The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Untamed, by Max Brand

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Untamed

Author: Max Brand

Release Date: January 31, 2004 [EBook #10886]
[Last updated: March 17, 2011]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNTAMED ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Gene Smethers and PG Distributed Proofreaders




THE UNTAMED

BY MAX BRAND


1919



CONTENTS

CHAPTER

I.       Pan of the Desert

II.      The Panther

III.     Silent Shoots

IV.      Something Yellow

V.       Four in the Air

VI.      Laughter

VII.     The Mute Messenger

VIII.    Red Writing

IX.      The Phantom Rider

X.       The Strength of Women

XI.      Silent Bluffs

XII.     Partners

XIII.    The Lone Riders Entertain

XIV.     Delilah

XV.      The Cross Roads

XVI.     The Three of us

XVII.    The Panther's Paw

XVIII.   Cain

XIX.     Real Men

XX.      One Trail Ends

XXI.     One Way Out

XXII.    The Woman's Way

XXIII.   Hell Starts

XXIV.    The Rescue

XXV.     The Long Ride

XXVI.    Black Bart Turns Nurse

XXVII.   Nobody Laughs

XXVIII.  Whistling Dan, Desperado

XXIX.    "Werewolf"

XXX.     "The Manhandling"

XXXI.    "Laugh, Damn it!"

XXXII.   Those who See in the Dark

XXXIII.  The Song of the Untamed

XXXIV.   The Coward

XXXV.    Close in!

XXXVI.   Fear

XXXVII.  Death

XXXVIII. The Wild Geese




THE UNTAMED




CHAPTER I


PAN OF THE DESERT

Even to a high-flying bird this was a country to be passed over
quickly. It was burned and brown, littered with fragments of rock,
whether vast or small, as if the refuse were tossed here after the
making of the world. A passing shower drenched the bald knobs of a
range of granite hills and the slant morning sun set the wet rocks
aflame with light. In a short time the hills lost their halo and
resumed their brown. The moisture evaporated. The sun rose higher and
looked sternly across the desert as if he searched for any remaining
life which still struggled for existence under his burning course.

And he found life. Hardy cattle moved singly or in small groups and
browsed on the withered bunch grass. Summer scorched them, winter
humped their backs with cold and arched up their bellies with famine,
but they were a breed schooled through generations for this fight
against nature. In this junk-shop of the world, rattlesnakes were
rulers of the soil. Overhead the buzzards, ominous black specks
pendant against the white-hot sky, ruled the air.

It seemed impossible that human beings could live in this
rock-wilderness. If so, they must be to other men what the lean, hardy
cattle of the hills are to the corn-fed stabled beeves of the States.

Over the shoulder of a hill came a whistling which might have been
attributed to the wind, had not this day been deathly calm. It was fit
music for such a scene, for it seemed neither of heaven nor earth,
but the soul of the great god Pan come back to earth to charm those
nameless rocks with his wild, sweet piping. It changed to harmonious
phrases loosely connected. Such might be the exultant improvisations
of a master violinist.

A great wolf, or a dog as tall and rough coated as a wolf, trotted
around the hillside. He paused with one foot lifted and lolling,
crimson tongue, as he scanned the distance and then turned to look
back in the direction from which he had come. The weird music changed
to whistled notes as liquid as a flute. The sound drew closer. A
horseman rode out on the shoulder and checked his mount. One could not
choose him at first glance as a type of those who fight nature in a
region where the thermometer moves through a scale of a hundred and
sixty degrees in the year to an accompaniment of cold-stabbing winds
and sweltering suns. A thin, handsome face with large brown eyes and
black hair, a body tall but rather slenderly made--he might have been
a descendant of some ancient family of Norman nobility; but could such
proud gentry be found riding the desert in a tall-crowned sombrero
with chaps on his legs and a red bandana handkerchief knotted around
his throat? That first glance made the rider seem strangely out of
place in such surroundings. One might even smile at the contrast, but
at the second glance the smile would fade, and at the third, it would
be replaced with a stare of interest. It was impossible to tell why
one respected this man, but after a time there grew a suspicion of
unknown strength in this lone rider, strength like that of a machine
which is stopped but only needs a spark of fire to plunge it into
irresistible action. Strangely enough, the youthful figure seemed in
tune with that region of mighty distances, with that white, cruel sun,
with that bird of prey hovering high, high in the air.

It required some study to guess at these qualities of the rider, for
they were such things as a child feels more readily than a grown man;
but it needed no expert to admire the horse he bestrode. It was a
statue in black marble, a steed fit for a Shah of Persia! The stallion
stood barely fifteen hands, but to see him was to forget his size. His
flanks shimmered like satin in the sun. What promise of power in the
smooth, broad hips! Only an Arab poet could run his hand over that
shoulder and then speak properly of the matchless curve. Only an Arab
could appreciate legs like thin and carefully drawn steel below the
knees; or that flow of tail and windy mane; that generous breast with
promise of the mighty heart within; that arched neck; that proud head
with the pricking ears, wide forehead, and muzzle, as the Sheik said,
which might drink from a pint-pot.

A rustling like dried leaves came from among the rocks and the hair
rose bristling around the neck of the wolflike dog. With outstretched
head he approached the rocks, sniffing, then stopped and turned
shining eyes upon his master, who nodded and swung from the saddle. It
was a little uncanny, this silent interchange of glances between the
beast and the man. The cause of the dog's anxiety was a long rattler
which now slid out from beneath a boulder, and giving its harsh
warning, coiled, ready to strike. The dog backed away, but instead of
growling he looked to the man.

Cowboys frequently practise with their revolvers at snakes, but one of
the peculiarities of this rider was that he carried no gun, neither
six-shooter nor rifle. He drew out a short knife which might be used
to skin a beef or carve meat, though certainly no human being had ever
used such a weapon against a five-foot rattler. He stooped and rested
both hands on his thighs. His feet were not two paces from the poised
head of the snake. As if marvelling at this temerity, the big rattler
tucked back his head and sounded the alarm again. In response the
cowboy flashed his knife in the sun. Instantly the snake struck but
the deadly fangs fell a few inches short of the riding boots. At the
same second the man moved. No eye could follow the leap of his hand as
it darted down and fastened around the snake just behind the head. The
long brown body writhed about his wrist, with rattles clashing. He
severed the head deftly and tossed the twisting mass back on the
rocks.

Then, as if he had performed the most ordinary act, he rubbed his
gloves in the sand, cleansed his knife in a similar manner, and
stepped back to his horse. Contrary to the rules of horse-nature, the
stallion had not flinched at sight of the snake, but actually advanced
a high-headed pace or two with his short ears laid flat on his
neck, and a sudden red fury in his eyes. He seemed to watch for an
opportunity to help his master. As the man approached after killing
the snake the stallion let his ears go forward again and touched his
nose against his master's shoulder. When the latter swung into the
saddle, the wolf-dog came to his side, reared, and resting his
forefeet on the stirrup stared up into the rider's face. The man
nodded to him, whereat, as if he understood a spoken word, the dog
dropped back and trotted ahead. The rider touched the reins and
galloped down the easy slope. The little episode had given the effect
of a three-cornered conversation. Yet the man had been as silent as
the animals.

In a moment he was lost among the hills, but still his whistling came
back, fainter and fainter, until it was merely a thrilling whisper
that dwelt in the air but came from no certain direction.

His course lay towards a road which looped whitely across the hills.
The road twisted over a low ridge where a house stood among a grove of
cottonwoods dense enough and tall enough to break the main force of
any wind. On the same road, a thousand yards closer to the rider of
the black stallion, was Morgan's place.




CHAPTER II


THE PANTHER

In the ranch house old Joseph Cumberland frowned on the floor as he
heard his daughter say: "It isn't right, Dad. I never noticed it
before I went away to school, but since I've come back I begin to feel
that it's shameful to treat Dan in this way."

Her eyes brightened and she shook her golden head for emphasis. Her
father watched her with a faintly quizzical smile and made no reply.
The dignity of ownership of many thousand cattle kept the old
rancher's shoulders square, and there was an antique gentility about
his thin face with its white goatee. He was more like a quaint
figure of the seventeenth century than a successful cattleman of the
twentieth.

"It _is_ shameful, Dad," she went on, encouraged by his silence, "or
you could tell me some reason."

"Some reason for not letting him have a gun?" asked the rancher, still
with the quizzical smile.

"Yes, yes!" she said eagerly, "and some reason for treating him in a
thousand ways as if he were an irresponsible boy."

"Why, Kate, gal, you have tears in your eyes!"

He drew her onto a stool beside him, holding both her hands, and
searched her face with eyes as blue and almost as bright as her own.
"How does it come that you're so interested in Dan?"

"Why, Dad, dear," and she avoided his gaze, "I've always been
interested in him. Haven't we grown up together?"

"Part ways you have."

"And haven't we been always just like brother and sister?"

"You're talkin' a little more'n sisterly, Kate."

"What do you mean?"

"Ay, ay! What do I mean! And now you're all red. Kate, I got an idea
it's nigh onto time to let Dan start on his way."

He could not have found a surer way to drive the crimson from her face
and turn it white to the lips.

"Dad!"

"Well, Kate?"

"You wouldn't send Dan away!"

Before he could answer she dropped her head against his shoulder
and broke into great sobs. He stroked her head with his calloused,
sunburned hand and his eyes filmed with a distant gaze.

"I might have knowed it!" he said over and over again; "I might have
knowed it! Hush, my silly gal."

Her sobbing ceased with magic suddenness.

"Then you won't send him away?"

"Listen to me while I talk to you straight," said Joe Cumberland,
"and accordin' to the way you take it will depend whether Dan goes or
stays. Will you listen?"

"Dear Dad, with all my heart!"

"Humph!" he grunted, "that's just what I don't want. This what I'm
goin' to tell you is a queer thing--a mighty lot like a fairy tale,
maybe. I've kept it back from you years an' years thinkin' you'd find
out the truth about Dan for yourself. But bein' so close to him has
made you sort of blind, maybe! No man will criticize his own hoss."

"Go on, tell me what you mean. I won't interrupt."

He was silent for a moment, frowning to gather his thoughts.

"Have you ever seen a mule, Kate?"

"Of course!"

"Maybe you've noticed that a mule is just as strong as a horse--"

"Yes."

"--but their muscles ain't a third as big?"

"Yes, but what on earth--"

"Well, Kate, Dan is built light an' yet he's stronger than the biggest
men around here."

"Are you going to send him away simply because he's strong?"

"It doesn't show nothin'," said the old man gently, "savin' that he's
different from the regular run of men--an' I've seen a considerable
pile of men, honey. There's other funny things about Dan maybe you
ain't noticed. Take the way he has with hosses an' other animals. The
wildest man-killin', spur-hatin' bronchos don't put up no fight when
them long legs of Dan settle round 'em."

"Because they know fighting won't help them!"

"Maybe so, maybe so," he said quietly, "but it's kind of queer, Kate,
that after most a hundred men on the best hosses in these parts had
ridden in relays after Satan an' couldn't lay a rope on him, Dan could
jest go out on foot with a halter an' come back in ten days leadin'
the wildest devil of a mustang that ever hated men."

"It was a glorious thing to do!" she said.

Old Cumberland sighed and then shook his head.

"It shows more'n that, honey. There ain't any man but Dan that can sit
the saddle on Satan. If Dan should die, Satan wouldn't be no more use
to other men than a piece of haltered lightnin'. An' then tell me how
Dan got hold of that wolf, Black Bart, as he calls him."

"It isn't a wolf, Dad," said Kate, "it's a dog. Dan says so himself."

"Sure he says so," answered her father, "but there was a lone wolf
prowlin' round these parts for a considerable time an' raisin' Cain
with the calves an' the colts. An' Black Bart comes pretty close to a
description of the lone wolf. Maybe you remember Dan found his 'dog'
lyin' in a gully with a bullet through his shoulder. If he was a dog
how'd he come to be shot--"

"Some brute of a sheep herder may have done it. What could it prove?"

"It only proves that Dan is queer--powerful queer! Satan an' Black
Bart are still as wild as they ever was, except that they got one
master. An' they ain't got a thing to do with other people. Black
Bart'd tear the heart out of a man that so much as patted his head."

"Why," she cried, "he'll let me do anything with him!"

"Humph!" said Cumberland, a little baffled; "maybe that's because Dan
is kind of fond of you, gal, an' he has sort of introduced you to
his pets, damn 'em! That's just the pint! How is he able to make his
man-killers act sweet with you an' play the devil with everybody
else."

"It wasn't Dan at all!" she said stoutly, "and he _isn't_ queer. Satan
and Black Bart let me do what I want with them because they know I
love them for their beauty and their strength."

"Let it go at that," growled her father. "Kate, you're jest like your
mother when it comes to arguin'. If you wasn't my little gal I'd say
you was plain pig-headed. But look here, ain't you ever felt that Dan
is what I call him--different? Ain't you ever seen him get mad--jest
for a minute--an' watched them big brown eyes of his get all packed
full of yellow light that chases a chill up and down your back like a
wrigglin' snake?"

She considered this statement in a little silence.

"I saw him kill a rattler once," she said in a low voice. "Dan caught
him behind the head after he had struck. He did it with his bare hand!
I almost fainted. When I looked again he had cut off the head of the
snake. It was--it was terrible!"

She turned to her father and caught him firmly by the shoulders.

"Look me straight in the eye, Dad, and tell me just what you mean."

"Why, Kate," said the wise old man, "you're beginnin' to see for
yourself what I'm drivin' at! Haven't you got somethin' else right on
the tip of your tongue?"

"There was one day that I've never told you about," she said in a low
voice, looking away, "because I was afraid that if I told you, you'd
shoot Black Bart. He was gnawing a big beef bone and just for fun I
tried to take it away from him. He'd been out on a long trail with Dan
and he was very hungry. When I put my hand on the bone he snapped.
Luckily I had a thick glove on and he merely pinched my wrist. Also
I think he realized what he was doing for otherwise he'd have cut
through the glove as if it had been paper. He snarled fearfully and I
sprang back with a cry. Dan hadn't seen what happened, but he
heard the snarl and saw Black Bart's bared teeth. Then--oh, it was
terrible!"

She covered her face.

"Take your time, Kate," said Cumberland softly.

"'Bart,' called Dan," she went on, "and there was such anger in his
face that I think I was more afraid of him than of the big dog.

"Bart turned to him with a snarl and bared his teeth. When Dan saw
that his face turned--I don't know how to say it!"

She stopped a moment and her hands tightened.

"Back in his throat there came a sound that was almost like the snarl
of Black Bart. The wolf-dog watched him with a terror that was uncanny
to see, the hair around his neck fairly on end, his teeth still bared,
and his growl horrible.

"'Dan!' I called, 'don't go near him!'

"I might as well have called out to a whirlwind. He leaped. Black Bart
sprang to meet him with eyes green with fear. I heard the loud click
of his teeth as he snapped--and missed. Dan swerved to one side and
caught Black Bart by the throat and drove him into the dust, falling
with him.

"I couldn't move. I was weak with horror. It wasn't a struggle between
a man and a beast. It was like a fight between a panther and a wolf.
Black Bart was fighting hard but fighting hopelessly. Those hands were
settling tighter on his throat. His big red tongue lolled out; his
struggles almost ceased. Then Dan happened to glance at me. What he
saw in my face sobered him. He got up, lifting the dog with him, and
flung away the lifeless weight of Bart. He began to brush the dust
from his clothes, looking down as if he were ashamed. He asked me if
the dog had hurt me when he snapped. I could not speak for a moment.
Then came the most horrible part. Black Bart, who must have been
nearly killed, dragged himself to Dan on his belly, choking and
whining, and licked the boots of his master!"

"Then you _do_ know what I mean when I say Dan is--different?"

She hesitated and blinked, as if she were shutting her eyes on a fact.
"I _don't_ know. I know that he's gentle and kind and loves you more
than you love him." Her voice broke a little. "Oh, Dad, you forget the
time he sat up with you for five days and nights when you got sick out
in the hills, and how he barely managed to get you back to the house
alive!"

The old man frowned to conceal how greatly he was moved.

"I haven't forgot nothin', Kate," he said, "an' everything is for his
own good. Do you know what I've been tryin' to do all these years?"

"What?"

"I've been tryin' to hide him from himself! Kate, do you remember how I found him?"

"I was too little to know. I've heard you tell a little about it. He
was lost on the range. You found him twenty miles south of the house."

"Lost on the range?" repeated her father softly. "I don't think he
could ever have been lost. To a hoss the corral is a home. To us our
ranch is a home. To Dan Barry the whole mountain-desert is a home!
This is how I found him. It was in the spring of the year when the
wild geese was honkin' as they flew north. I was ridin' down a gulley
about sunset and wishin' that I was closer to the ranch when I heard a
funny, wild sort of whistlin' that didn't have any tune to it that
I recognized. It gave me a queer feelin'. It made me think of fairy
stories--an' things like that! Pretty soon I seen a figure on the
crest of the hill. There was a triangle of geese away up overhead an'
the boy was walkin' along lookin' up as if he was followin' the trail
of the wild geese.

"He was up there walkin' between the sunset an' the stars with his
head bent back, and his hands stuffed into his pockets, whistlin' as
if he was goin' home from school. An' such whistlin'."

"Nobody could ever whistle like Dan," she said, and smiled.

"I rode up to him, wonderin'," went on Cumberland.

"'What're you doin' round here?' I says.

"Says he, lookin' at me casual like over his shoulder: 'I'm jest
takin' a stroll an' whistlin'. Does it bother you, mister?'

"'It doesn't bother me none,' says I. 'Where do you belong, sonny?'

"'Me?' says he, lookin' sort of surprised, 'why, I belong around over
there!' An' he waved his hand careless over to the settin' sun.

"There was somethin' about him that made my heart swell up inside of
me. I looked down into them big brown eyes and wondered--well, I don't
know what I wondered; but I remembered all at once that I didn't have
no son.

"'Who's your folks?' says I, gettin' more an' more curious.

"He jest looked at me sort of bored.

"'Where does your folks live at?' says I.

"'Oh, they live around here,' says he, an' he waved his hand again,
an' this time over towards the east.

"Says I: 'When do you figure on reachin' home?'

"'Oh, most any day,' says he.

"An' I looked around at them brown, naked hills with the night comin'
down over them. Then I stared back at the boy an' there was something
that come up in me like hunger. You see, he was lost; he was alone;
the queer ring of his whistlin' was still in my ears; an' I couldn't
help rememberin' that I didn't have no son.

"'Then supposin' you come along with me,' says I, 'an' I'll send you
home in a buckboard tomorrow?'

"So the end of it was me ridin' home with the little kid sittin' up
before me, whistlin' his heart out! When I got him home I tried to
talk to him again. He couldn't tell me, or he wouldn't tell me where
his folks lived, but jest kept wavin' his hand liberal to half the
points of the compass. An' that's all I know of where he come from. I
done all I could to find his parents. I inquired and sent letters to
every rancher within a hundred miles. I advertised it through the
railroads, but they said nobody'd yet been reported lost. He was still
mine, at least for a while, an' I was terrible glad.

"I give the kid a spare room. I sat up late that first night listenin'
to the wild geese honkin' away up in the sky an' wonderin' why I was
so happy. Kate, that night there was tears in my eyes when I thought
of how that kid had been out there on the hills walkin' along so happy
an' independent.

"But the next mornin' he was gone. I sent my cowpunchers out to look
for him.

"'Which way shall we ride?' they asked.

"I don't know why, but I thought of the wild geese that Dan had seemed
to be followin'.

"'Ride north,' I said.

"An' sure enough, they rode north an' found him. After that I didn't
have no trouble with him about runnin' away--at least not durin' the
summer. An' all those months I kept plannin' how I would take care of
this boy who had come wanderin' to me. It seemed like he was sort of a
gift of God to make up for me havin' no son. And everythin' went well
until the next fall, when the geese began to fly south.

"Sure enough, that was when Dan ran away again, and when I sent my
cowpunchers south after him, they found him and brought him back. It
seemed as if they'd brought back half the world to me, when I seen
him. But I saw that I'd have to put a stop to this runnin' away. I
tried to talk to him, but all he'd say was that he'd better be movin'
on. I took the law in my hands an' told him he had to be disciplined.
So I started thrashin' him with a quirt, very light. He took it as if
he didn't feel the whip on his shoulders, an' he smiled. But there
came up a yellow light in his eyes that made me feel as if a man was
standin' right behind me with a bare knife in his hand an' smilin'
jest like the kid was doin'. Finally I simply backed out of the room,
an' since that day there ain't been man or beast ever has put a hand
on Whistlin' Dan. To this day I reckon he ain't quite forgiven me."

"Why!" she cried, "I have never heard him mention it!"

"That's why I know he's not forgotten it. Anyway, Kate, I locked him
in his room, but he wouldn't promise not to run away. Then I got an
inspiration. You was jest a little toddlin' thing then. That day you
was cryin' an awful lot an' I suddenly thought of puttin' you in Dan's
room. I did it. I jest unlocked the door quick and then shoved you in
an' locked it again. First of all you screamed terrible hard. I was
afraid maybe you'd hurt yourself yellin' that way. I was about to take
you out again when all at once I heard Dan start whistlin' and pretty
quick your cryin' stopped. I listened an' wondered. After that I never
had to lock Dan in his room. I was sure he'd stay on account of you.
But now, honey, I'm gettin' to the end of the story, an' I'm goin' to
give you the straight idea the way I see it.

"I've watched Dan like--like a father, almost. I think he loves me,
sort of--but I've never got over being afraid of him. You see I can't
forget how he smiled when I licked him! But listen to me, Kate, that
fear has been with me all the time--an' it's the only time I've ever
been afraid of any man. It isn't like being scared of a man, but of a
panther.

"Now we'll jest nacherally add up all the points we've made about
Dan--the queer way I found him without a home an' without wantin'
one--that strength he has that's like the power of a mule compared
with a horse--that funny control he has over wild animals so that they
almost seem to know what he means when he simply looks at them (have
you noticed him with Black Bart and Satan?)--then there's the yellow
light that comes in his eyes when he begins to get real mad--you an' I
have both seen it only once, but we don't want to see it again! More
than this there's the way he handles either a knife or a gun. He
hasn't practiced much with shootin' irons, but I never seen him miss a
reasonable mark--or an unreasonable one either, for that matter. I've
spoke to him about it. He said: 'I dunno how it is. I don't see how
a feller can shoot crooked. It jest seems that when I get out a gun
there's a line drawn from the barrel to the thing I'm shootin' at. All
I have to do is to pull the trigger--almost with my eyes closed!' Now,
Kate, do you begin to see what these here things point to?"

"Tell me what you see," she said, "and then I'll tell you what I think
of it all."

"All right," he said. "I see in Dan a man who's different from the
common run of us. I read in a book once that in the ages when men
lived like animals an' had no weapons except sticks and stones, their
muscles must have been two or three times as strong as they are
now--more like the muscles of brutes. An' their hearin' an' their
sight an' their quickness an' their endurance was about three times
more than that of ordinary men. Kate, I think that Dan is one of those
men the book described! He knows animals because he has all the powers
that they have. An' I know from the way his eyes go yellow that he has
the fightin' instinct of the ancestors of man. So far I've kept him
away from other men. Which I may say is the main reason I bought Dan
Morgan's place so's to keep fightin' men away from our Whistlin' Dan.
So I've been hidin' him from himself. You see, he's my boy if he
belongs to anybody. Maybe when time goes on he'll get tame. But I
reckon not. It's like takin' a panther cub--or a wolf pup--an tryin'
to raise it for a pet. Some day it gets the taste of blood, maybe its
own blood, an' then it goes mad and becomes a killer. An' that's what
I fear, Kate. So far I've kept Dan from ever havin' a single fight,
but I reckon the day'll come when someone'll cross him, and then
there'll be a tornado turned loose that'll jest about wreck these
parts."

Her anger had grown during this speech. Now she rose.

"I won't believe you, Dad," she said. "I'd sooner trust our Dan than
any man alive. I don't think you're right in a single word!"

"I was sure loco," sighed Cumberland, "to ever dream of convincin' a
woman. Let it drop, Kate. We're about to get rid of Morgan's place,
an' now I reckon there won't be any temptation near Dan. We'll see
what time'll do for him. Let the thing drop there. Now I'm goin' over
to the Bar XO outfit an' I won't be back till late tonight. There's
only one thing more. I told Morgan there wasn't to be any gun-play in
his place today. If you hear any shootin' go down there an' remind
Morgan to take the guns off'n the men."

Kate nodded, but her stare travelled far away, and the thing she saw
was the yellow light burning in the eyes of Whistling Dan.




CHAPTER III


SILENT SHOOTS

It was a great day and also a sad one for Morgan. His general store
and saloon had been bought out by old Joe Cumberland, who declared
a determination to clear up the landscape, and thereby plunged the
cowpunchers in gloom. They partially forgave Cumberland, but only
because he was an old man. A younger reformer would have met armed
resistance. Morgan's place was miles away from the next oasis in the
desert and the closing meant dusty, thirsty leagues of added journey
to every man in the neighbourhood. The word "neighbourhood," of
course, covered a territory fifty miles square.

If the day was very sad for this important reason, it was also very
glad, for rustling Morgan advertised the day of closing far and wide,
and his most casual patrons dropped all business to attend the big
doings. A long line of buckboards and cattle ponies surrounded the
place. Newcomers gallopped in every few moments. Most of them did not
stop to tether their mounts, but simply dropped the reins over the
heads of the horses and then went with rattling spurs and slouching
steps into the saloon. Every man was greeted by a shout, for one or
two of those within usually knew him, and when they raised a cry
the others joined in for the sake of good fellowship. As a rule he
responded by ordering everyone up to the bar.

One man, however, received no more greeting than the slamming of the
door behind him. He was a tall, handsome fellow with tawny hair and a
little smile of habit rather than mirth upon his lips. He had ridden
up on a strong bay horse, a full two hands taller than the average
cattle pony, and with legs and shoulders and straight back that
unmistakably told of a blooded pedigree. When he entered the saloon
he seemed nowise abashed by the silence, but greeted the turned heads
with a wave of the hand and a good-natured "Howdy, boys!" A volley of
greetings replied to him, for in the mountain-desert men cannot be
strangers after the first word.

"Line up and hit the red-eye," he went on, and leaning against the
bar as he spoke, his habitual smile broadened into one of actual
invitation. Except for a few groups who watched the gambling in the
corners of the big room, there was a general movement towards the bar.

"And make it a tall one, boys," went on the genial stranger. "This is
the first time I ever irrigated Morgan's place, and from what I have
heard today about the closing I suppose it will be the last time. So
here's to you, Morgan!"

And he waved his glass towards the bartender. His voice was well
modulated and his enunciation bespoke education. This, in connection
with his careful clothes and rather modish riding-boots, might have
given him the reputation of a dude, had it not been for several other
essential details of his appearance. His six-gun hung so low that he
would scarcely have to raise his hand to grasp the butt. He held his
whisky glass in his left hand, and the right, which rested carelessly
on his hip, was deeply sunburned, as if he rarely wore a glove.
Moreover, his eyes were marvellously direct, and they lingered a
negligible space as they touched on each man in the room. All of this
the cattlemen noted instantly. What they did not see on account of his
veiling fingers was that he poured only a few drops of the liquor into
his glass.

In the meantime another man who had never before "irrigated" at
Morgan's place, rode up. His mount, like that of the tawny-haired
rider, was considerably larger and more finely built than the common
range horse. In three days of hard work a cattle pony might wear down
these blooded animals, but would find it impossible to either overtake
or escape them in a straight run. The second stranger, short-legged,
barrel-chested, and with a scrub of black beard, entered the barroom
while the crowd was still drinking the health of Morgan. He took a
corner chair, pushed back his hat until a mop of hair fell down his
forehead, and began to roll a cigarette. The man of the tawny hair
took the next seat.

"Seems to be quite a party, stranger," said the tall fellow
nonchalantly.

"Sure," growled he of the black beard, and after a moment he added:
"Been out on the trail long, pardner?"

"Hardly started."

"So'm I."

"As a matter of fact, I've got a lot of hard riding before me."

"So've I."

"And some long riding, too."

Perhaps it was because he turned his head suddenly towards the light,
but a glint seemed to come in the eyes of the bearded man.

"Long rides," he said more amiably, "are sure hell on hosses."

"And on men, too," nodded the other, and tilted back in his chair.

The bearded man spoke again, but though a dozen cowpunchers were close
by no one heard his voice except the man at his side. One side of his
face remained perfectly immobile and his eyes stared straight before
him drearily while he whispered from a corner of his mouth: "How long
do you stay, Lee?"

"Noon," said Lee.

Once more the shorter man spoke in the manner which is learned in a
penitentiary: "Me too. We must be slated for the same ride, Lee. Do
you know what it is? It's nearly noon, and the chief ought to be
here."

There was a loud greeting for a newcomer, and Lee took advantage of
the noise to say quite openly: "If Silent said he'll come, he'll be
here. But I say he's crazy to come to a place full of range riders,
Bill."

"Take it easy," responded Bill. "This hangout is away off our regular
beat. Nobody'll know him."

"His hide is his own and he can do what he wants with it," said Lee.
"I warned him before."

"Shut up," murmured Bill, "Here's Jim now, and Hal Purvis with him!"

Through the door strode a great figure before whom the throng at the
bar gave way as water rolls back from the tall prow of a ship. In his
wake went a little man with a face dried and withered by the sun and
small bright eyes which moved continually from side to side. Lee and
Bill discovered their thirst at the same time and made towards the
newcomers.

They had no difficulty in reaching them. The large man stood with his
back to the bar, his elbows spread out on it, so that there was a
little space left on either side of him. No one cared to press too
close to this sombre-faced giant. Purvis stood before him and Bill and
Lee were instantly at his side. The two leaned on the bar, facing him,
yet the four did not seem to make a group set apart from the rest.

"Well?" asked Lee.

"I'll tell you what it is when we're on the road," said Jim Silent.
"Plenty of time, Haines."

"Who'll start first?" asked Bill.

"You can, Kilduff," said the other. "Go straight north, and go slow.
Then Haines will follow you. Purvis next. I come last because I got
here last. There ain't any hurry--What's this here?"

"I tell you I seen it!" called an angry voice from a corner.

"You must of been drunk an' seein' double, partner," drawled the
answer.

"Look here!" said the first man, "I'm willin' to take that any way you
mean it!"

"An' I'm willin'," said the other, "that you should take it any way
you damn please."

Everyone in the room was grave except Jim Silent and his three
companions, who were smiling grimly.

"By God, Jack," said the first man with ominous softness, "I'll take a
lot from you but when it comes to doubtin' my word----"

Morgan, with popping eyes and a very red face, slapped his hand on
the bar and vaulted over it with more agility than his plumpness
warranted. He shouldered his way hurriedly through the crowd to the
rapidly widening circle around the two disputants. They stood with
their right hands resting with rigid fingers low down on their hips,
and their eyes, fixed on each other, forgot the rest of the world.
Morgan burst in between them.

"Look here," he thundered, "it's only by way of a favour that I'm
lettin' you boys wear shootin' irons today because I promised old
Cumberland there wouldn't be no fuss. If you got troubles there's
enough room for you to settle them out in the hills, but there ain't
none at all in here!"

The gleam went out of their eyes like four candles snuffed by the
wind. Obviously they were both glad to have the tension broken. Mike
wiped his forehead with a rather unsteady hand.

"I ain't huntin' for no special brand of trouble," he said, "but Jack
has been ridin' the red-eye pretty hard and it's gotten into that
dried up bean he calls his brain."

"Say, partner," drawled Jack, "I ain't drunk enough of the hot stuff
to make me fall for the line you've been handing out."

He turned to Morgan.

"Mike, here, has been tryin' to make me believe that he knew a feller
who could drill a dollar at twenty yards every time it was tossed up."

The crowd laughed, Morgan loudest of all.

"Did you anyways have Whistlin' Dan in mind?" he asked.

"No, I didn't," said Mike, "an' I didn't say this here man I was
talkin' about could drill them every time. But he could do it two
times out of four."

"Mike," said Morgan, and he softened his disbelief with his smile and
the good-natured clap on the shoulder, "you sure must of been drinkin'
when you seen him do it. I allow Whistlin' Dan could do that an' more,
but he ain't human with a gun."

"How d'you know?" asked Jack, "I ain't ever seen him packin' a
six-gun."

"Sure you ain't," answered Morgan, "but I have, an' I seen him use it,
too. It was jest sort of by chance I saw it."

"Well," argued Mike anxiously, "then you allow it's possible if
Whistlin' Dan can do it. An' I say I seen a chap who could turn the
trick."

"An' who in hell is this Whistlin' Dan?" asked Jim Silent.

"He's the man that caught Satan, an' rode him," answered a bystander.

"Some man if he can ride the devil," laughed Lee Haines.

"I mean the black mustang that ran wild around here for a couple of
years. Some people tell tales about him being a wonder with a gun. But
Morgan's the only one who claims to have seen him work."

"Maybe you did see it, and maybe you didn't," Morgan was saying to
Mike noncommittally, "but there's some pretty fair shots in this
room, which I'd lay fifty bucks no man here could hit a dollar with a
six-gun at twenty paces."

"While they're arguin'," said Bill Kilduff, "I reckon I'll hit the
trail."

"Wait a minute," grinned Jim Silent, "an' watch me have some fun with
these short-horns."

He spoke more loudly: "Are you makin' that bet for the sake of
arguin', partner, or do you calculate to back it up with cold cash?"

Morgan whirled upon him with a scowl, "I ain't pulled a bluff in my
life that I can't back up!" he said sharply.

"Well," said Silent, "I ain't so flush that I'd turn down fifty bucks
when a kind Christian soul, as the preachers say, slides it into my
glove. Not me. Lead out the dollar, pal, an' kiss it farewell!"

"Who'll hold the stakes?" asked Morgan.

"Let your friend Mike," said Jim Silent carelessly, and he placed
fifty dollars in gold in the hands of the Irishman. Morgan followed
suit. The crowd hurried outdoors.

A dozen bets were laid in as many seconds. Most of the men wished to
place their money on the side of Morgan, but there were not a few who
stood willing to risk coin on Jim Silent, stranger though he was.
Something in his unflinching eye, his stern face, and the nerveless
surety of his movements commanded their trust.

"How do you stand, Jim?" asked Lee Haines anxiously. "Is it a safe
bet? I've never seen you try a mark like this one!"

"It ain't safe," said Silent, "because I ain't mad enough to shoot my
best, but it's about an even draw. Take your pick."

"Not me," said Haines, "if you had ten chances instead of one I might
stack some coin on you. If the dollar were stationary I know you could
do it, but a moving coin looks pretty small."

"Here you are," called Morgan, who stood at a distance of twenty
paces, "are you ready?"

Silent whipped out his revolver and poised it. "Let 'er go!"

The coin whirled in the air. Silent fired as it commenced to fall--it
landed untouched.

"As a kind, Christian soul," said Morgan sarcastically, "I ain't in
your class, stranger. Charity always sort of interests me when I'm on
the receivin' end!"

The crowd chuckled, and the sound infuriated Silent.

"Don't go back jest yet, partners," he drawled. "Mister Morgan, I got
one hundred bones which holler that I can plug that dollar the second
try."

"Boys," grinned Morgan, "I'm leavin' you to witness that I hate to do
it, but business is business. Here you are!"

The coin whirled again. Silent, with his lips pressed into a straight
line and his brows drawn dark over his eyes, waited until the coin
reached the height of its rise, and then fired--missed--fired again,
and sent the coin spinning through the air in a flashing semicircle.
It was a beautiful piece of gun-play. In the midst of the clamour of
applause Silent strode towards Morgan with his hand outstretched.

"After all," he said. "I knowed you wasn't really hard of heart. It
only needed a little time and persuasion to make you dig for coin when
I pass the box."

Morgan, red of face and scowling, handed over his late winnings and
his own stakes.

"It took you two shots to do it," he said, "an' if I wanted to argue
the pint maybe you wouldn't walk off with the coin."

"Partner," said Jim Silent gently, "I got a wanderin' hunch that
you're showin' a pile of brains by not arguin' this here pint!"

There followed that little hush of expectancy which precedes trouble,
but Morgan, after a glance at the set lips of his opponent, swallowed
his wrath.

"I s'pose you'll tell how you did this to your kids when
you're eighty," he said scornfully, "but around here, stranger, they
don't think much of it. Whistlin' Dan"--he paused, as if to calculate
how far he could safely exaggerate--"Whistlin' Dan can stand with
his back to the coins an' when they're thrown he drills four dollars
easier than you did one--an' he wouldn't waste three shots on one
dollar. He ain't so extravagant!"




CHAPTER IV


SOMETHING YELLOW

The crowd laughed again at the excitement of Morgan, and Silent's
mirth particularly was loud and long.

"An' if you're still bent on charity," he said at last, "maybe we
could find somethin' else to lay a bet on!"

"Anything you name!" said Morgan hotly.

"I suppose," said Silent, "that you're some rider, eh?"

"I c'n get by with most of 'em."

"Yeh--I suppose you never pulled leather in your life?"

"Not any hoss that another man could ride straight up."

"Is that so? Well, partner, you see that roan over there?"

"That tall horse?"

"You got him. You c'n win back that hundred if you stick on his back
two minutes. D'you take it?"

Morgan hesitated a moment. The big roan was footing it nervously here
and there, sometimes throwing up his head suddenly after the manner of
a horse of bad temper. However, the loss of that hundred dollars and
the humiliation which accompanied it, weighed heavily on the saloon
owner's mind.

"I'll take you," he said.

A high, thrilling whistle came faintly from the distance.

"That fellow on the black horse down the road," said Lee Haines, "I
guess he's the one that can hit the four dollars? Ha! ha! ha!"

"Sure," grinned Silent, "listen to his whistle! We'll see if we can
drag another bet out of the bar-keep if the roan doesn't hurt him too
bad. Look at him now!"

Morgan was having a bad time getting his foot in the stirrup, for
the roan reared and plunged. Finally two men held his head and the
saloon-keeper swung into the saddle. There was a little silence. The
roan, as if doubtful that he could really have this new burden on his
back, and still fearful of the rope which had been lately tethering
him, went a few short, prancing steps, and then, feeling something
akin to freedom, reared straight up, snorting. The crowd yelled with
delight, and the sound sent the roan back to all fours and racing down
the road. He stopped with braced feet, and Morgan lurched forwards on
the neck, yet he struck to his seat gamely. Whistling Dan was not a
hundred yards away.

Morgan yelled and swung the quirt. The response of the roan was
another race down the road at terrific speed, despite the pull of
Morgan on the reins. Just as the running horse reached Whistling Dan,
he stopped as short as he had done before, but this time with an added
buck and a sidewise lurch all combined, which gave the effect of
snapping a whip--and poor Morgan was hurled from the saddle like
a stone from a sling. The crowd waved their hats and yelled with
delight.

"Look out!" yelled Jim Silent. "Grab the reins!"

But though Morgan made a valiant effort the roan easily swerved past
him and went racing down the road.

"My God," groaned Silent, "he's gone!"

"Saddles!" called someone. "We'll catch him!"

"Catch hell!" answered Silent bitterly. "There ain't a hoss on earth
that can catch him--an' now that he ain't got the weight of a rider,
he'll run away from the wind!"

"Anyway there goes Dan on Satan after him!"

"No use! The roan ain't carryin' a thing but the saddle."

"Satan never seen the day he could make the roan eat dust, anyway!"

"Look at 'em go, boys!"

"There ain't no use," said Jim Silent sadly, "he'll wind his black for
nothin'--an' I've lost the best hoss on the ranges."

"I believe him," whispered one man to a neighbour, "because I've got
an idea that hoss is Red Peter himself!"

His companion stared at him agape.

"Red Pete!" he said. "Why, pal, that's the hoss that Silent--"

"Maybe it is an' maybe it ain't. But why should we ask too many
questions?"

"Let the marshals tend to him. He ain't ever troubled this part of the
range."

"Anyway, I'm goin' to remember his face. If it's really Jim Silent, I
got something that's worth tellin' to my kids when they grow up."

They both turned and looked at the tall man with an uncomfortable awe.
The rest of the crowd swarmed into the road to watch the race.

The black stallion was handicapped many yards at the start before Dan
could swing him around after the roan darted past with poor Morgan in
ludicrous pursuit. Moreover, the roan had the inestimable advantage
of an empty saddle. Yet Satan leaned to his work with a stout heart.
There was no rock and pitch to his gait, no jerk and labour to his
strides. Those smooth shoulders were corded now with a thousand lines
where the steel muscles whipped to and fro. His neck stretched out
a little--his ears laid back along the neck--his whole body settled
gradually and continually down as his stride lengthened. Whistling Dan
was leaning forward so that his body would break less wind. He laughed
low and soft as the air whirred into his face, and now and then he
spoke to his horse, no yell of encouragement, but a sound hardly
louder than a whisper. There was no longer a horse and rider--the two
had become one creature--a centaur--the body of a horse and the mind
of a man.

For a time the roan increased his advantage, but quickly Satan began
to hold him even, and then gain. First inch by inch; then at every
stride the distance between them diminished. No easy task. The great
roan had muscle, heart, and that empty saddle; as well, perhaps, as a
thought of the free ranges which lay before him and liberty from the
accursed thraldom of the bit and reins and galling spurs. What he
lacked was that small whispering voice--that hand touching lightly now
and then on his neck--that thrill of generous sympathy which passes
between horse and rider. He lost ground steadily and more and more
rapidly. Now the outstretched black head was at his tail, now at his
flank, now at his girth, now at his shoulder, now they raced nose and
nose. Whistling Dan shifted in the saddle. His left foot took the
opposite stirrup. His right leg swung free.

The big roan swerved--the black in response to a word from his rider
followed the motion--and then the miracle happened. A shadow plunged
through the air; a weight thudded on the saddle of the roan; an iron
hand jerked back the reins.

Red Pete hated men and feared them, but this new weight on his back
was different. It was not the pressure on the reins which urged him to
slow up; he had the bit in his teeth and no human hand could pull down
his head; but into the blind love, blind terror, blind rage which
makes up the consciousness of a horse entered a force which he had
never known before. He realized suddenly that it was folly to attempt
to throw off this clinging burden. He might as well try to jump out of
his skin. His racing stride shortened to a halting gallop, this to a
sharp trot, and in a moment more he was turned and headed back for
Morgan's place. The black, who had followed, turned at the same time
like a dog and followed with jouncing bridle reins. Black Bart, with
lolling red tongue, ran under his head, looking up to the stallion now
and again with a comical air of proprietorship, as if he were showing
the way.

It was very strange to Red Pete. He pranced sideways a little and
shook his head up and down in an effort to regain his former temper,
but that iron hand kept his nose down, now, and that quiet voice
sounded above him--no cursing, no raking of sharp spurs to torture his
tender flanks, no whir of the quirt, but a calm voice of authority and
understanding. Red Pete broke into an easy canter and in this fashion
they came up to Morgan in the road. Red Pete snorted and started to
shy, for he recognized the clumsy, bouncing weight which had insulted
his back not long before; but this quiet voiced master reassured him,
and he came to a halt.

"That red devil has cost me a hundred bones and all the skin on my
knees," groaned Morgan, "and I can hardly walk. Damn his eyes. But
say, Dan"--and his eyes glowed with an admiration which made him
momentarily forget his pains--"that was some circus stunt you done
down the road there--that changin' of saddles on the run, I never seen
the equal of it!"

"If you got hurt in the fall," said Dan quietly, overlooking the
latter part of the speech, "why don't you climb onto Satan. He'll take
you back."

Morgan laughed.

"Say, kid, I'd take a chance with Satan, but there ain't any hospital
for fools handy."

"Go ahead. He won't stir a foot. Steady, Satan!"

"All right," said Morgan, "every step is sure like pullin' teeth!"

He ventured closer to the black stallion, but was stopped short. Black
Bart was suddenly changed to a green-eyed devil, his hair bristling
around his shoulders, his teeth bared, and a snarl that came from the
heart of a killer. Satan also greeted his proposed rider with ears
laid flat back on his neck and a quivering anger.

"If I'm goin' to ride Satan," declared Morgan, "I got to shoot the dog
first and then blindfold the hoss."

"No you don't," said Dan. "No one else has ever had a seat on Satan,
but I got an idea he'll make an exception for a sort of temporary
cripple. Steady, boy. Here you, Bart, come over here an' keep your
face shut!"

The dog, after a glance at his master, moved reluctantly away, keeping
his eyes upon Morgan. Satan backed away with a snort. He stopped at
the command of Dan, but when Morgan laid a hand on the bridle and
spoke to him he trembled with fear and anger. The saloon-keeper turned
away.

"Thankin' you jest the same, Dan," he said, "I think I c'n walk back.
I'd as soon ride a tame tornado as that hoss."

He limped on down the road with Dan riding beside him. Black Bart
slunk at his heels, sniffing.

"Dan, I'm goin' to ask you a favour--an' a big one; will you do it for
me?"

"Sure," said Whistling Dan. "Anything I can."

"There's a skunk down there with a bad eye an' a gun that jumps out
of its leather like it had a mind of its own. He picked me for fifty
bucks by nailing a dollar I tossed up at twenty yards. Then he gets a
hundred because I couldn't ride this hoss of his. Which he's made a
plumb fool of me, Dan. Now I was tellin' him about you--maybe I was
sort of exaggeratin'--an' I said you could have your back turned when
the coins was tossed an' then pick off four dollars before they hit
the ground. I made it a bit high, Dan?"

His eyes were wistful.

"Nick four round boys before they hit the dust?" said Dan. "Maybe I
could, I don't know. I can't try it, anyway, Morgan, because I told
Dad Cumberland I'd never pull a gun while there was a crowd aroun'."

Morgan sighed; he hesitated, and then: "But you promised you'd do me a
favour, Dan?"

The rider started.

"I forgot about that--I didn't think----"

"It's only to do a shootin' trick," said Morgan eagerly. "It ain't
pullin' a gun on any one. Why, lad, if you'll tell me you got a ghost
of a chance, I'll bet every cent in my cash drawer on you agin that
skunk! You've give me your word, Dan."

Whistling Dan shrugged his shoulders.

"I've given you my word," he said, "an' I'll do it. But I guess Dad
Cumberland'll be mighty sore on me."

A laugh rose from the crowd at Morgan's place, which they were nearing
rapidly. It was like a mocking comment on Dan's speech. As they came
closer they could see money changing hands in all directions.

"What'd you do to my hoss?" asked Jim Silent, walking out to meet
them.

"He hypnotized him," said Hal Purvis, and his lips twisted over yellow
teeth into a grin of satisfaction.

"Git out of the saddle damn quick," growled Silent. "It ain't nacheral
he'd let you ride him like he was a plough-hoss. An' if you've tried
any fancy stunts, I'll----"

"Take it easy," said Purvis as Dan slipped from the saddle without
showing the slightest anger. "Take it easy. You're a bum loser. When
I seen the black settle down to his work," he explained to Dan with
another grin, "I knowed he'd nail him in the end an' I staked twenty
on you agin my friend here! That was sure a slick change of hosses you
made."

There were other losers. Money chinked on all sides to an
accompaniment of laughter and curses. Jim Silent was examining the
roan with a scowl, while Bill Kilduff and Hal Purvis approached Satan
to look over his points. Purvis reached out towards the bridle when a
murderous snarl at his feet made him jump back with a shout. He stood
with his gun poised, facing Black Bart.

"Who's got any money to bet this damn wolf lives more'n five seconds?"
he said savagely.

"I have," said Dan.

"Who in hell are you? What d'you mean by trailing this man-killer
around?"

He turned to Dan with his gun still poised.

"Bart ain't a killer," said Dan, and the gentleness of his voice was
oil on troubled waters, "but he gets peeved when a stranger comes nigh
to the hoss."

"All right this time," said Purvis, slowly restoring his gun to its
holster, "but if this wolf of yours looks cross-eyed at me agin he'll
hit the long trail that ain't got any end, savvy?"

"Sure," said Dan, and his soft brown eyes smiled placatingly.

Purvis kept his right hand close to the butt of his gun and his eyes
glinted as if he expected an answer somewhat stronger than words.
At this mild acquiesence he turned away, sneering. Silent, having
discovered that he could find no fault with Dan's treatment of his
horse, now approached with an ominously thin-lipped smile. Lee Haines
read his face and came to his side with a whisper: "Better cut out the
rough stuff, Jim. This chap hasn't hurt anything but your cash, and
he's already taken water from Purvis. I guess there's no call for you
to make any play."

"Shut your face, Haines," responded Silent, in the same tone. "He's
made a fool of me by showin' up my hoss, an' by God I'm goin' to give
him a man-handlin' he'll never forgit."

He whirled on Morgan.

"How about it, bar-keep, is this the dead shot you was spillin' so
many words about?"

Dan, as if he could not understand the broad insult, merely smiled at
him with marvellous good nature.

"Keep away from him, stranger," warned Morgan. "Jest because he rode
your hoss you ain't got a cause to hunt trouble with him. He's been
taught not to fight."

Silent, still looking Dan over with insolent eyes, replied: "He sure
sticks to his daddy's lessons. Nice an' quiet an' house broke, ain't
he? In my part of the country they dress this kind of a man in gal's
clothes so's nobody'll ever get sore at him an' spoil his pretty face.
Better go home to your ma. This ain't any place for you. They's men
aroun' here."

There was another one of those grimly expectant hushes and then a
general guffaw; Dan showed no inclination to take offence. He merely
stared at brawny Jim Silent with a sort of childlike wonder.

"All right," he said meekly, "if I ain't wanted around here I figger
there ain't any cause why I should stay. You don't figger to be peeved
at me, do you?"

The laughter changed to a veritable yell of delight. Even Silent
smiled with careless contempt.

"No, kid," he answered, "if I was peeved at you, you'd learn it
without askin' questions."

He turned slowly away.

"Maybe I got jaundice, boys," he said to the crowd, "but it seems to
me I see something kind of yellow around here!"

The delightful subtlety of this remark roused another side-shaking
burst of merriment. Dan shook his head as if the mystery were beyond
his comprehension, and looked to Morgan for an explanation. The
saloon-keeper approached him, struggling with a grin.

"It's all right, Dan," he said. "Don't let 'em rile you."

"You ain't got any cause to fear that," said Silent, "because it can't
be done."




CHAPTER V


FOUR IN THE AIR

Dan looked from Morgan to Silent and back again for understanding.
He felt that something was wrong, but what it was he had not the
slightest idea. For many years old Joe Cumberland had patiently taught
him that the last offence against God and man was to fight. The old
cattleman had instilled in him the belief that if he did not cross the
path of another, no one would cross his way. The code was perfect
and satisfying. He would let the world alone and the world would not
trouble him. The placid current of his life had never come to "white
waters" of wrath.

Wherefore he gazed bewildered about him. They were laughing--they were
laughing unpleasantly at him as he had seen men laugh at a fiery young
colt which struggled against the rope. It was very strange. They could
not mean harm. Therefore he smiled back at them rather uncertainly.
Morgan slapped at his shoulder by way of good-fellowship and to
hearten him, but Dan slipped away under the extended hand with a
motion as subtle and swift as the twist of a snake when it flees for
its hole. He had a deep aversion for contact with another man's body.
He hated it as the wild horse hates the shadow of the flying rope.

"Steady up, pal," said Morgan, "the lads mean no harm. That tall man
is considerable riled; which he'll now bet his sombrero agin you when
it comes to shootin'."

He turned back to Silent.

"Look here, partner," he said, "this is the man I said could nail the
four dollars before they hit the dust. I figger you don't think how it
can be done, eh?"

"Him?" said Silent in deep disgust. "Send him back to his ma before
somebody musses him all up! Why, he don't even pack a gun!"

Morgan waited a long moment so that the little silence would make his
next speech impressive.

"Stranger," he said, "I've still got somewhere in the neighbourhood of
five hundred dollars in that cash drawer. An' every cent of it hollers
that Dan can do what I said."

Silent hesitated. His code was loose, but he did not like to take
advantage of a drunk or a crazy man. However, five hundred dollars was
five hundred dollars. Moreover that handsome fellow who had just taken
water from Hal Purvis and was now smiling foolishly at his own shame,
had actually ridden Red Peter. The remembrance infuriated Silent.

"Hurry up," said Morgan confidently. "I dunno what you're thinkin',
stranger. Which I'm kind of deaf an' I don't understand the way
anything talks except money."

"Corral that talk, Morgan!" called a voice from the crowd, "you're
plumb locoed if you think any man in the world can get away with a
stunt like that! Pick four in the air!"

"You keep your jaw for yourself," said Silent angrily, "if he wants to
donate a little more money to charity, let him do it. Morgan, I've got
five hundred here to cover your stake."

"Make him give you odds, Morgan," said another voice, "because----"

A glance from Silent cut the suggestion short. After that there was
little loud conversation. The stakes were large. The excitement made
the men hush the very tones in which they spoke. Morgan moistened his
white lips.

"You c'n see I'm not packin' any shootin' irons," said Dan. "Has
anybody got any suggestions?"

Every gun in the crowd was instantly at his service. They were
heartily tempted to despise Dan, but as one with the courage to
attempt the impossible, they would help him as far as they could. He
took their guns one after the other, weighed them, tried the action,
and handed them back. It was almost as if there were a separate
intelligence in the ends of his fingers which informed him of the
qualities of each weapon.

"Nice gun," he said to the first man whose revolver he handled, "but I
don't like a barrel that's quite so heavy. There's a whole ounce too
much in the barrel."

"What d'you mean?" asked the cowpuncher. "I've packed that gun for
pretty nigh eight years!"

"Sorry," said Dan passing on, "but I can't work right with a top-heavy
gun."

The next weapon he handed back almost at once.

"What's the matter with that?" asked the owner aggressively.

"Cylinder too tight," said Dan decisively, and a moment later to
another man, "Bad handle. I don't like the feel of it."

Over Jim Silent's guns he paused longer than over most of the rest,
but finally he handed them back. The big man scowled.

Dan looked back to him in gentle surprise.

"You see," he explained quietly, "you got to handle a gun like a
horse. If you don't treat it right it won't treat you right. That's
all I know about it. Your gun ain't very clean, stranger, an' a gun
that ain't kept clean gets off feet."

Silent glanced at his weapons, cursed softly, and restored them to the
holsters.

"Lee," he muttered to Haines, who stood next to him, "what do you
think he meant by that? D' you figger he's got somethin' up his
sleeve, an' that's why he acts so like a damned woman?"

"I don't know," said Haines gravely, "he looks to me sort of
queer--sort of different--damned different, chief!"

By this time Dan had secured a second gun which suited him. He whirled
both guns, tried their actions alternately, and then announced that he
was ready. In the dead silence, one of the men paced off the twenty
yards.

Dan, with his back turned, stood at the mark, shifting his revolvers
easily in his hands, and smiling down at them as if they could
understand his caress.

"How you feelin', Dan?" asked Morgan anxiously.

"Everything fine," he answered.

"Are you gettin' weak?"

"No, I'm all right."

"Steady up, partner."

"Steady up? Look at my hand!"

Dan extended his arm. There was not a quiver in it.

"All right, Dan. When you're shootin', remember that I got pretty
close to everything I own staked on you. There's the stranger gettin'
his four dollars ready."

Silent took his place with the four dollars in his hand.

"Are you ready?" he called.

"Let her go!" said Dan, apparently without the least excitement.

Jim Silent threw the coins, and he threw them so as to increase his
chances as much as possible. A little snap of his hand gave them a
rapid rotary motion so that each one was merely a speck of winking
light. He flung them high, for it was probable that Whistling Dan
would wait to shoot until they were on the way down. The higher he
threw them the more rapidly they would be travelling when they crossed
the level of the markman's eye.

As a shout proclaimed the throwing of the coins, Dan whirled, and it
seemed to the bystanders that a revolver exploded before he was fully
turned; but one of the coins never rose to the height of the throw.
There was a light "cling!" and it spun a dozen yards away. Two more
shots blended almost together; two more dollars darted away in
twinkling streaks of light. One coin still fell, but when it was a
few inches from the earth a six-shooter barked again and the fourth
dollar glanced sidewise into the dust. It takes long to describe the
feat. Actually, the four shots consumed less than a second of time.

"That last dollar," said Dan, and his soft voice was the first sound
out of the silence, "wasn't good. It didn't ring true. Counterfeit?"

It seemed that no one heard his words. The men were making a wild
scramble for the dollars. They dived into the dust for them, rising
white of face and clothes to fight and struggle over their prizes.
Those dollars with the chips and neat round holes in them would
confirm the truth of a story that the most credulous might be tempted
to laugh or scorn. A cowpuncher offered ten dollars for one of the
relics--but none would part with a prize.

The moment the shooting was over Dan stepped quietly back and restored
the guns to the owners. The first man seized his weapon carelessly. He
was in the midst of his rush after one of the chipped coins. The other
cowpuncher received his weapon almost with reverence.

"I'm thankin' you for the loan," said Dan, "an here's hopin' you
always have luck with the gun."

"Luck?" said the other. "I sure _will_ have luck with it. I'm goin'
to oil her up and put her in a glass case back home, an' when I get
grandchildren I'm goin' to point out that gun to 'em and tell 'em what
men used to do in the old days. Let's go in an' surround some red-eye
at my expense."

"No thanks," answered Dan, "I ain't drinkin'."

He stepped back to the edge of the circle and folded his arms. It was
as if he had walked out of the picture. He suddenly seemed to be aloof
from them all.

Out of the quiet burst a torrent of curses, exclamations, and shouts.
Chance drew Jim Silent and his three followers together.

"My God!" whispered Lee Haines, with a sort of horror in his voice,
"it wasn't human! Did you see? Did you see?"

"Am I blind?" asked Hal Purvis, "an' think of me walkin' up an'
bracin' that killer like he was a two-year-old kid! I figger that's
the nearest I ever come to a undeserved grave, an' I've had some close
calls! 'That last dollar wasn't good! It didn't ring true,' says he
when he finished. I never seen such nerve!"

"You're wrong as hell," said Silent, "a _woman_ can shoot at a target,
but it takes a cold _nerve_ to shoot at a man--an' this feller is
yellow all through!"

"Is he?" growled Bill Kilduff, "well, I'd hate to take him by
surprise, so's he'd forget himself. He gets as much action out of a
common six-gun as if it was a gatling. He was right about that last
dollar, too. It was pure--lead!"

"All right, Haines," said Silent. "You c'n start now any time, an'
the rest of us'll follow on the way I said. I'm leavin' last. I got a
little job to finish up with the kid."

But Haines was staring fixedly down the road.

"I'm not leaving yet," said Haines. "Look!"

He turned to one of the cowpunchers.

"Who's the girl riding up the road, pardner?"

"That calico? She's Kate Cumberland--old Joe's gal."

"I like the name," said Haines. "She sits the saddle like a man!"

Her pony darted off from some imaginary object in the middle of the
road, and she swayed gracefully, following the sudden motion. Her
mount came to the sudden halt of the cattle pony and she slipped to
the ground before Morgan could run out to help. Even Lee Haines, who
was far quicker, could not reach her in time.

"Sorry I'm late," said Haines. "Shall I tie your horse?"

The fast ride had blown colour to her face and good spirits into her
eyes. She smiled up to him, and as she shook her head in refusal her
eyes lingered a pardonable moment on his handsome face, with the stray
lock of tawny hair fallen low across his forehead. She was used to
frank admiration, but this unembarrassed courtesy was a new world to
her. She was still smiling when she turned to Morgan.

"You told my father the boys wouldn't wear guns today."

He was somewhat confused.

"They seem to be wearin' them," he said weakly, and his eyes wandered
about the armed circle, pausing on the ominous forms of Hal Purvis,
Bill Kilduff, and especially Jim Silent, a head taller than the rest.
He stood somewhat in the background, but the slight sneer with which
he watched Whistling Dan dominated the entire picture.

"As a matter of fact," went on Morgan, "it would be a ten man job to
take the guns away from this crew. You can see for yourself."

She glanced about the throng and started. She had seen Dan.

"How did he come here?"

"Oh, Dan?" said Morgan, "he's all right. He just pulled one of the
prettiest shootin' stunts I ever seen."

"But he promised my father--" began Kate, and then stopped, flushing.

If her father was right in diagnosing Dan's character, this was the
most critical day in his life, for there he stood surrounded by armed
men. If there were anything wild in his nature it would be brought out
that day. She was almost glad the time of trial had come.

She said: "How about the guns, Mr. Morgan?"

"If you want them collected and put away for a while," offered Lee
Haines, "I'll do what I can to help you!"

Her smile of thanks set his blood tingling. His glance lingered a
little too long, a little too gladly, and she coloured slightly.

"Miss Cumberland," said Haines, "may I introduce myself? My name is
Lee."

She hesitated. The manners she had learned in the Eastern school
forbade it, but her Western instinct was truer and stronger. Her hand
went out to him.

"I'm very glad to know you, Mr. Lee."

"All right, stranger," said Morgan, who in the meantime had been
shifting from one foot to the other and estimating the large chances
of failure in this attempt to collect the guns, "if you're going to
help me corral the shootin' irons, let's start the roundup."

The girl went with them. They had no trouble in getting the weapons.
The cold blue eye of Lee Haines was a quick and effective persuasion.

When they reached Jim Silent he stared fixedly upon Haines. Then he
drew his guns slowly and presented them to his comrade, while his eyes
shifted to Kate and he said coldly: "Lady, I hope I ain't the last one
to congratulate you!"

She did not understand, but Haines scowled and coloured. Dan, in the
meantime, was swept into the saloon by an influx of the cowpunchers
that left only Lee Haines outside with Kate. She had detained him with
a gesture.




CHAPTER VI


LAUGHTER

"Mr. Lee," she said, "I am going to ask you to do me a favour. Will
you?"

His smile was a sufficient answer, and it was in her character that
she made no pretext of misunderstanding it.

"You have noticed Dan among the crowd?" she asked, "Whistling Dan?"

"Yes," he said, "I saw him do some very nice shooting."

"It's about him that I want to speak to you. Mr. Lee, he knows very
little about men and their ways. He is almost a child among them. You
seem--stronger--than most of the crowd here. Will you see that if
trouble comes he is not imposed upon?"

She flushed a little, there was such a curious yearning in the eyes of
the big man.

"If you wish it," he said simply, "I will do what I can."

As he walked beside her towards her horse, she turned to him abruptly.

"You are very different from the men I have met around here," she
said.

"I am glad," he answered.

"Glad?"

"If you find me different, you will remember me, whether for better or
worse."

He spoke so earnestly that she grew grave. He helped her to the saddle
and she leaned a little to study him with the same gentle gravity.

"I should like to see you again, Mr. Lee," she said, and then in a
little outburst, "I should like to see you a _lot!_ Will you come to
my house sometime?"

The directness, the sudden smile, made him flinch. His voice was a
trifle unsteady when he replied.

"I _shall!_" He paused and his hand met hers. "If it is possible."

Her eyebrows raised a trifle.

"Is it so hard to do?"

"Do not ask me to explain," he said, "I am riding a long way."

"Oh, a 'long-rider'!" she laughed, "then of course--" She stopped
abruptly. It may have been imagination, but he seemed to start when
she spoke the phrase by which outlaws were known to each other. He was
forcing his eyes to meet hers.

He said slowly: "I am going on a long journey. Perhaps I will come
back. If I am able to, I shall."

He dropped his hand from hers and she remained silent, guessing at
many things, and deeply moved, for every woman knows when a man speaks
from his soul.

"You will not forget me?"

"I shall never forget you," she answered quietly. "Good-bye, Mr. Lee!"

Her hand touched his again, she wheeled, and rode away. He remained
standing with the hand she had grasped still raised. And after a
moment, as he had hoped, she turned in the saddle and waved to him.
His eyes were downward and he was smiling faintly when he re-entered
the saloon.

Silent sat at a table with his chin propped in his hand--his left
hand, of course, for that restless right hand must always be free. He
stared across the room towards Whistling Dan. The train of thoughts
which kept those ominous eyes so unmoving must be broken. He sat down
at the side of his chief.

"What the hell?" said the big man, "ain't you started yet?"

"Look here, Jim," said Haines cautiously, "I want you to lay off on
this kid, Whistling Dan. It won't meant anything to you to raise the
devil with him."

"I tell you," answered Silent, "it'll please me more'n anything in the
world to push that damned girl face of his into the floor."

"Silent, I'm asking a personal favour of you!"

The leader turned upon him that untamed stare. Haines set his teeth.

"Haines," came the answer, "I'll stand more from you than from any man
alive. I know you've got guts an' I know you're straight with me.
But there ain't anything can keep me from manhandlin' that kid over
there." He opened and shut his fingers slowly. "I sort of yearn to get
at him!"

Haines recognized defeat.

"But you haven't another gun hidden on you, Jim? You won't try to
shoot him up?"

"No," said Silent. "If I had a gun I don't know--but I haven't a gun.
My hands'll be enough!"

All that could be done now was to get Whistling Dan out of the saloon.
That would be simple. A single word would suffice to send the timid
man helter-skelter homewards.

The large, lazy brown eyes turned up to Haines as the latter
approached.

"Dan," he said, "hit for the timbers--get on your way--there's danger
here for you!"

To his astonishment the brown eyes did not vary a shade.

"Danger?" he repeated wonderingly.

"Danger! Get up and get out if you want to save your hide!"

"What's the trouble?" said Dan, and his eyes were surprised, but not
afraid.

"The biggest man in this room is after your blood."

"Is he?" said Dan wonderingly. "I'm sorry I don't feel like leavin',
but I'm not tired of this place yet."

"Friend," said Haines, "if that tall man puts his hands on you, he'll
break you across his knee like a rotten stick of wood!"

It was too late. Silent evidently guessed that Haines was urging his
quarry to flee.

"Hey!" he roared, so that all heads turned towards him, "you over
there."

Haines stepped back, sick at heart. He knew that it would be folly to
meet his chief hand to hand, but he thought of his pledge to Kate, and
groaned.

"What do you want of me?" asked Dan, for the pointed arm left no doubt
as to whom Silent intended.

"Get up when you're spoke to" cried Silent. "Ain't you learned no
manners? An' git up quick!"

Dan rose, smiling his surprise.

"Your friend has a sort of queer way of talkin'," he said to Haines.

"Don't stan' there like a fool. Trot over to the bar an' git me a jolt
of red-eye. I'm dry!" thundered Silent.

"Sure!" nodded Whistling Dan amiably, "glad to!" and he went
accordingly towards the bar.

The men about the room looked to each other with sick smiles.
There was an excuse for acquiescence, for the figure of Jim Silent
contrasted with Whistling Dan was like an oak compared with a sapling.
Nevertheless such bland cowardice as Dan was showing made their flesh
creep. He asked at the bar for the whisky, and Morgan spoke as Dan
filled a glass nearly to the brim.

"Dan," he whispered rapidly, "I got a gun behind the bar. Say the word
an' I'll take the chance of pullin' it on that big skunk. Then you
make a dive for the door. Maybe I can keep him back till you get on
Satan."

"Why should I beat it?" queried Dan, astonished. "I'm jest beginnin'
to get interested in your place. That tall feller is sure a queer one,
ain't he?"

With the same calm and wide-eyed smile of inquiry he turned away,
taking the glass of liquor, and left Morgan to stare after him with a
face pale with amazement, while he whispered over and over to himself:
"Well, I'll be damned! Well, I'll be damned!"

Dan placed the liquor before Silent. The latter sat gnawing his lips.

"What in hell do you mean?" he said. "Did you only bring one glass?
Are you too damn good to drink with me? Then drink by yourself, you
white-livered coyote!"

He dashed the glass of whisky into Dan's face. Half blinded by the
stinging liquor, the latter fell back a pace, sputtering, and wiping
his eyes. Not a man in the room stirred. The same sick look was on
each face. But the red devil broke loose in Silent's heart when he saw
Dan cringe. He followed the thrown glass with his clenched fist. Dan
stood perfectly still and watched the blow coming. His eyes were wide
and wondering, like those of a child. The iron-hard hand struck him
full on the mouth, fairly lifted him from his feet, and flung him
against the wall with such violence that he recoiled again and fell
forward onto his knees. Silent was making beast noises in his throat
and preparing to rush on the half-prostrate figure. He stopped short.

Dan was laughing. At least that chuckling murmur was near to a laugh.
Yet there was no mirth in it. It had that touch of the maniacal in it
which freezes the blood. Silent halted in the midst of his rush, with
his hands poised for the next blow. His mouth fell agape with an odd
expression of horror as Dan stared up at him. That hideous chuckling
continued. The sound defied definition. And from the shadow in which
Dan was crouched his brown eyes blazed, changed, and filled with
yellow fires.

"God!" whispered Silent, and at that instant the ominous crouched
animal with the yellow eyes, the nameless thing which had been
Whistling Dan a moment before, sprang up and forward with a leap like
that of a panther.

Morgan stood behind the bar with a livid face and a fixed smile. His
fingers still stiffly clutched the whisky bottle from which the last
glass had been filled. Not another man in the room stirred from his
place. Some sat with their cards raised in the very act of playing.
Some had stopped midway a laugh. One man had been tying a bootlace.
His body did not rise. Only his eyes rolled up to watch.

Dan darted under the outstretched arms of Silent, fairly heaved him up
from the floor and drove him backwards. The big man half stumbled and
half fell, knocking aside two chairs. He rushed back with a shout, but
at sight of the white face with the thin trickle of blood falling from
the lips, and at the sound of that inhuman laughter, he paused again.

Once more Dan was upon him, his hands darting out with motions too
fast for the eye to follow. Jim Silent stepped back a half pace,
shifted his weight, and drove his fist straight at that white face.
How it happened not a man in the room could tell, but the hand did not
strike home. Dan had swerved aside as lightly as a wind-blown feather
and his fist rapped against Silent's ribs with a force that made the
giant grunt.

Some of the horror was gone from his face and in its stead was baffled
rage. He knew the scientific points of boxing, and he applied them.
His eye was quick and sure. His reach was whole inches longer than his
opponent's. His strength was that of two ordinary men. What did it
avail him? He was like an agile athlete in the circus playing tag with
a black panther. He was like a child striking futilely at a wavering
butterfly. Sometimes this white-faced, laughing devil ducked under
his arms. Sometimes a sidestep made his blows miss by the slightest
fraction of an inch.

And for every blow he struck four rained home against him. It was
impossible! It could not be! Silent telling himself that he dreamed,
and those dancing fists crashed into his face and body like
sledgehammers. There was no science in the thing which faced him. Had
there been trained skill the second blow would have knocked Silent
unconscious, and he knew it, but Dan made no effort to strike a
vulnerable spot. He hit at anything which offered.

Still he laughed as he leaped back and forth. Perhaps mere weight of
rushing would beat the dancing will-o'-the-wisp to the floor. Silent
bored in with lowered head and clutched at his enemy. Then he roared
with triumph. His outstretched hand caught Dan's shirt as the latter
flicked to one side. Instantly they were locked in each other's arms!
The most meaning part of the fight followed.

The moment after they grappled, Silent shifted his right arm from its
crushing grip on Dan's body and clutched at the throat. The move was
as swift as lightning, but the parry of the smaller man was still
quicker. His left hand clutched Silent by the wrist, and that mighty
sweep of arm was stopped in mid-air! They were in the middle of the
room. They stood perfectly erect and close together, embraced. Their
position had a ludicrous resemblance to the posture of dancers, but
their bodies were trembling with effort. With every ounce of power in
his huge frame Silent strove to complete his grip at the throat.
He felt the right arm of Dan tightening around him closer, closer,
closer! It was not a bulky arm, but it seemed to be made of linked
steel which was shrinking into him, and promised to crush his very
bones. The strength of this man seemed to increase. It was limitless.
His breath came struggling under that pressure and the blood thundered
and raged in his temples. If he could only get at that soft throat!

But his struggling right hand was held in a vice of iron. Now his numb
arm gave way, slowly, inevitably. He ground his teeth and cursed. His
curse was half a prayer. For answer there was the unearthly chuckle
just below his ear. His hand was moved back, down, around! He was
helpless as a child in the arms of its father--no, helpless as a sheep
in the constricting coils of a python.

An impulse of frantic horror and shame and fear gave him redoubled
strength for an instant. He tore himself clear and reeled back. Dan
planted two smashes on Silent's snarling mouth. A glance showed the
large man the mute, strained faces around the room. The laughing devil
leaped again. Then all pride slipped like water from the heart of Jim
Silent, and in its place there was only icy fear, fear not of a man,
but of animal power. He caught up a heavy chair and drove it with all
his desperate strength at Dan.

It cracked distinctly against his head and the weight of it fairly
drove him into the floor. He fell with a limp thud on the boards.
Silent, reeling and blind, staggered to and fro in the centre of the
room. Morgan and Lee Haines reached Dan at the same moment and kneeled
beside him.




CHAPTER VII


THE MUTE MESSENGER

Almost at once Haines raised a hand and spoke to the crowd: "He's all
right, boys. Badly cut across the head and stunned, but he'll live."

There was a deep gash on the upper part of the forehead. If the
cross-bar of the chair had not broken, the skull might have been
injured. The impact of the blow had stunned him, and it might be many
minutes before his senses returned.

As the crowd closed around Dan, a black body leaped among them,
snarling hideously. They sprang back with a yell from the rush of this
green-eyed fury; but Black Bart made no effort to attack them. He sat
crouching before the prostrate body, licking the deathly white face,
and growling horribly, and then stood over his fallen master and
stared about the circle. Those who had seen a lone wolf make its stand
against a pack of dogs recognized the attitude. Then without a sound,
as swiftly as he had entered the room, he leaped through the door and
darted off up the road. Satan, for the first time deserted by this
wolfish companion, turned a high head and neighed after him, but he
raced on.

The men returned to their work over Dan's body, cursing softly. There
was a hair-raising unearthliness about the sudden coming and departure
of Black Bart. Jim Silent and his comrades waited no longer, but took
to their saddles and galloped down the road.

Within a few moments the crowd at Morgan's place began to thin out.
Evening was coming on, and most of them had far to ride. They might
have lingered until midnight, but this peculiar accident damped their
spirits. Probably not a hundred words were spoken from the moment
Silent struck Dan to the time when the last of the cattlemen took to
the saddle. They avoided each other's eyes as if in shame. In a short
time only Morgan remained working over Dan.

In the house of old Joe Cumberland his daughter sat fingering the keys
of the only piano within many miles. The evening gloom deepened as she
played with upward face and reminiscent eyes. The tune was uncertain,
weird--for she was trying to recall one of those nameless airs which
Dan whistled as he rode through the hills. There came a patter of
swift, light footfalls in the hall, and then a heavy scratching at the
door.

"Down, Bart!" she called, and went to admit him to the room.

The moment she turned the handle the door burst open and Bart fell in
against her. She cried out at sight of the gleaming teeth and eyes,
but he fawned about her feet, alternately whining and snarling.

"What is it, boy?" she asked, gathering her skirts close about her
ankles and stepping back, for she never was without some fear of this
black monster. "What do you want, Bart?"

For reply he stood stock still, raised his nose, and emitted a long
wail, a mournful, a ghastly sound, with a broken-hearted quaver at the
end. Kate Cumberland shrank back still farther until the wall blocked
her retreat. Black Bart had never acted like this before. He followed
her with a green light in his eyes, which shone phosphorescent and
distinct through the growing shadows. And most terrible of all was
the sound which came deep in his throat as if his brute nature was
struggling to speak human words. She felt a great impulse to cry out
for help, but checked herself. He was still crouching about her feet.
Obviously he meant no harm to her.

He turned and ran towards the door, stopped, looked back to her, and
made a sound which was nearer to the bark of a dog than anything he
had ever uttered. She made a step after him. He whined with delight
and moved closer to the door. Now she stopped again. He whirled and
ran back, caught her dress in his teeth, and again made for the door,
tugging her after him.

At last she understood and followed him. When she went towards the
corral to get her horse, he planted himself in front of her and
snarled so furiously that she gave up her purpose. She was beginning
to be more and more afraid. A childish thought came to her that
perhaps this brute was attempting to lure her away from the house, as
she had seen coyotes lure dogs, and then turn his teeth against her.
Nevertheless she followed. Something in the animal's eagerness moved
her deeply. When he led her out to the road he released her dress and
trotted ahead a short distance, looking back and whining, as if to beg
her to go faster. For the first time the thought of Dan came into her
mind. Black Bart was leading her down the road towards Morgan's place.
What if something had happened to Dan?

She caught a breath of sharp terror and broke into a run. Bart yelped
his pleasure. Yet a cold horror rose in her heart as she hurried. Had
her father after all been right? What power had Dan, if he needed her,
to communicate with this mute beast and send him to her? As she ran
she wished for the day, the warm, clear sun--for these growing shadows
of evening bred a thousand ghostly thoughts. Black Bart was running
backwards and forwards before her as if he half entreated and half
threatened her.

Her heart died within her as she came in sight of Morgan's place.
There was only one horse before it, and that was the black stallion.
Why had the others gone so soon? Breathless, she reached the door of
the saloon. It was very dim within. She could make out only formless
shades at first. Black Bart slid noiselessly across the floor. She
followed him with her eyes, and now she saw a figure stretched
straight out on the floor while another man kneeled at his side. She
ran forward with a cry.

Morgan rose, stammering. She pushed him aside and dropped beside Dan.
A broad white bandage circled his head. His face was almost as pale as
the cloth. Her touches went everywhere over that cold face, and she
moaned little syllables that had no meaning. He lived, but it seemed
to her that she had found him at the legended gates of death.

"Miss Kate!" said Morgan desperately.

"You murderer!"

"You don't think that _I_ did that?"

"It happened in your place--you had given Dad your word!"

Still she did not turn her head.

"Won't you hear me explain? He's jest in a sort of a trance. He'll
wake up feelin' all right. Don't try to move him tonight. I'll go out
an' put his hoss up in the shed. In the mornin' he'll be as good as
new. Miss Kate, won't you listen to me?"

She turned reluctantly towards him. Perhaps he was right and Dan would
waken from his swoon as if from a healthful sleep.

"It was that big feller with them straight eyes that done it," began
Morgan.

"The one who was sneering at Dan?"

"Yes."

"Weren't there enough boys here to string him up?"

"He had three friends with him. It would of taken a hundred men to lay
hands on one of those four. They were all bad ones. I'm goin' to tell
you how it was, because I'm leavin' in a few minutes and ridin' south,
an' I want to clear my trail before I start. This was the way it
happened--"

His back was turned to the dim light which fell through the door. She
could barely make out the movement of his lips. All the rest of his
face was lost in shadow. As he spoke she sometimes lost his meaning
and the stir of his lips became a nameless gibbering. The grey gloom
settled more deeply round the room and over her heart while he talked.
He explained how the difference had risen between the tall stranger
and Whistling Dan. How Dan had been insulted time and again and borne
it with a sort of childish stupidity. How finally the blow had been
struck. How Dan had crouched on the floor, laughing, and how a yellow
light gathered in his eyes.

At that, her mind went blank. When her thoughts returned she stood
alone in the room. The clatter of Morgan's galloping horse died
swiftly away down the road. She turned to Dan. Black Bart was crouched
at watch beside him. She kneeled again--lowered her head--heard the
faint but steady breathing. He seemed infinitely young--infinitely
weak and helpless. The whiteness of the bandage stared up at her like
an eye through the deepening gloom. All the mother in her nature came
to her eyes in tears.




CHAPTER VIII


RED WRITING

He stirred.

"Dan--dear!"

"My head," he muttered, "it sort of aches, Kate, as if--"

He was silent and she knew that he remembered.

"You're all right now, honey. I've come here to take care of you--I
won't leave you. Poor Dan!"

"How did you know?" he asked, the words trailing.

"Black Bart came for me."

"Good ol' Bart!"

The great wolf slunk closer, and licked the outstretched hand.

"Why, Kate, I'm on the floor and it's dark. Am I still in Morgan's
place? Yes, I begin to see clearer."

He made an effort to rise, but she pressed him back.

"If you try to move right away you may get a fever. I'm going back
to the house, and I'll bring you down some blankets. Morgan says you
shouldn't attempt to move for several hours. He says you've lost a
great deal of blood and that you mustn't make any effort or ride a
horse till tomorrow."

Dan relaxed with a sigh.

"Kate."

"Yes, honey."

Her hand travelled lightly as blown snow across his forehead. He
caught it and pressed the coolness against his cheek.

"I feel as if I'd sort of been through a fire. I seem to be still
seein' red."

"Dan, it makes me feel as if I never knew you! Now you must forget all
that has happened. Promise me you will!"

He was silent for a moment and then he sighed again.

"Maybe I can, Kate. Which I feel, though, as if there was somethin'
inside me writ--writ in red letters--I got to try to read the writin'
before I can talk much."

She barely heard him. Her hand was still against his face. A deep awe
and content was creeping through her, so that she began to smile and
was glad that the dark covered her face. She felt abashed before him
for the first time in her life, and there was a singular sense of
shame. It was as if some door in her inner heart had opened so that
Dan was at liberty to look down into her soul. There was terror in
this feeling, but there was also gladness.

"Kate."

"Yes--honey!"

"What were you hummin'?"

She started.

"I didn't know I was humming, Dan."

"You were, all right. It sounded sort of familiar, but I couldn't
figger out where I heard it."

"I know now. It's one of your own tunes."

Now she felt a tremor so strong that she feared he would notice it.

"I must go back to the house, Dan. Maybe Dad has returned. If he has,
perhaps he can arrange to have you carried back tonight."

"I don't want to think of movin', Kate. I feel mighty comfortable.
I'm forgettin' all about that ache in my head. Ain't that queer? Why,
Kate, what in the world are you laughin' about?"

"I don't know, Dan. I'm just happy!"

"Kate."

"Yes?"

"I like you pretty much."

"I'm so glad!"

"You an' Black Bart, an' Satan--"

"Oh!" Her tone changed.

"Why are you tryin' to take your hand away, Kate?"

"Don't you care for me any more than for your horse--and your dog?"

He drew a long breath, puzzled.

"It's some different, I figger."

"Tell me!"

"If Black Bart died--"

The wolf-dog whined, hearing his name.

"Good ol' Bart! Well, if Black Bart died maybe I'd some day have
another dog I'd like almost as much."

"Yes."

"An' if Satan died--even Satan!--maybe I could sometime like another
hoss pretty well--if he was a pile like Satan! But if you was to
die--it'd be different, a considerable pile different."

"Why?"

His pauses to consider these questions were maddening.

"I don't know," he muttered at last.

Once more she was thankful for the dark to hide her smile.

"Maybe you know the reason, Kate?"

Her laughter was rich music. His hold on her hand relaxed. He was
thinking of a new theme. When he laughed in turn it startled her. She
had never heard that laugh before.

"What is it, Dan?"

"He was pretty big, Kate. He was bigger'n almost any man I ever seen!
It was kind of funny. After he hit me I was almost glad. I didn't hate
him--"

"Dear Dan!"

"I didn't hate him--I jest nacherally wanted to kill him--and wantin'
to do that made me glad. Isn't that funny, Kate?"

He spoke of it as a chance traveller might point out a striking
feature of the landscape to a companion.

"Dan, if you really care for me you must drop the thought of him."

His hand slipped away.

"How can I do that? That writin' I was tellin' you about--"

"Yes?"

"It's about him!"

"Ah!"

"When he hit me the first time--"

"I won't hear you tell of it!"

"The blood come down my chin--jest a little trickle of it. It was
warm, Kate. That was what made me hot all through."

Her hands fell limp, cold, lifeless.

"It's as clear as the print in a book. I've got to finish him. That's
the only way I can forget the taste of my own blood."

"Dan, listen to me!"

He laughed again, in the new way. She remembered that her father had
dreaded the very thing that had come to Dan--this first taste of his
own powers--this first taste (she shuddered) of blood!

"Dan, you've told me that you like me. You have to make a choice now,
between pursuing this man, and me."

"You don't understand," he explained carefully. "I _got_ to follow
him. I can't help it no more'n Black Bart can help howlin' when he
sees the moon."

He fell silent, listening. Far across the hills came the plaintive
wail of a coyote--that shrill bodiless sound. Kate trembled.

"Dan!"

Outside, Satan whinnied softly like a call. She leaned and her lips
touched his. He thrust her away almost roughly.

"They's blood on my lips, Kate! I can't kiss you till they're clean."

He turned his head.

"You must listen to me, Dan!"

"Kate, would you talk to the wind?"

"Yes, if I loved the wind!"

He turned his head.

She pleaded: "Here are my hands to cover your eyes and shut out the
thoughts of this man you hate. Here are my lips, dear, to tell you
that I love you unless this thirst for killing carries you away from
me. Stay with me! Give me your heart to keep gentle!"

He said nothing, but even through the dark she was aware of a struggle
in his face, and then, through the gloom, she began to see his
eyes more clearly. They seemed to be illuminated by a light from
within--they changed--there was a hint of yellow in the brown. And she
spoke again, blindly, passionately.

"Give me your promise! It is so easy to do. One little word will make
you safe. It will save you from yourself."

Still he answered nothing. Black Bart came and crouched at his head
and stared at her fixedly.

"Speak to me!"

Only the yellow light answered her. Cold fear fought in her heart, but
love still struggled against it.

"For the last time--for God's sake, Dan!"

Still that silence. She rose, shaking and weak. The changeless eyes
followed her. Only fear remained now. She backed towards the door,
slowly, then faster, and faster. At the threshold she whirled and
plunged into the night.

Up the road she raced. Once she stumbled and fell to her knees. She
cried out and glanced behind her, breathing again when she saw that
nothing followed. At the house she made no pause, though she heard the
voice of her father singing. She could not tell him. He should be the
last in all the world to know. She went to her room and huddled into
bed.

Presently a knock came at her door, and her father's voice asked if
she were ill. She pleaded that she had a bad headache and wished to be
alone. He asked if she had seen Dan. By a great effort she managed to
reply that Dan had ridden to a neighbouring ranch. Her father left
the door without further question. Afterwards she heard him in the
distance singing his favourite mournful ballads. It doubled her sense
of woe and brought home the clinging fear. She felt that if she could
weep she might live, but otherwise her heart would burst. And after
hours and hours of that torture which burns the name of "woman" in the
soul of a girl, the tears came. The roosters announced the dawn before
she slept.

Late the next morning old Joe Cumberland knocked again at her door. He
was beginning to fear that this illness might be serious. Moreover, he
had a definite purpose in rousing her.

"Yes?" she called, after the second knock.

"Look out your window, honey, down to Morgan's place. You remember I
said I was goin' to clean up the landscape?"

The mention of Morgan's place cleared the sleep from Kate's mind and
it brought back the horror of the night before. Shivering she slipped
from her bed and went to the window. Morgan's place was a mass of
towering flames!

She grasped the window-sill and stared again. It could not be. It must
be merely another part of the nightmare, and no reality. Her father's
voice, high with exultation, came dimly to her ears, but what she saw
was Dan as he had laid there the night before, hurt, helpless, too
weak to move!

"There's the end of it," Joe Cumberland was saying complacently
outside her door. "There ain't goin' to be even a shadow of the saloon
left nor nothin' that's in it. I jest travelled down there this
mornin' and touched a match to it!"

Still she stared without moving, without making a sound. She was
seeing Dan as he must have wakened from a swoonlike sleep with the
smell of smoke and the heat of rising flames around him. She saw him
struggle, and fail to reach his feet. She almost heard him cry out--a
sound drowned easily by the roar of the fire, and the crackling of the
wood. She saw him drag himself with his hands across the floor, only
to be beaten back by a solid wall of flame. Black Bart crouched beside
him and would not leave his doomed master. Fascinated by the raging
fire the black stallion Satan would break from the shed and rush into
the flames!--and so the inseparable three must have perished together!

"Why don't you speak, Kate?" called her father.

"Dan!" she screamed, and pitched forward to the floor.




CHAPTER IX


THE PHANTOM RIDER

In the daytime the willows along the wide, level river bottom seemed
an unnatural growth, for they made a streak of yellow-green across
the mountain-desert when all other verdure withered and died. After
nightfall they became still more dreary. Even when the air was calm
there was apt to be a sound as of wind, for the tenuous, trailing
branches brushed lightly together, making a guarded whispering like
ghosts.

In a small clearing among these willows sat Silent and his companions.
A fifth member had just arrived at this rendezvous, answered the quiet
greeting with a wave of his hand, and was now busy caring for his
horse. Bill Kilduff, who had a natural inclination and talent for
cookery, raked up the deft dying coals of the fire over which he had
cooked the supper, and set about preparing bacon and coffee for the
newcomer. The latter came forward, and squatted close to the cook,
watching the process with a careful eye. He made a sharp contrast with
the rest of the group. From one side his profile showed the face of
a good-natured boy, but when he turned his head the flicker of the
firelight ran down a scar which gleamed in a jagged semi-circle from
his right eyebrow to the corner of his mouth. This whole side of his
countenance was drawn by the cut, the mouth stretching to a perpetual
grimace. When he spoke it was as if he were attempting secrecy. The
rest of the men waited in patience until he finished eating. Then
Silent asked: "What news, Jordan?"

Jordan kept his regretful eyes a moment longer on his empty coffee
cup.

"There ain't a pile to tell," he answered at last. "I suppose you
heard about what happened to the chap you beat up at Morgan's place
the other day?"

"Who knows that _I_ beat him up?" asked Silent sharply.

"Nobody," said Jordan, "but when I heard the description of the man
that hit Whistling Dan with the chair, I knew it was Jim Silent."

"What about Barry?" asked Haines, but Jordan still kept his eyes upon
the chief.

"They was sayin' pretty general," he went on, "that you _needed_ that
chair, Jim. Is that right?"

The other three glanced covertly to each other. Silent's hand bunched
into a great fist.

"He went loco. I had to slam him. Was he hurt bad?"

"The cut on his head wasn't much, but he was left lyin' in the saloon
that night, an' the next mornin' old Joe Cumberland, not knowin' that
Whistlin' Dan was in there, come down an' touched a match to the old
joint. She went up in smoke an' took Dan along."

No one spoke for a moment. Then Silent cried out: "Then what was that
whistlin' I've heard down the road behind us?"

Bill Kilduff broke into rolling bass laughter, and Hal Purvis chimed
in with a squeaking tenor.

"We told you all along, Jim," said Purvis, as soon as he could control
his voice, "that there wasn't any whistlin' behind us. We know you
got powerful good hearin', Jim, but we all figger you been makin'
somethin' out of nothin'. Am I right, boys?"

"You sure are," said Kilduff, "I ain't heard a thing."

Silent rolled his eyes angrily from face to face.

"I'm kind of sorry the lad got his in the fire. I was hopin' maybe
we'd meet agin. There's nothin' I'd rather do than be alone five
minutes with Whistlin' Dan."

His eyes dared any one to smile. The men merely exchanged glances.
When he turned away they grinned broadly. Hal Purvis turned and caught
Bill Kilduff by the shoulder.

"Bill," he said excitedly, "if Whistlin' Dan is dead there ain't any
master for that dog!"

"What about him?" growled Kilduff.

"I'd like to try my hand with him," said Purvis, and he moistened his
tight lips. "Did you see the black devil when he snarled at me in
front of Morgan's place?"

"He sure didn't look too pleasant."

"Right. Maybe if I had him on a chain I could change his manners some,
eh?"

"How?"

"A whip every day, damn him--a whip every time he showed his teeth at
me. No eats till he whined and licked my hand."

"He'd die first. I know that kind of a dog--or a wolf."

"Maybe he'd die. Anyway I'd like to try my hand with him. Bill, I'm
goin' to get hold of him some of these days if I have to ride a
hundred miles an' swim a river!"

Kilduff grunted.

"Let the damn wolf be. You c'n have him, I say. What I'm thinkin'
about is the hoss. Hal, do you remember the way he settled to his
stride when he lighted out after Red Pete?"

Purvis shrugged his shoulders.

"You're a fool, Bill. Which no man but Barry could ever ride that
hoss. I seen it in his eye. He'd cash in buckin'. He'd fight you like
a man."

Kilduff sighed. A great yearning was in his eyes.

"Hal," he said softly, "they's some men go around for years an'
huntin' for a girl whose picture is in their bean, cached away
somewhere. When they see her they jest nacherally goes nutty. Hal, I
don't give a damn for women folk, but I've travelled around a long
time with a picture of a hoss in my brain, an' Satan is the hoss."

He closed his eyes.

"I c'n see him now. I c'n see them shoulders--an' that head--an', my
God! them eyes--them fire eatin' eyes! Hal, if a man was to win the
heart of that hoss he'd lay down his life for you--he'd run himself
plumb to death! I won't never sleep tight till I get the feel of them
satin sides of his between my knees."

Lee Haines heard them speak, but he said nothing. His heart also
leaped when he heard of Whistling Dan's death, but he thought neither
of the horse nor the dog. He was seeing the yellow hair and the blue
eyes of Kate Cumberland. He approached Jordan and took a place beside
him.

"Tell me some more about it, Terry," he asked.

"Some more about what?"

"About Whistling Dan's death--about the burning of the saloon," said
Haines.

"What the hell! Are you still thinkin' about that?"

"I certainly am."

"Then I'll trade you news," said Terry Jordan, lowering his voice so
that it would not reach the suspicious ear of Jim Silent. "I'll tell
you about the burnin' if you'll tell me something about Barry's fight
with Silent!"

"It's a trade," answered Haines.

"All right. Seems old Joe Cumberland had a hunch to clean up the
landscape--old fool! so he jest up in the mornin' an' without sayin' a
word to any one he downs to the saloon and touches a match to it. When
he come back to his house he tells his girl, Kate, what he done. With
that she lets out a holler an' drops in a faint."

Haines muttered.

"What's the matter?" asked Terry, a little anxiously.

"Nothin," said Haines. "She fainted, eh? Well, good!"

"Yep. She fainted an' when she come to, she told Cumberland that Dan
was in the saloon, an' probably too weak to get out of the fire. They
started for the place on the run. When they got there all they found
was a pile of red hot coals. So everyone figures that he went up in
the flames. That's all I know. Now what about the fight?"

Lee Haines sat with fixed eyes.

"There isn't much to say about the fight," he said at last.

"The hell there isn't," scoffed Terry Jordan. "From what I heard, this
Whistling Dan simply cut loose and raised the devil more general than
a dozen mavericks corralled with a bunch of yearlings."

"Cutting loose is right," said Haines. "It wasn't a pleasant thing to
watch. One moment he was about as dangerous as an eighteen-year-old
girl. The next second he was like a panther that's tasted blood.
That's all there was to it, Terry. After the first blow, he was all
over the chief. You know Silent's a bad man with his hands?"

"I guess we all know that," said Jordan, with a significant smile.

"Well," said Haines, "he was like a baby in the hands of Barry. I
don't like to talk about it--none of us do. It makes the flesh creep."

There was a loud crackling among the underbrush several hundred yards
away. It drew closer and louder.

"Start up your works agin, will you, Bill?" called Silent. "Here comes
Shorty Rhinehart, an' he's overdue."

In a moment Shorty swung from his horse and joined the group. He
gained his nickname from his excessive length, being taller by an inch
or two than Jim Silent himself, but what he gained in height he lost
in width. Even his face was monstrously long, and marked with such sad
lines that the favourite name of "Shorty" was affectionately varied to
"Sour-face" or "Calamity." Silent went to him at once.

"You seen Hardy?" he asked.

"I sure did," said Rhinehart, "an' it's the last time I'll make that
trip to him, you can lay to that."

"Did he give you the dope?"

"No."

"What do you mean?"

"I jest want you to know that this here's my last trip to Elkhead--on
_any_ business."

"Why?"

"I passed three marshals on the street, an' I knew them all. They was
my friends, formerly. One of them was--"

"What did they do?"

"I waved my hand to them, glad an' familiar. They jest grunted. One of
them, he looked up an' down the street, an' seein' that no one was in
sight, he come up to me an' without shakin' hands he says: 'I'm some
surprised to see you in Elkhead, Shorty.' 'Why,' says I, 'the town's
all right, ain't it?' 'It's all right,' he says, 'but you'd find it a
pile more healthier out on the range.'"

"What in hell did he mean by that?" growled Silent.

"He simply meant that they're beginnin' to think a lot more about
us than they used to. We've been pullin' too many jobs the last six
months."

"You've said all that before, Shorty. I'm runnin' this gang. Tell me
about Hardy."

"I'm comin' to that. I went into the Wells Fargo office down by the
railroad, an' the clerk sent me back to find Hardy in the back room,
where he generally is. When he seen me he changed colour. I'd jest
popped my head through the door an' sung out: 'Hello, Hardy, how's the
boy?' He jumped up from the desk an' sung out so's his clerk in the
outside room could hear: 'How are you, lad?' an' he pulled me quick
into the room an' locked the door behind me.

"'Now what in hell have you come to Elkhead for?' says he.

"'For a drink' says I, never battin' an eye.

"'You've come a damn long ways,' says he.

"'Sure,' says I, 'that's one reason I'm so dry. Will you liquor, pal?'

"He looked like he needed a drink, all right. He begun loosening his
shirt collar.

"'Thanks, but I ain't drinkin', says he. 'Look here, Shorty, are you
loco to come ridin' into Elkhead this way?'

"'I'm jest beginnin' to think maybe I am,' says I.

"'Shorty,' he says in a whisper, 'they're beginnin' to get wise to the
whole gang--includin' me.'

"'Take a brace,' says I. 'They ain't got a thing on you, Hardy.'

"'That don't keep 'em from thinkin' a hell of a pile,' says he, 'an'
I tell you, Shorty, I'm jest about through with the whole works. It
ain't worth it--not if there was a million in it. Everybody is gettin'
wise to Silent, an' the rest of you. Pretty soon hell's goin' to bust
loose.'

"'You've been sayin' that for two years,' says I.

"He stopped an' looked at me sort of thoughtful an' pityin'. Then he
steps up close to me an' whispers in that voice: 'D'you know who's on
Silent's trail now? Eh?'

"'No, an' I don't give a damn,' says I, free an' careless.

"'Tex Calder!' says he."

Silent started violently, and his hand moved instinctively to his
six-gun.

"Did he say Tex Calder?"

"He said no less," answered Shorty Rhinehart, and waited to see his
news take effect. Silent stood with head bowed, scowling.

"Tex Calder's a fool," he said at last. "He ought to know better'n to
take to _my_ trail."

"He's fast with his gun," suggested Shorty.

"Don't I know that?" said Silent. "If Alvarez, an' Bradley, an'
Hunter, an' God knows how many more could come up out of their graves,
they'd tell jest how quick he _is_ with a six-gun. But I'm the one man
on the range that's faster."

Shorty was eloquently mute.

"I ain't askin' you to take my word for it," said Jim Silent. "Now
that he's after me, I'm glad of it. It had to come some day. The
mountains ain't big enough for both of us to go rangin' forever. We
had to lock horns some day. An' I say, God help Tex Calder!"

He turned abruptly to the rest of the men.

"Boys, I got somethin' to tell you that Shorty jest heard. Tex Calder
is after us."

There came a fluent outburst of cursing.

Silent went on: "I know jest how slick Calder is. I'm bettin' on
my draw to be jest the necessary half a hair quicker. He may die
shootin'. I don't lay no bets that I c'n nail him before he gets his
iron out of its leather, but I say he'll be shootin' blind when he
dies. Is there any one takin' that bet?"

His eyes challenged them one after another. Their glances travelled
past Silent as if they were telling over and over to themselves the
stories of those many men to whom Tex Calder had played the part of
Fate. The leader turned back to Shorty Rhinehart.

"Now tell me what he had to say about the coin."

"Hardy says the shipment's delayed. He don't know how long."

"How'd it come to be delayed?"

"He figures that Wells Fargo got a hunch that Silent was layin' for
the train that was to carry it."

"Will he let us know when it _does_ come through?"

"I asked him, an' he jest hedged. He's quitting on us cold."

"I was a fool to send you, Shorty. I'm goin' myself, an' if Hardy
don't come through to me--"

He broke off and announced to the rest of his gang that he intended to
make the journey to Elkhead. He told Haines, who in such cases usually
acted as lieutenant, to take charge of the camp. Then he saddled his
roan.

In the very act of pulling up the cinch of his saddle, Silent stopped
short, turned, and raised a hand for quiet. The rest were instantly
still. Hal Purvis leaned his weazened face towards the ground. In this
manner it was sometimes possible to detect far-off sounds which to one
erect would be inaudible. In a moment, however, he straightened up,
shaking his head.

"What is it?" whispered Haines.

"Shut up," muttered Silent, and the words were formed by the motion of
his lips rather than through any sound. "That damned whistling again."

Every face changed. At a rustling in a near-by willow, Terry Jordan
started and then cursed softly to himself. That broke the spell.

"It's the whisperin' of the willows," said Purvis.

"You lie," said Silent hoarsely. "I hear the sound growing closer."

"Barry is dead," said Haines.

Silent whipped out his revolver--and then shoved it back into the
holster.

"Stand by me, boys," he pleaded. "It's his ghost come to haunt me! You
can't hear it, because he ain't come for you."

They stared at him with a fascinated horror.

"How do you know it's him?" asked Shorty Rhinehart.

"There ain't no sound in the whole world like it. It's a sort of cross
between the singing of a bird an' the wailin' of the wind. It's the
ghost of Whistlin' Dan."

The tall roan raised his head and whinnied softly. It was an unearthly
effect--as if the animal heard the sound which was inaudible to all
but his master. It changed big Jim Silent into a quavering coward.
Here were five practised fighters who feared nothing between heaven
and hell, but what could they avail him against a bodiless spirit? The
whistling stopped. He breathed again, but only for a moment.

It began again, and this time much louder and nearer. Surely the
others must hear it now, or else it was certainly a ghost. The men sat
with dilated eyes for an instant, and then Hal Purvis cried, "I heard
it, chief! If it's a ghost, it's hauntin' me too!"

Silent cursed loudly in his relief.

"It ain't a ghost. It's Whistlin' Dan himself. An' Terry Jordan has
been carryin' us lies! What in hell do you mean by it?"

"I ain't been carryin' you lies," said Jordan, hotly. "I told you
what I heard. I didn't never say that there was any one seen his dead
body!"

The whistling began to die out. A babble of conjecture and exclamation
broke out, but Jim Silent, still sickly white around the mouth, swung
up into the saddle.

"That Whistlin' Dan I'm leavin' to you, Haines," he called. "I've had
his blood onct, an' if I meet him agin there's goin' to be another
notch filed into my shootin' iron."




CHAPTER X


THE STRENGTH OF WOMEN

He rode swiftly into the dark of the willows, and the lack of noise
told that he was picking his way carefully among the bended branches.

"It seems to me," said Terry Jordan, "which I'm not suggestin'
anything--but it seems to me that the chief was in a considerable
hurry to leave the camp."

"He was," said Hal Purvis, "an' if you seen that play in Morgan's
place you wouldn't be wonderin' why. If I was the chief I'd do the
same."

"Me speakin' personal," remarked Shorty Rhinehart, "I ain't layin' out
to be no man-eater like the chief, but I ain't seen the man that'd
make me take to the timbers that way. I don't noways expect there _is_
such a man!"

"Shorty," said Haines calmly, "we all knows that you're quite a man,
but you and Terry are the only ones of us who are surprised that
Silent slid away. The rest of us who saw this Whistling Dan in action
aren't a bit inclined to wonder. Suppose you were to meet a black
panther down here in the willows?"

"I wouldn't give a damn if I had my Winchester with me."

"All right, Terry, but suppose the panther," broke in Hal Purvis,
"could sling shootin' irons as well as you could--maybe _that'd_ make
you partic'ler pleased."

"It ain't possible," said Terry.

"Sure it ain't," grinned Purvis amiably, "an' this Barry ain't
possible, either. Where you going, Lee?"

Haines turned from his task of saddling his mount.

"Private matter. Kilduff, you take my place while I'm gone. I may be
back tomorrow night. The chief isn't apt to return so soon."

A few moments later Haines galloped out of the willows and headed
across the hills towards old Joe Cumberland's ranch. He was
remembering his promise to Kate, to keep Dan out of danger. He had
failed from that promise once, but that did not mean that he had
forgotten. He looked up to the yellow-bright mountain stars, and they
were like the eyes of good women smiling down upon him. He guessed
that she loved Barry and if he could bring her to Whistling Dan she
might have strength enough to take the latter from Silent's trail. The
lone rider knew well enough that to bring Dan and Kate together was
to surrender his own shadowy hopes, but the golden eyes of the sky
encouraged him. So he followed his impulse.

Haines could never walk that middle path which turns neither to the
right nor the left, neither up nor down. He went through life with
a free-swinging stride, and as the result of it he had crossed the
rights of others. He might have lived a lawful life, for all his
instincts were gentle. But an accident placed him in the shadow of the
law. He waited for his legal trial, but when it came and false witness
placed him behind the bars, the revolt came. Two days after his
confinement, he broke away from his prison and went to the wilds.
There he found Jim Silent, and the mountain-desert found another to
add to its list of great outlaws.

Morning came as he drew close to the house, and now his reminiscences
were cut short, for at a turn of the road he came upon Kate galloping
swiftly over the hills. He drew his horse to a halt and raised his
hand. She followed suit. They sat staring. If she had remembered his
broken promise and started to reproach, he could have found answer,
but her eyes were big with sorrow alone. He put out his hand without a
word. She hesitated over it, her eyes questioning him mutely, and then
with the ghost of a smile she touched his fingers.

"I want to explain," he said huskily.

"What?"

"You remember I gave you my word that no harm would come to Barry?"

"No man could have helped him."

"You don't hold it against me?"

A gust of wind moaned around them. She waved her arm towards the
surrounding hills and her laugh blended with the sound of the wind,
it was so faint. He watched her with a curious pang. She seemed among
women what that morning was to the coming day--fresh, cool, aloof. It
was hard to speak the words which would banish the sorrow from her
eyes and make them brilliant with hope and shut him away from her
thoughts with a barrier higher than mountains, and broader than seas.

"I have brought you news," he said at last, reluctantly.

She did not change.

"About Dan Barry."

Ay, she changed swiftly enough at that! He could not meet the fear and
question of her glance. He looked away and saw the red rim of the sun
pushing up above the hills. And colour poured up the throat of Kate
Cumberland, up even to her forehead beneath the blowing golden hair.

Haines jerked his sombrero lower on his head. A curse tumbled up to
his lips and he had to set his teeth to keep it back.

"But I have heard his whistle."

Her lips moved but made no sound.

"Five other men heard him."

She cried out as if he had hurt her, but the hurt was happiness. He
knew it and winced, for she was wonderfully beautiful.

"In the willows of the river bottom, a good twenty miles south," he
said at last, "and I will show you the way, if you wish."

He watched her eyes grow large with doubt.

"Can you trust me?" he asked. "I failed you once. Can you trust me
now?"

Her hand went out to him.

"With all my heart," she said. "Let us start!"

"I've given my horse a hard ride. He must have some rest."

She moaned softly in her impatience, and then: "We'll go back to the
house and you can stable your horse there until you're ready to start.
Dad will go with us."

"Your father cannot go," he said shortly.

"Cannot?"

"Let's start back for the ranch," he said, "and I'll tell you
something about it as we go."

As they turned their horses he went on: "In order that you may reach
Whistling Dan, you'll have to meet first a number of men who are
camping down there in the willows."

He stopped. It became desperately difficult for him to go on.

"I am one of those men," he said, "and another of them is the one whom
Whistling Dan is following."

She caught her breath and turned abruptly on him.

"What are you, Mr. Lee?"

Very slowly he forced his eyes up to meet her gaze.

"In that camp," he answered indirectly, "your father wouldn't be
safe!"

It was out at last!

"Then you are--"

"Your friend."

"Forgive me. You _are_ my friend!"

"The man whom Dan is following," he went on, "is the leader. If he
gives the command four practised fighters pit themselves against
Barry."

"It is murder!"

"You can prevent it," he said. "They know Barry is on the trail, but I
think they will do nothing unless he forces them into trouble. And he
will force them unless you stop him. No other human being could take
him off that trail."

"I know! I know!" she muttered. "But I have already tried, and he will
not listen to me!"

"But he will listen to you," insisted Haines, "when you tell him that
he will be fighting not one man, but six."

"And if he doesn't listen to me?"

Haines shrugged his shoulders.

"Can't you promise that these men will not fight with him?"

"I cannot."

"But I shall plead with them myself."

He turned to her in alarm.

"No, you must not let them dream you know who they are," he warned,
"for otherwise--"

Again that significant shrug of the shoulders.

He explained: "These men are in such danger that they dare not take
chances. You are a woman, but if they feel that you suspect them you
will no longer be a woman in their eyes."

"Then what must I do?"

"I shall ride ahead of you when we come to the willows, after I have
pointed out the position of our camp. About an hour after I have
arrived, for they must not know that I have brought you, you will ride
down towards the camp. When you come to it I will make sure that it
is I who will bring you in. You must pretend that you have simply
blundered upon our fire. Whatever you do, never ask a question while
you are there--and I'll be your warrant that you will come off safely.
Will you try?"

He attempted no further persuasion and contented himself with merely
meeting the wistful challenge of her eyes.

"I will," she said at last, and then turning her glance away she
repeated softly, "I will."

He knew that she was already rehearsing what she must say to Whistling
Dan.

"You are not afraid?"

She smiled.

"Do you really trust me as far as this?"

With level-eyed tenderness that took his breath, she answered: "An
absolute trust, Mr. Lee."

"My name," he said in a strange voice, "is Lee Haines."

Of one accord they stopped their horses and their hands met.




CHAPTER XI


SILENT BLUFFS

The coming of the railroad had changed Elkhead from a mere crossing of
the ways to a rather important cattle shipping point. Once a year it
became a bustling town whose two streets thronged with cattlemen with
pockets burdened with gold which fairly burned its way out to the open
air. At other times Elkhead dropped back into a leaden-eyed sleep.

The most important citizen was Lee Hardy, the Wells Fargo agent.
Office jobs are hard to find in the mountain-desert, and those who
hold them win respect. The owner of a swivel-chair is more lordly
than the possessor of five thousand "doggies." Lee Hardy had such
a swivel-chair. Moreover, since large shipments of cash were often
directed by Wells Fargo to Elkhead, Hardy's position was really more
significant than the size of the village suggested. As a crowning
stamp upon his dignity he had a clerk who handled the ordinary routine
of work in the front room, while Hardy set himself up in state in
a little rear office whose walls were decorated by two brilliant
calendars and the coloured photograph of a blond beauty advertising a
toilet soap.

To this sanctuary he retreated during the heat of the day, while in
the morning and evening he loitered on the small porch, chatting with
passers-by. Except in the hottest part of the year he affected a soft
white collar with a permanent bow tie. The leanness of his features,
and his crooked neck with the prominent Adam's apple which stirred
when he spoke, suggested a Yankee ancestry, but the faded blue eyes,
pathetically misted, could only be found in the mountain-desert.

One morning into the inner sanctum of this dignitary stepped a man
built in rectangles, a square face, square, ponderous shoulders, and
even square-tipped fingers. Into the smiling haze of Hardy's face his
own keen black eye sparkled like an electric lantern flashed into a
dark room. He was dressed in the cowboy's costume, but there was no
Western languor in his make-up. Everything about him was clear cut
and precise. He had a habit of clicking his teeth as he finished a
sentence. In a word, when he appeared in the doorway Lee Hardy woke
up, and before the stranger had spoken a dozen words the agent was
leaning forward to be sure that he would not miss a syllable.

"You're Lee Hardy, aren't you?" said he, and his eyes gave the
impression of a smile, though his lips did not stir after speaking.

"I am," said the agent.

"Then you're the man I want to see. If you don't mind--"

He closed the door, pulled a chair against it, and then sat down, and
folded his arms. Very obviously he meant business. Hardy switched his
position in his chair, sitting a little more to the right, so that the
edge of the seat would not obstruct the movement of his hand towards
the holster on his right thigh.

"Well," he said good naturedly, "I'm waitin'."

"Good," said the stranger, "I won't keep you here any longer than is
necessary. In the first place my name is Tex Calder."

Hardy changed as if a slight layer of dust had been sifted over his
face. He stretched out his hand.

"It's great to see you, Calder," he said, "of course I've heard
about you. Everyone has. Here! I'll send over to the saloon for some
red-eye. Are you dry?"

He rose, but Calder waved him back to the swivel-chair.

"Not dry a bit," he said cheerily. "Not five minutes ago I had a drink
of--water."

"All right," said Hardy, and settled back into his chair.

"Hardy, there's been crooked work around here."

"What in hell--"

"Get your hand away from that gun, friend."

"What the devil's the meaning of all this?"

"That's very well done," said Calder. "But this isn't the stage. Are
we going to talk business like friends?"

"I've got nothing agin you," said Hardy testily, and his eyes followed
Calder's right hand as if fascinated. "What do you want to say? I'll
listen. I'm not very busy."

"That's exactly it," smiled Tex Calder, "I want you to get busier."

"Thanks."

"In the first place I'll be straight with you. Wells Fargo hasn't sent
me here."

"Who has?"

"My conscience."

"I don't get your drift."

Through a moment of pause Calder's eyes searched the face of Hardy.

"You've been pretty flush for some time."

"I ain't been starvin'."

"There are several easy ways for you to pick up extra money."

"Yes?"

"For instance, you know all about the Wells Fargo money shipments, and
there are men around here who'd pay big for what you could tell them."

The prominent Adam's apple rose and fell in Hardy's throat.

"You're quite a joker, ain't you Calder? Who, for instance?"

"Jim Silent."

"This is like a story in a book," grinned Hardy. "Go on. I suppose
I've been takin' Silent's money?"

The answer came like the click of a cocked revolver.

"You have!"

"By God, Calder--"

"Steady! I have some promising evidence, partner. Would you like to
hear part of it?"

"This country has its share of the world's greatest liars," said
Hardy, "I don't care what you've heard."

"That saves my time. Understand me straight. I can slap you into a
lock-up, if I want to, and then bring in that evidence. I'm not going
to do it. I'm going to use you as a trap and through you get some of
the worst of the lone riders."

"There's nothin' like puttin' your hand on the table."

"No, there isn't. I'll tell you what you're to do."

"Thanks."

The marshal drove straight on.

"I've got four good men in this town. Two of them will always be
hanging around your office. Maybe you can get a job for them here, eh?
I'll pay the salaries. You simply tip them off when your visitors are
riders the government wants, see? You don't have to lift a hand. You
just go to the door as the visitor leaves, and if he's all right you
say: 'So long, we'll be meeting again before long.' But if he's a man
I want, you say 'Good-bye.' That's all. My boys will see that it is
good-bye."

"Go on," said the agent, "and tell the rest of the story. It starts
well."

"Doesn't it?" agreed Calder, "and the way it concludes is with you
reaching over and shaking hands with me and saying 'yes'!"

He leaned forward. The twinkle was gone from his eyes and he extended
his hand to Hardy. The latter reached out with an impulsive gesture,
wrung the proffered hand, and then slipping back into his chair broke
into hysterical laughter.

"The real laugh," said Calder, watching his man narrowly, "will be on
the long riders."

"Tex," said the agent. "I guess you have the dope. I won't say
anything except that I'm glad as hell to be out of the rotten business
at last. Once started I couldn't stop. I did one 'favour' for these
devils, and after that they had me in their power. I haven't slept for
months as I'm going to sleep tonight!"

He wiped his face with an agitated hand.

"A week ago," he went on, "I knew you were detailed on this work. I've
been sweating ever since. Now that you've come--why, I'm glad of it!"

A faint sneer touched Calder's mouth and was gone.

"You're a wise man," he said. "Have you seen much of Jim Silent
lately?"

Hardy hesitated. The rôle of informer was new.

"Not directly."

Calder nodded.

"Now put me right if I go off the track. The way I understand it, Jim
Silent has about twenty gun fighters and long riders working in gangs
under him and combining for big jobs."

"That's about it."

"The inside circle consists of Silent; Lee Haines, a man who went
wrong because the law did _him_ wrong; Hal Purvis, a cunning devil;
and Bill Kilduff, a born fighter who loves blood for its own sake."

"Right."

"Here's something more. For Jim Silent, dead or alive, the government
will pay ten thousand dollars. For each of the other three it pays
five thousand. The notices aren't out yet, but they will be in a few
days. Hardy, if you help me bag these men, you'll get fifty per cent
of the profits. Are you on?"

The hesitancy of Hardy changed to downright enthusiasm.

"Easy money, Tex. I'm your man, hand and glove."

"Don't get optimistic. This game isn't played yet, and unless I make
the biggest mistake of my life we'll be guessing again before we land
Silent. I've trailed some fast gunmen in my day, and I have an idea
that Silent will be the hardest of the lot; but if you play your end
of the game we may land him. I have a tip that he's lying out in the
country near Elkhead. I'm riding out alone to get track of him. As I
go out I'll tell my men that you're O.K. for this business."

He hesitated a moment with his hand on the door knob.

"Just one thing more, Hardy. I heard a queer tale this morning about
a fight in a saloon run by a man named Morgan. Do you know anything
about it?"

"No."

"I was told of a fellow who chipped four dollars thrown into the air
at twenty yards."

"That's a lie."

"The man who talked to me had a nicked dollar to prove his yarn."

"The devil he did!"

"And after the shooting this chap got into a fight with a tall man
twice his size and fairly mopped up the floor with him. They say it
wasn't a nice thing to watch. He is a frail man, but when the fight
started he turned into a tiger."

"Wish I'd seen it."

"The tall man tallies to a hair with my description of Silent."

"You're wrong. I know what Silent can do with his hands. No one could
beat him up. What's the name of the other?"

"Barry. Whistling Dan Barry."

Calder hesitated.

"Right or wrong, I'd like to have this Barry with me. So long."

He was gone as he had come, with a nod and a flash of the keen, black
eyes. Lee Hardy stared at the door for some moments, and then went
outside. The warm light of the sun had never been more welcome to him.
Under that cheering influence he began to feel that with Tex Calder
behind him he could safely defy the world.

His confidence received a shock that afternoon when a heavy step
crossed the outside room, and his door opening without a preliminary
knock, he looked up into the solemn eyes of Jim Silent. The outlaw
shook his head when Hardy offered him a chair.

"What's the main idea of them two new men out in your front room,
Lee?" he asked.

"Two cowpunchers that was down on their luck. I got to stand in with
the boys now and then."

"I s'pose so. Shorty Rhinehart in here to see you, Lee?"

"Yep."

"You told him that the town was gettin' pretty hot."

"It is."

"You said you had no dope on when that delayed shipment was comin'
through?"

Hardy made lightning calculations. A half truth would be the best way
out.

"I've just got the word you want. It come this morning."

Silent's expression changed and he leaned a little closer.

"It's the nineteenth. Train number 89. Savvy? Seven o'clock at
Elkhead!"

"How much? Same bunch of coin?"

"Fifty thousand!"

"That's ten more."

"Yep. A new shipment rolled in with the old one. No objections?"

Silent grinned.

"Any other news, Lee?"

"Shorty told you about Tex Calder?"

"He did. Seen him around here?"

The slightest fraction of a second in hesitation.

"No."

"Was that the straight dope you give Shorty?"

"Straighter'n hell. They're beginnin' to talk, but I guess I was jest
sort of panicky when I talked with Shorty."

"This Tex Calder----"

"What about him?" This with a trace of suspicion.

"He's got a long record."

"So've you, Jim."

Once more that wolflike grin which had no mirth.

"So long, Lee. I'll be on the job. Lay to that."

He turned towards the door. Hardy followed him. A moment more, in a
single word, and the job would be done. Five thousand dollars for a
single word! It warmed the very heart of Lee Hardy.

Silent, as he moved away, seemed singularly thoughtful. He hesitated a
moment with bowed head at the door--then whirled and shoved a six-gun
under the nose of Hardy. The latter leaped back with his arms thrust
above his head, straining at his hands to get them higher.

"My God, Jim!"

"You're a low-down, lyin' hound!"

Hardy's tongue clove to the roof of his mouth.

"Damn you, d'you hear me?"

"Yes! For God's sake, Jim, don't shoot!"

"Your life ain't worth a dime!"

"Give me one more chance an' I'll play square!"

A swift change came over the face of Silent, and then Hardy went hot
with terror and anger. The long rider had known nothing. The gun play
had been a mere bluff, but he had played into the hands of Silent, and
now his life was truly worth nothing.

"You poor fool," went on Silent, his voice purring with controlled
rage. "You damn blind fool! D'you think you could double cross me an'
get by with it?"

"Give me a chance, Jim. One more chance, one more chance!"

Even in his terror he remembered to keep his voice low lest those in
the front room should hear.

"Out with it, if you love livin'!"

"I--I can't talk while you got that gun on me!"

Silent not only lowered his gun, but actually returned it to the
holster. Nothing could more clearly indicate his contempt, and Hardy,
in spite of his fear, crimsoned with shame.

"It was Tex Calder," he said at last.

Silent started a little and his eyes narrowed again.

"What of him?"

"He came here a while ago an' tried to make a deal with me."

"An' made it!" said Silent ominously.

No gun pointed at him this time, but Hardy jerked his hands once more
above his head and cowered against the wall.

"So help me God he didn't, Jim."

"Get your hands down."

He lowered his hands slowly.

"I told him I didn't know nothin' about you."

"What about that train? What about that shipment?"

"It's jest the way I told you, except that it's on the eighteenth
instead of the nineteenth."

"I'm goin' to believe you. If you double cross me I'll have your hide.
Maybe they'll get me, but there'll be enough of my boys left to get
you. You can lay to that. How much did they offer you, Lee? How much
am I worth to the little old U.S.A.?"

"I--I--it wasn't the money. I was afraid to stick with my game any
longer."

The long rider had already turned towards the door, making no effort
to keep his face to the agent. The latter, flushing again, moved his
hand towards his hip, but stopped the movement. The last threat of
Silent carried a deep conviction with it. He knew that the faith of
lone riders to each other was an inviolable bond. Accordingly he
followed at the heels of the other man into the outside room.

"So long, old timer," he called, slapping Silent on the shoulder,
"I'll be seein' you agin before long."

Calder's men looked up with curious eyes. Hardy watched Silent swing
onto his horse and gallop down the street. Then he went hurriedly
back to his office. Once inside he dropped into the big swivel-chair,
buried his face in his arms, and wept like a child.




CHAPTER XII


PARTNERS

Dust powdered his hat and clothes as Tex Calder trotted his horse
north across the hills. His face was a sickly grey, and his black
hair might have been an eighteenth century wig, so thoroughly was it
disguised. It had been a long ride. Many a long mile wound back behind
him, and still the cattle pony, with hanging head, stuck to its task.
Now he was drawing out on a highland, and below him stretched the
light yellow-green of the willows of the bottom land. He halted his
pony and swung a leg over the horn of his saddle. Then he rolled a
cigarette, and while he inhaled it in long puffs he scanned the trees
narrowly. Miles across, and stretching east and west farther than his
eye could reach, extended the willows. Somewhere in that wilderness
was the gang of Jim Silent. An army corps might have been easily
concealed there.

If he was not utterly discouraged in the beginning of his search, it
was merely because the rangers of the hills and plains are taught
patience almost as soon as they learn to ride a horse. He surveyed the
yellow-green forest calmly. In the west the low hanging sun turned
crimson and bulged at the sides into a clumsy elipse. He started down
the slope at the same dog-trot which the pony had kept up all day.
Just before he reached the skirts of the trees he brought his horse to
a sudden halt and threw back his head. It seemed to him that he heard
a faint whistling.

He could not be sure. It was so far off and unlike any whistling he
had ever heard before, that he half guessed it to be the movement of a
breeze through the willows, but the wind was hardly strong enough to
make this sound. For a full five minutes he listened without moving
his horse. Then came the thing for which he waited, a phrase of melody
undoubtedly from human lips.

What puzzled him most was the nature of the music. As he rode closer
to the trees it grew clearer. It was unlike any song he had ever
heard. It was a strange improvisation with a touch of both melancholy
and savage exultation running through it. Calder found himself nodding
in sympathy with the irregular rhythm.

It grew so clear at last that he marked with some accuracy the
direction from which it came. If this was Silent's camp, it must be
strongly guarded, and he should approach the place more cautiously
than he could possibly do on a horse. Accordingly he dismounted, threw
the reins over the pony's head, and started on through the willows.
The whistling became louder and louder. He moved stealthily from tree
to tree, for he had not the least idea when he would run across a
guard. The whistling ceased, but the marshal was now so near that he
could follow the original direction without much trouble. In a few
moments he might distinguish the sound of voices. If there were two or
three men in the camp he might be able to surprise them and make his
arrest. If the outlaws were many, at least he could lie low near
the camp and perhaps learn the plans of the gang. He worked his way
forward more and more carefully. At one place he thought a shadowy
figure slipped through the brush a short distance away. He poised his
gun, but lowered it again after a moment's thought. It must have
been a stir of shadows. No human being could move so swiftly or so
noiselessly.

Nevertheless the sight gave him such a start that he proceeded with
even greater caution. He was crouched close to the ground. Every inch
of it he scanned carefully before he set down a foot, fearful of the
cracking of a fallen twig. Like most men when they hunt, he began to
feel that something followed him. He tried to argue the thought out of
his brain, but it persisted, and grew stronger. Half a dozen times he
whirled suddenly with his revolver poised. At last he heard a stamp
which could come from nothing but the hoof of a horse. The sound
dispelled his fears. In another moment he would be in sight of the
camp.

"Do you figger you'll find it?" asked a quiet voice behind him.

He turned and looked into the steady muzzle of a Colt. Behind that
revolver was a thin, handsome face with a lock of jet black hair
falling over the forehead. Calder knew men, and now he felt a strange
absence of any desire to attempt a gun-play.

"I was just taking a stroll through the willows," he said, with a
mighty attempt at carelessness.

"Oh," said the other. "It appeared to me you was sort of huntin' for
something. You was headed straight for my hoss."

Calder strove to find some way out. He could not. There was no waver
in the hand that held that black gun. The brown eyes were decidedly
discouraging to any attempt at a surprise. He felt helpless for the
first time in his career.

"Go over to him, Bart," said the gentle voice of the stranger. "Stand
fast!"

The last two words, directed to Calder came, with a metallic hardness,
for the marshal started as a great black dog slipped from behind a
tree and slunk towards him. This was the shadow which moved more
swiftly and noiselessly than a human being.

"Keep back that damned wolf," he said desperately.

"He ain't goin' to hurt you," said the calm voice. "Jest toss your gun
to the ground."

There was nothing else for it. Calder dropped his weapon with the butt
towards Whistling Dan.

"Bring it here, Bart," said the latter.

The big animal lowered his head, still keeping his green eyes upon
Calder, took up the revolver in his white fangs, and glided back to
his master.

"Jest turn your back to me, an' keep your hands clear of your body,"
said Dan.

Calder obeyed, sweating with shame. He felt a hand pat his pockets
lightly in search for a hidden weapon, and then, with his head
slightly turned, he sensed the fact that Dan was dropping his revolver
into its holster. He whirled and drove his clenched fist straight at
Dan's face.

What happened then he would never forget to the end of his life.
Calder's weapon still hung in Dan's right hand, but the latter made no
effort to use it. He dropped the gun, and as Calder's right arm shot
out, it was caught at the wrist, and jerked down with a force that
jarred his whole body.

"Down, Bart!" shouted Dan. The great wolf checked in the midst of his
leap and dropped, whining with eagerness, at Calder's feet. At the
same time the marshal's left hand was seized and whipped across his
body. He wrenched away with all his force. He might as well have
struggled with steel manacles. He was helpless, staring into eyes
which now glinted with a yellow light that sent a cold wave tingling
through his blood.

The yellow gleam died; his hands were loosed; but he made no move to
spring at Dan's throat. Chill horror had taken the place of his shame,
and the wolf-dog still whined at his feet with lips grinned back from
the long white teeth.

"Who in the name of God are you?" he gasped, and even as he spoke
the truth came to him--the whistling--the panther-like speed of
hand--"Whistling Dan Barry."

The other frowned.

"If you didn't know my name why were you trailin' me?"

"I wasn't after you," said Calder.

"You was crawlin' along like that jest for fun? Friend, I figger to
know you. You been sent out by the tall man to lay for me."

"What tall man?" asked Calder, his wits groping.

"The one that swung the chair in Morgan's place," said Dan. "Now
you're goin' to take me to your camp. I got something to say to him."

"By the Lord!" cried the marshal, "you're trailing Silent."

Dan watched him narrowly. It was hard to accuse those keen black eyes
of deceit.

"I'm trailin' the man who sent you out after me," he asserted with a
little less assurance.

Calder tore open the front of his shirt and pushed back one side of
it. Pinned there next to his skin was his marshal's badge.

He said: "My name's Tex Calder."

It was a word to conjure with up and down the vast expanse of the
mountain-desert. Dan smiled, and the change of expression made him
seem ten years younger.

"Git down, Bart. Stand behind me!" The dog obeyed sullenly. "I've
heard a pile of men talk about you, Tex Calder." Their hands and their
eyes met. There was a mutual respect in the glances. "An' I'm a pile
sorry for this."

He picked up the gun from the ground and extended it butt first to the
marshal, who restored it slowly to the holster. It was the first time
it had ever been forced from his grasp.

"Who was it you talked about a while ago?" asked Dan.

"Jim Silent."

Dan instinctively dropped his hand back to his revolver.

"The tall man?"

"The one you fought with in Morgan's place."

The unpleasant gleam returned to Dan's eyes.

"I thought there was only one reason why he should die, but now I see
there's a heap of 'em."

Calder was all business.

"How long have you been here?" he asked.

"About a day."

"Have you seen anything of Silent here among the willows?"

"No."

"Do you think he's still here?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"I dunno. I'll stay here till I find him among the trees or he breaks
away into the open."

"How'll you know when he leaves the willows?"

Whistling Dan was puzzled.

"I dunno," he answered. "Somethin' will tell me when he gets far away
from me--he an' his men."

"It's an inner sense, eh? Like the smell of the bloodhound?" said
Calder, but his eyes were strangely serious.

"This day's about done," he went on. "Have you any objections to me
camping with you here?"

Not a cowpuncher within five hundred miles but would be glad of such
redoubted company. They went back to Calder's horse.

"We can start for my clearing," said Dan. "Bart'll bring the hoss.
Fetch him in."

The wolf took the dangling bridle reins and led on the cowpony. Calder
observed his performance with starting eyes, but he was averse to
asking questions. In a few moments they came out on a small open
space. The ground was covered with a quantity of dried bunch grass
which a glorious black stallion was cropping. Now he tossed up his
head so that some of his long mane fell forward between his ears and
at sight of Calder his ears dropped back and his eyes blazed, but when
Dan stepped from the willows the ears came forward again with a
whinny of greeting. Calder watched the beautiful animal with all the
enthusiasm of an expert horseman. Satan was untethered; the saddle and
bridle lay in a corner of the clearing; evidently the horse was a pet
and would not leave its master. He spoke gently and stepped forward to
caress the velvet shining neck, but Satan snorted and started away,
trembling with excitement.

"How can you keep such a wild fellow as this without hobbling him?"
asked Calder.

"He ain't wild," said Dan.

"Why, he won't let me put a hand on him."

"Yes, he will. Steady, Satan!"

The stallion stood motionless with the veritable fires of hell in his
eyes as Calder approached. The latter stopped.

"Not for me," he said. "I'd rather rub the moustache of the lion in
the zoo than touch that black devil!"

Bart at that moment led in the cowpony and Calder started to remove
the saddle. He had scarcely done so and hobbled his horse when he was
startled by a tremendous snarling and snorting. He turned to see the
stallion plunging hither and thither, striking with his fore-hooves,
while around him, darting in and out under the driving feet, sprang
the great black wolf, his teeth clashing like steel on steel. In
another moment they might sink in the throat of the horse! Calder,
with an exclamation of horror, whipped out his revolver, but checked
himself at the very instant of firing. The master of the two animals
stood with arms folded, actually smiling upon the fight!

"For God's sake!" cried the marshal. "Shoot the damned wolf, man, or
he'll have your horse by the throat!"

"Leave 'em be," said Dan, without turning his head. "Satan an' Black
Bart ain't got any other dogs an' hosses to run around with. They's
jest playing a little by way of exercise."

Calder stood agape before what seemed the incarnate fury of the pair.
Then he noticed that those snapping fangs, however close they came,
always missed the flesh of the stallion, and the driving hoofs never
actually endangered the leaping wolf.

"Stop 'em!" he cried at last. "It makes me nervous to watch that sort
of play. It isn't natural!"

"All right," said Dan. "Stop it, boys."

He had not raised his voice, but they ceased their wild gambols
instantly, the stallion, with head thrown high and arched tail and
heaving sides, while the wolf, with lolling red tongue, strolled
calmly towards his master.

The latter paid no further attention to them, but set about kindling a
small fire over which to cook supper. Calder joined him. The marshal's
mind was too full for speech, but now and again he turned a long
glance of wonder upon the stallion or Black Bart. In the same silence
they sat under the last light of the sunset and ate their supper.
Calder, with head bent, pondered over the man of mystery and his two
tamed animals. Tamed? Not one of the three was tamed, the man least of
all.

He saw Dan pause from his eating to stare with wide, vacant eyes among
the trees. The wolf-dog approached, looked up in his master's face,
whined softly, and getting no response went back to his place and lay
down, his eyes never moving from Dan. Still he stared among the trees.
The gloom deepened, and he smiled faintly. He began to whistle, a low,
melancholy strain so soft that it blended with the growing hush of the
night. Calder listened, wholly overawed. That weird music seemed an
interpretation of the vast spaces of the mountains, of the pitiless
desert, of the limitless silences, and the whistler was an
understanding part of the whole.

He became aware of a black shadow behind the musician. It was Satan,
who rested his nose on the shoulder of the master. Without ceasing his
whistling Dan raised a hand, touched the small muzzle, and Satan went
at once to a side of the clearing and lay down. It was almost as if
the two had said good-night! Calder could stand it no longer.

"Dan, I've got to talk to you," he began.

The whistling ceased; the wide brown eyes turned to him.

"Fire away--partner."

Ay, they had eaten together by the same fire--they had watched the
coming of the night--they had shaken hands in friendship--they were
partners. He knew deep in his heart that no human being could ever
be the actual comrade of this man. This lord of the voiceless desert
needed no human companionship; yet as the marshal glanced from the
black shadow of Satan to the gleaming eyes of Bart, and then to
the visionary face of Barry, he felt that he had been admitted by
Whistling Dan into the mysterious company. The thought stirred him
deeply. It was as if he had made an alliance with the wandering wind.
Why he had been accepted he could not dream, but he had heard the word
"partner" and he knew it was meant. After all, stranger things
than this happen in the mountain-desert, where man is greater and
convention less. A single word has been known to estrange lifelong
comrades; a single evening beside a camp-fire has changed foes to
partners. Calder drew his mind back to business with a great effort.

"There's one thing you don't know about Jim Silent. A reward of ten
thousand dollars lies on his head. The notices aren't posted yet."

Whistling Dan shrugged his shoulders.

"I ain't after money," he answered.

Calder frowned. He did not appreciate a bluff.

"Look here," he said, "if we kill him, because no power on earth will
take him alive--we'll split the money."

"If you lay a hand on him," said Dan, without emotion, "we won't be
friends no longer, I figger."

Calder stared.

"If you don't want to get him," he said, "why in God's name are you
trailing him this way?"

Dan touched his lips. "He hit me with his fist."

He paused, and spoke again with a drawling voice that gave his words
an uncanny effect.

"My blood went down from my mouth to my chin. I tasted it. Till I get
him there ain't no way of me forgettin' him."

His eyes lighted with that ominous gleam.

"That's why no other man c'n put a hand on him. He's laid out all for
me. Understand?"

The ring of the question echoed for a moment through Calder's mind.

"I certainly do," he said with profound conviction, "and I'll never
forget it." He decided on a change of tactics. "But there are other
men with Jim Silent and those men will fight to keep you from getting
to him."

"I'm sorry for 'em," said Dan gently. "I ain't got nothin' agin any
one except the big man."

Calder took a long breath.

"Don't you see," he explained carefully, "if you shoot one of these
men you are simply a murderer who must be apprehended by the law and
punished."

"It makes it bad for me, doesn't it?" said Dan. "An' I hope I won't
have to hurt more'n one or two of 'em. You see,"--he leaned forward
seriously towards Calder--"I'd only shoot for their arms or their
legs. I wouldn't spoil them altogether."

Calder threw up his hands in despair. Black Bart snarled at the
gesture.

"I can't listen no more," said Dan. "I got to start explorin' the
willows pretty soon."

"In the dark?" exclaimed Calder.

"Sure. Black Bart'll go with me. The dark don't bother him."

"I'll go along."

"I'd rather be alone. I might meet him."

"Any way you want," said Calder, "but first hear my plan--it doesn't
take long to tell it."

The darkness thickened around them while he talked. The fire died
out--the night swallowed up their figures.




CHAPTER XIII


THE LONE RIDERS ENTERTAIN

When Lee Haines rode into Silent's camp that evening no questions were
asked. Questions were not popular among the long riders. He did not
know more than the names of half the men who sat around the smoky
fire. They were eager to forget the past, and the only allusions
to former times came in chance phrases which they let fall at rare
intervals. When they told an anecdote they erased all names by
instinct. They would begin: "I heard about a feller over to the Circle
Y outfit that was once ridin'--" etc. As a rule they themselves were
"that feller over to the Circle Y outfit." Accordingly only a few
grunts greeted Haines and yet he was far and away the most popular man
in the group. Even solemn-eyed Jim Silent was partial to the handsome
fellow.

"Heard the whistling today?" he asked.

Purvis shook his head and Terry Jordan allowed "as how it was most
uncommon fortunate that this Barry feller didn't start his noise."
After this Haines ate his supper in silence, his ear ready to catch
the first sound of Kate's horse as it crashed through the willows and
shrubs. Nevertheless it was Shorty Rhinehart who sprang to his feet
first.

"They's a hoss there comin' among the willows!" he announced.

"Maybe it's Silent," remarked Haines casually.

"The chief don't make no such a noise. He picks his goin'," answered
Hal Purvis.

The sound was quite audible now.

"They's been some crooked work," said Rhinehart excitedly. "Somebody's
tipped off the marshals about where we're lyin'."

"All right," said Haines quietly, "you and I will investigate."

They started through the willows. Rhinehart was cursing beneath his
breath.

"Don't be too fast with your six-gun," warned Haines.

"I'd rather be too early than too late."

"Maybe it isn't a marshal. If a man were looking for us he'd be a fool
to come smashing along like that."

He had scarcely spoken when Kate came into view.

"A girl, by God!" said Rhinehart, with mingled relief and disgust.

"Sure thing," agreed Haines.

"Let's beat it back to the camp."

"Not a hope. She's headed straight for the camp. We'll take her in and
tell her we're a bunch from the Y Circle X outfit headed north. She'll
never know the difference."

"Good idea," said Rhinehart, and he added with a chuckle, "it's been
nigh three months since I've talked to a piece of calico."

"Hey, there!" called Haines, and he stepped out with Rhinehart before
her horse.

"Oh!" cried Kate, reining up her horse sharply. "Who are you?"

"A beaut!" muttered Rhinehart in devout admiration.

"We're from the Y Circle X outfit," said Haines glibly, "camping over
here for the night. Are you lost, lady?"

"I guess I am. I thought I could get across the willows before the
night fell. I'm trying to find a man who rode in this direction."

"Come on into the camp," said Haines easily. "Maybe some of the boys
can put you on his track. What sort of a looking fellow is he?"

"Rides a black horse and whistles a good deal. His name is Barry. They
call him Whistling Dan."

"By God!" whispered Rhinehart in the ear of Haines.

"Shut up!" answered Haines in the same tone. "Are you afraid of a
girl?"

"I've trailed him south this far," went on Kate, "and a few miles away
from here I lost track of him. I think he may have gone on across the
willows."

"Haven't seen him," said Rhinehart amiably. "But come on to the camp,
lady. Maybe one of the boys has spotted him on the way. What's your
name?"

"Kate Cumberland," she answered.

He removed his hat with a broad grin and reached up a hand to her.

"I'm most certainly glad to meet you, an' my name's Shorty. This here
is Lee. Want to come along with us?"

"Thank you. I'm a little worried."

"'S all right. Don't get worried. We'll show you the way out. Just
follow us."

They started back through the willows, Kate following half a dozen
yards behind.

"Listen here, Shorty," said Haines in a cautious voice. "You heard her
name?"

"Sure."

"Well, that's the daughter of the man that raised Whistling Dan. I
saw her at Morgan's place. She's probably been tipped off that he's
following Silent, but she has no idea who we are."

"Sure she hasn't. She's a great looker, eh, Lee?"

"She'll do, I guess. Now get this: The girl is after Whistling Dan,
and if she meets him she'll persuade him to come back to her father's
place. She'll take him off our trail, and I guess none of us'll be
sorry to know that he's gone, eh?"

"I begin to follow you, Lee. You've always had the head!"

"All right. Now we'll get Purvis to tell the girl that he's heard a
peculiar whistling around here this evening. We'll advise her to stick
around and go out when she hears the whistling again. That way she'll
meet him and head him off, savvy?"

"Right," said Rhinehart.

"Then beat it ahead as fast as you can and wise up the boys."

"That's me--specially about their bein' Y Circle X fellers, eh?"

He chuckled and made ahead as fast as his long legs could carry him.
Haines dropped back beside Kate.

"Everything goes finely," he assured her. "I told Rhinehart what to
do. He's gone ahead to the camp. Now all you have to do is to keep
your head. One of the boys will tell you that we've heard some
whistling near the camp this evening. Then I'll ask you to stay around
for a while in case the whistling should sound again, do you see?
Remember, never ask a question!"

It was even more simple than Haines had hoped. Silent's men suspected
nothing. After all, Kate's deception was a small affair, and her
frankness, her laughter, and her beauty carried all before her.

The long riders became quickly familiar with her, but through their
rough talk, the Westerners' reverence for a woman ran like a thread of
gold over a dark cloth. Her fear lessened and almost passed away while
she listened to their talk and watched their faces. The kindly human
nature which had lain unexpressed in most of them for months together
burst out torrent-like and flooded about her with a sense of security
and power. These were conquerors of men, fighters by instinct and
habit, but here they sat laughing and chattering with a helpless girl,
and not a one of them but would have cut the others' throats rather
than see her come to harm. The roughness of their past and the dread
of their future they laid aside like an ugly cloak while they showed
her what lies in the worst man's heart--a certain awe of woman. Their
manners underwent a sudden change. Polite words, rusted by long
disuse, were resurrected in her honour. Tremendous phrases came
labouring forth. There was a general though covert rearranging of
bandanas, and an interchange of self-conscious glances. Haines alone
seemed impervious to her charm.

The red died slowly along the west. There was no light save the
flicker of the fire, which played on Kate's smile and the rich gold of
her hair, or caught out of the dark one of the lean, hard faces which
circled her. Now and then it fell on the ghastly grin of Terry Jordan
and Kate had to clench her hand to keep up her nerve.

It was deep night when Jim Silent rode into the clearing. Shorty
Rhinehart and Hal Purvis went to him quickly to explain the presence
of the girl and the fact that they were all members of the Y Circle
X outfit. He responded with nods while his gloomy eyes held fast on
Kate. When they presented him as the boss, Jim, he replied to her
good-natured greeting in a voice that was half grunt and half growl.




CHAPTER XIV


DELILAH

Haines muttered at Kate's ear: "This is the man. Now keep up your
courage."

"He doesn't like this," went on Haines in the same muffled voice, "but
when he understands just why you're here I think he'll be as glad as
any of us."

Silent beckoned to him and he went to the chief.

"What about the girl?" asked the big fellow curtly.

"Didn't Rhinehart tell you?"

"Rhinehart's a fool and so are the rest of them. Have you gone loco
too, Haines, to let a girl come here?"

"Where's the harm?"

"Why, damn it, she's marked every man here."

"I let her in because she is trying to get hold of Whistling Dan."

"Which no fool girl c'n take that feller off the trail. Nothin' but
lead can do that."

"I tell you," said Haines, "the boy's in love with her. I watched them
at Morgan's place. She can twist him around her finger."

A faint light broke the gloom of Silent's face.

"Yaller hair an' blue eyes. They c'n do a lot. Maybe you're right.
What's that?" His voice had gone suddenly husky.

A russet moon pushed slowly up through the trees. Its uncertain light
fell across the clearing. For the first time the thick pale smoke of
the fire was visible, rising straight up until it cleared the tops of
the willows, and then caught into swift, jagging lines as the soft
wind struck it. A coyote wailed from the distant hills, and before
his complaint was done another sound came through the hushing of the
willows, a melancholy whistling, thin with distance.

"We'll see if that's the man you want," suggested Haines.

"I'll go along," said Shorty Rhinehart.

"And me too," said a third. The whole group would have accompanied
them, but the heavy voice of Jim Silent cut in: "You'll stay here, all
of you except the girl and Lee."

They turned back, muttering, and Kate followed Haines into the
willows.

"Well?" growled Bill Kilduff.

"What I want to know--" broke in Terry Jordan.

"Go to hell with your questions," said Silent, "but until you go there
you'll do what I say, understand?"

"Look here, Jim," said Hal Purvis, "are you a king an' we jest your
slaves, maybe?"

"You're goin' it a pile too hard," said Shorty Rhinehart.

Every one of these speeches came sharply out while they glared at
Jim Silent. Hands were beginning to fall to the hip and fingers were
curving stiffly as if for the draw. Silent leaned his broad shoulders
against the side of his roan and folded his arms. His eyes went round
the circle slowly, lingering an instant on each face. Under that cold
stare they grew uneasy. To Shorty Rhinehart it became necessary to
push back his hat and scratch his forehead. Terry Jordan found a
mysterious business with his bandana. Every one of them had occasion
to raise his hand from the neighbourhood of his six-shooter. Silent
smiled.

"A fine, hard crew you are," he said sarcastically at last. "A great
bunch of long riders, lettin' a slip of a yaller-haired girl make
fools of you. You over there--you, Shorty Rhinehart, you'd cut the
throat of a man that looked crosswise at the Cumberland girl, wouldn't
you? An' you, Purvis, you're aching to get at me, ain't you? An'
you're still thinkin' of them blue eyes, Jordan?"

Before any one could speak he poured in another volley between wind
and water: "One slip of a girl can make fools out of five long riders?
No, you ain't long riders. All you c'n handle is hobby hosses!"

"What do you want us to do?" growled swarthy Bill Kilduff.

"Keep your face shut while I'm talkin', that's what I want you to do!"

There was a devil of rage in his eyes. His folded arms tugged at each
other, and if they got free there would be gun play. The four men
shrank, and he was satisfied.

"Now I'll tell you what we're goin' to do," he went on. "We're goin'
out after Haines an' the girl. If they come up with this Whistlin' Dan
we're goin' to surround him an' fill him full of lead, while they're
talkin'."

"Not for a million dollars!" burst in Hal Purvis.

"Not in a thousan' years!" echoed Terry Jordan.

Silent turned his watchful eyes from one to the other. They were ready
to fight now, and he sensed it at once.

"Why?" he asked calmly.

"It ain't playin' square with the girl," announced Rhinehart.

"Purvis," said Silent, for he knew that the opposition centred in the
figure of the venomous little gun fighter; "if you seen a mad dog
that was runnin' straight at you, would you be kep' from shootin' it
because a pretty girl hollered out an' asked you not to?"

Their eyes shifted rapidly from one to another, seeking a way out, and
finding none.

"An' is there any difference between this hero Whistlin' Dan an' a mad
dog?"

Still they were mute.

"I tell you, boys, we got a better chance of dodgin' lightnin' an'
puttin' a bloodhound off our trail than we have of gettin' rid of this
Whistlin' Dan. An' when he catches up with us--well, all I'm askin' is
that you remember what he done to them four dollars before they hit
the dust?"

"The chief's right," growled Kilduff, staring down at the ground.
"It's Whistlin' Dan or us. The mountains ain't big enough to hold him
an' us!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Before Whistling Dan the great wolf glided among the trees. For a full
hour they had wandered through the willows in this manner, and Dan had
made up his mind to surrender the search when Bart, returning from
one of his noiseless detours, sprang out before his master and whined
softly. Dan turned, loosening his revolver in the holster, and
followed Bart through the soft gloom of the tree shadows and the
moonlight. His step was almost as silent as that of the slinking
animal which went before. At last the wolf stopped and raised his
head. Almost instantly Dan saw a man and a woman approaching through
the willows. The moonlight dropped across her face. He recognized
Kate, with Lee Haines walking a pace before her.

"Stand where you are," he said.

Haines leaped to one side, his revolver flashing in his hand. Dan
stepped out before them while Black Bart slunk close beside him,
snarling softly.

He seemed totally regardless of the gun in Haines's hand. His manner
was that of a conqueror who had the outlaw at his mercy.

"You," he said, "walk over there to the side of the clearing."

"Dan!" cried Kate, as she went to him with extended arms.

He stopped her with a gesture, his eyes upon Haines, who had moved
away.

"Watch him, Bart," said Dan.

The black wolf ran to Haines and crouched snarling at his feet. The
outlaw restored his revolver to his holster and stood with his arms
folded, his back turned. Dan looked to Kate. At the meeting of their
eyes she shrank a little. She had expected a difficult task in
persuading him, but not this hard aloofness. She felt suddenly as if
she were a stranger to him.

"How do you come here--with him?"

"He is my friend!"

"You sure pick a queer place to go walkin' with him."

"Hush, Dan! He brought me here to find you!"

"_He_ brought you here?"

"Don't you understand?"

"When I want a friend like him, I'll go huntin' for him myself; an'
I'll pack a gun with me!"

That flickering yellow light played behind Dan's eyes.

"I looked into his face--an' he stared the other way."

She made a little imploring gesture, but his hand remained on his
hips, and there was no softening of his voice.

"What fetched you here?"

Every word was like a hand that pushed her farther away.

"Are you dumb, Kate? What fetched you here?"

"I have come to bring you home, Dan."

"I'm home now."

"What do you mean?"

"There's the roof of my house," he jerked his hand towards the sky,
"the mountain passes are my doors--an' the earth is my floor."

"No! no! We are waiting for you at the ranch."

He shrugged his shoulders.

"Dan, this wild trail has no end."

"Maybe, but I know that feller can show me the way to Jim Silent, an'
now----"

He turned towards Haines as he spoke, but here a low, venomous snarl
from Black Bart checked his words. Kate saw him stiffen--his lips
parted to a faint smile--his head tilted back a little as if he
listened intently, though she could hear nothing. She was not a yard
from him, and yet she felt a thousand miles away. His head turned full
upon her, and she would never forget the yellow light of his eyes.

"Dan!" she cried, but her voice was no louder than a whisper.

"Delilah!" he said, and leaped back into the shade of the willows.

Even as he sprang she saw the flash of the moonlight on his drawn
revolver, and fire spat from it twice, answered by a yell of pain,
the clang of a bullet on metal, and half a dozen shots from the woods
behind her.

That word "Delilah!" rang in her brain to the exclusion of all the
world. Vaguely she heard voices shouting--she turned a little and saw
Haines facing her with his revolver in his hand, but prevented from
moving by the wolf who crouched snarling at his feet. The order of his
master kept him there even after that master was gone. Now men ran out
into the clearing. A keen whistle sounded far off among the willows,
and the wolf leaped away from his prisoner and into the shadows on the
trail of Dan.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tex Calder prided himself on being a light sleeper. Years spent in
constant danger enabled him to keep his sense of hearing alert even
when he slept. He had never been surprised. It was his boast that he
never would be. Therefore when a hand dropped lightly on his shoulder
he started erect from his blankets with a curse and grasped his
revolver. A strong grip on his wrist paralysed his fingers. Whistling
Dan leaned above him.

"Wake up," said the latter.

"What the devil--" breathed the marshal. "You travel like a cloud
shadow, Dan. You make no sound."

"Wake up and talk to me."

"I'm awake all right. What's happened?"

There was a moment of silence while Dan seemed to be trying for
speech.

Black Bart, at the other side of the clearing, pointed his nose at
the yellow moon and wailed. He was very close, but the sound was so
controlled that it seemed to come at a great distance from some wild
spirit wandering between earth and heaven.

Instead of speaking Dan jumped to his feet and commenced pacing up and
down, up and down, a rapid, tireless stride; at his heels the wolf
slunk, with lowered head and tail. The strange fellow was in some
great trouble, Calder could see, and it stirred him mightily to know
that the wild man had turned to him for help. Yet he would ask no
questions.

When in doubt the cattleman rolls a cigarette, and that was what
Calder did. He smoked and waited. At last the inevitable came.

"How old are you, Tex?"

"Forty-four."

"That's a good deal. You ought to know something."

"Maybe."

"About women?"

"Ah!" said Calder.

"Bronchos is cut out chiefly after one pattern," went on Dan.

"They's chiefly jest meanness. Are women the same--jest cut after one
pattern?"

"What pattern, Dan?"

"The pattern of Delilah! They ain't no trust to be put in 'em?"

"A good many of us have found that out."

"I thought one woman was different from the rest."

"We all think that. Woman in particular is divine; woman in general
is--hell!"

"Ay, but this one--" He stopped and set his teeth.

"What has she done?"

"She--" he hesitated, and when he spoke again his voice did not
tremble; there was a deep hurt and wonder in it: "She double-crossed
me!"

"When? Do you mean to say you've met a woman tonight out here among
the willows?--Where--how----"

"Tex----!"

"Ay, Dan."

"It's--it's hell!"

"It is now. But you'll forget her! The mountains, the desert, and
above all, time--they'll cure you, my boy."

"Not in a whole century, Tex."

Calder waited curiously for the explanation. It came.

"Jest to think of her is like hearing music. Oh, God, Tex, what c'n I
do to fight agin this here cold feelin' at my heart?"

Dan slipped down beside the marshal and the latter dropped a
sympathetic hand over the lean, brown fingers. They returned the
pressure with a bone-crushing grip.

"Fight, Dan! It will make you forget her."

"Her skin is softer'n satin, Tex."

"Ay, but you'll never touch it again, Dan."

"Her eyes are deeper'n a pool at night an' her hair is all gold like
ripe corn."

"You'll never look into her eyes again, Dan, and you'll never touch
the gold of that hair."

"God!"

The word was hardly more than a whisper, but it brought Black Bart
leaping to his feet.

Dan spoke again: "Tex, I'm thankin' you for listenin' to me; I wanted
to talk. Bein' silent was burnin' me up. There's one thing more."

"Fire it out, lad."

"This evenin' I told you I hated no man but Jim Silent."

"Yes."

"An' now they's another of his gang. Sometime--when she's standin'
by--I'm goin' to take him by the throat till he don't breathe no more.
Then I'll throw him down in front of her an' ask her if she c'n kiss
the life back into his lips!"

Calder was actually shaking with excitement, but he was wise enough
not to speak.

"Tex!"

"Ay, lad."

"But when I've choked his damned life away----"

"Yes?"

"Ay, lad."

"There'll be five more that seen her shamin' me. Tex--all hell is
bustin' loose inside me!"

For a moment Calder watched, but that stare of cold hate mastered him.
He turned his head.




CHAPTER XV


THE CROSS ROADS

As Black Bart raced away in answer to Dan's whistle, Kate recovered
herself from the daze in which she stood and with a sob ran towards
the willows, calling the name of Dan, but Silent sprang after her, and
caught her by the arm. She cried out and struggled vainly in his grip.

"Don't follow him, boys!" called Silent. "He's a dog that can bite
while he runs. Stand quiet, girl!"

Lee Haines caught him by the shoulder and jerked Silent around. His
hand held the butt of his revolver, and his whole arm trembled with
eagerness for the draw.

"Take your hand from her, Jim!" he said.

Silent met his eye with the same glare and while his left hand still
held Kate by both her wrists his right dropped to his gun.

"Not when you tell me, Lee!"

"Damn you, I say let her go!"

"By God, Haines, I stand for too much from you!"

And still they did not draw, because each of them knew that if the
crisis came it would mean death to them both. Bill Kilduff jumped
between them and thrust them back.

He cried, "Ain't we got enough trouble without roundin' up work at
home? Terry Jordan is shot through the arm."

Kate tugged at the restraining hand of Silent, not in an attempt to
escape, but in order to get closer to Haines.

"Was this your friendship?" she said, her voice shaking with hate and
sorrow, "to bring me here as a lure for Whistling Dan? Listen to me,
all of you! He's escaped you now, and he'll come again. Remember him,
for he shan't forget you!"

"You hear her?" said Silent to Haines.

"Is this what you want me to turn loose?"

"Silent," said Haines, "it isn't the girl alone you've double crossed.
You've crooked me, and you'll pay me for it sooner or later!"

"Day or night, winter or summer, I'm willing to meet you an' fight it
out. Rhinehart and Purvis, take this girl back to the clearing!"

They approached, Purvis still staring at the hand from which only a
moment before his gun had been knocked by the shot of Whistling Dan.
It was a thing which he could not understand--he had not yet lost a
most uncomfortable sense of awe. Haines made no objection when they
went off, with Kate walking between them. He knew, now that his blind
anger had left him, that it was folly to draw on a fight while the
rest of Silent's men stood around them.

"An' the rest of you go back to the clearin'. I got somethin' to talk
over with Lee," said Silent.

The others obeyed without question, and the leader turned back to his
lieutenant. For a moment longer they remained staring at each other.
Then Silent moved slowly forward with outstretched hand.

"Lee," he said quietly, "I'm owin' you an apology an' I'm man enough
to make it."

"I can't take your hand, Jim."

Silent hesitated.

"I guess you got cause to be mad, Lee," he said. "Maybe I played too
quick a hand. I didn't think about double crossin' you. I only seen
a way to get Whistlin' Dan out of our path, an' I took it without
rememberin' that you was the safeguard to the girl."

Haines eyed his chief narrowly.

"I wish to God I could read your mind," he said at last, "but I'll
take your word that you did it without thinking."

His hand slowly met Silent's.

"An' what about the girl now, Lee?"

"I'll send her back to her father's ranch. It will be easy to put her
on the right way."

"Don't you see no reason why you can't do that?"

"Are you playing with me?"

"I'm talkin' to you as I'd talk to myself. If she's loose she'll
describe us all an' set the whole range on our trail."

Haines stared.

Silent went on: "If we can't turn her loose, they's only one thing
left--an' that's to take her with us wherever we go."

"On your honour, do you see no other way out?"

"Do you?"

"She may promise not to speak of it."

"There ain't no way of changin' the spots of a leopard, Lee, an' there
ain't no way of keepin' a woman's tongue still."

"How can we take a girl with us."

"It ain't goin' to be for long. After we pull the job that comes on
the eighteenth, we'll blow farther south an' then we'll let her go."

"And no harm will come to her while she's with us?"

"Here's my hand on it, Lee."

"How can she ride with us?"

"She won't go as a woman. I've thought of that. I brought out a new
outfit for Purvis from Elkhead--trousers, chaps, shirts, an' all. He's
small. They'll near fit the girl."

"There isn't any other way, Jim?"

"I leave it to you. God knows I don't want to drag any damn calico
aroun' with us."

As they went back towards their clearing they arranged the details.
Silent would take the men aside and explain his purpose to them.
Haines could inform the girl of what she must do. Just before they
reached the camp Silent stopped short and took Haines by the shoulder.

"They's one thing I can't make out, Lee, an' that's how Whistlin' Dan
made his getaway. I'd of bet a thousand bones that he would be dropped
before he could touch his shootin' irons. An' then what happened? Hal
Purvis jest flashed a gun--and that feller shot it out'n his hand.
I never seen a draw like that. His hand jest seemed to twitch--I
couldn't follow the move he made--an' the next second his gun went
off."

He stared at Lee with a sort of fascinated horror.

"Silent," said Haines, "can you explain how the lightning comes down
out of the sky?"

"Of course not."

"Then don't ask me to explain how Whistling Dan made his getaway. One
minute I heard him talkin' with the girl. The next second there was
two shots and when I whirled he was gone. But he'll come back, Jim.
We're not through with him. He slipped away from you and your men like
water out of a sieve, but we won't slip away from him the same way."

Silent stared on again with bowed head.

"He liked the girl, Lee?"

"Any one could see that."

"Then while she's with us he'll go pretty slow. Lee, that's another
reason why she's got to stay with us. My frien', it's time we was
moving out from the willows. The next time he comes up with us he
won't be numb in the head. He'll be thinkin' fast an' he'll be
shootin' a damn sight faster. We got two jobs ahead of us--first to
get that Wells Fargo shipment, and then to get Whistling Dan. There
ain't room enough in the whole world for him and me."




CHAPTER XVI


THE THREE OF US

In the clearing of Whistling Dan and Tex Calder the marshal had turned
into his blankets once more. There was no thought of sleep in Dan's
mind. When the heavy breathing of the sleeper began he rose and
commenced to pace up and down on the farther side of the open space.
Two pairs of glowing eyes followed him in every move. Black Bart, who
trailed him up and down during the first few turns he made, now sat
down and watched his master with a wistful gaze. The black stallion,
who lay more like a dog than a horse on the ground, kept his ears
pricked forwards, as if expecting some order. Once or twice he
whinnied very softly, and finally Dan sat down beside Satan, his
shoulders leaned against the satiny side and his arms flung out along
the stallion's back. Several times he felt hot breath against his
cheek as the horse turned a curious head towards him, but he paid no
attention, even when the stallion whinnied a question in his ear. In
his heart was a numb, strange feeling which made him weak. He was even
blind to the fact that Black Bart at last slipped into the shadows of
the willows.

Presently something cold touched his chin. He found himself staring
into the yellow-green eyes of Black Bart, who panted from his run, and
now dropped from his mouth something which fell into Dan's lap. It
was the glove of Kate Cumberland. In the grasp of his long nervous
fingers, how small it was!; and yet the hand which had wrinkled the
leather was strong enough to hold the heart of a man. He slipped and
caught the shaggy black head of Bart between his hands. The wolf
knew--in some mysterious way he knew!

The touch of sympathy unnerved him. All his sorrow and his weakness
burst on his soul in a single wave. A big tear struck the shining nose
of the wolf.

"Bart!" he whispered. "Did you figger on plumb bustin' my heart, pal?"

To avoid those large melancholy eyes, Bart pressed his head inside of
his master's arms.

"Delilah!" whispered Dan.

After that not a sound came from the three, the horse, the dog, or
the man. Black Bart curled up at the feet of his master and seemed to
sleep, but every now and then an ear raised or an eye twitched open.
He was on guard against a danger which he did not understand. The
horse, also, with a high head scanned the circling willows, alert; but
the man for whom the stallion and the wolf watched gave no heed to
either. There was a vacant and dreamy expression in his eye as if he
was searching his own inner heart and found there the greatest enemy
of all. All night they sat in this manner, silent, moveless; the
animals watching against the world, the man watching against himself.
Before dawn he roused himself suddenly, crossed to the sleeping
marshal, and touched him on the arm.

"It's time we hit the trail," he said, as Calder sat up in the
blanket.

"What's happened? Isn't it our job to comb the willows?"

"Silent ain't in the willows."

Calder started to his feet.

"How do you know?"

"They ain't close to us, that's all I know."

Tex smiled incredulously.

"I suppose," he said good humouredly, "that your _instinct_ brought you
this message?"

"Instinct?" repeated Dan blankly, "I dunno."

Calder grew serious.

"We'll take a chance that you may be right. At least we can ride down
the river bank and see if there are any fresh tracks in the sand. If
Silent started this morning I have an idea he'll head across the river
and line out for the railroad."

In twenty minutes their breakfast was eaten and they were in the
saddle. The sun had not yet risen when they came out of the willows to
the broad shallow basin of the river. In spring, when the snow of the
mountains melted, that river filled from bank to bank with a yellow
torrent; at the dry season of the year it was a dirty little creek
meandering through the sands. Down the bank they rode at a sharp trot
for a mile and a half until Black Bart, who scouted ahead of them at
his gliding wolf-trot, came to an abrupt stop. Dan spoke to Satan and
the stallion broke into a swift gallop which left the pony of Tex
Calder labouring in the rear. When they drew rein beside the wolf,
they found seven distinct tracks of horses which went down the bank
of the river and crossed the basin. Calder turned with a wide-eyed
amazement to Dan.

"You're right again," he said, not without a touch of vexation in his
voice; "but the dog stopped at these tracks. How does he know we are
hunting for Silent's crew?"

"I dunno," said Dan, "maybe he jest suspects."

"They can't have a long start of us," said Calder. "Let's hit the
trail. Well get them before night."

"No," said Dan, "we won't."

"Why won't we?"

"I've seen Silent's hoss, and I've ridden him. If the rest of his gang
have the same kind of hoss flesh, you c'n never catch him with that
cayuse of yours."

"Maybe not today," said Calder, "but in two days we'll run him down.
Seven horses can't travel as two in a long chase."

They started out across the basin, keeping to the tracks of Silent's
horses. It was the marshal's idea that the outlaws would head on a
fairly straight line for the railroad and accordingly when they lost
the track of the seven horses they kept to this direction. Twice
during the day they verified their course by information received once
from a range rider and once from a man in a dusty buck-board. Both of
these had sighted the fast travelling band, but each had seen it pass
an hour or two before Calder and Dan arrived. Such tidings encouraged
the marshal to keep his horse at an increasing speed; but in the
middle of the afternoon, though black Satan showed little or no signs
of fatigue, the cattle-pony was nearly blown and they were forced to
reduce their pace to the ordinary dog-trot.




CHAPTER XVII


THE PANTHER'S PAW

Evening came and still they had not sighted the outlaws. As dark fell
they drew near a house snuggled away among a group of cottonwoods.
Here they determined to spend the night, for Calder's pony was now
almost exhausted. A man of fifty came from the house in answer to
their call and showed them the way to the horse-shed. While they
unsaddled their horses he told them his name was Sam Daniels, yet
he evinced no curiosity as to the identity of his guests, and they
volunteered no information. His eyes lingered long and fondly over the
exquisite lines of Satan. From behind, from the side, and in front, he
viewed the stallion while Dan rubbed down the legs of his mount with
a care which was most foreign to the ranges. Finally the cattleman
reached out a hand toward the smoothly muscled shoulders.

It was Calder who stood nearest and he managed to strike up Daniels's
extended arm and jerk him back from the region of danger.

"What'n hell is that for?" exclaimed Daniels.

"That horse is called Satan," said Calder, "and when any one save his
owner touches him he lives up to his name and raises hell."

Before Daniels could answer, the light of his lantern fell upon Black
Bart, hitherto half hidden by the deepening shadows of the night,
but standing now at the entrance of the shed. The cattleman's teeth
clicked together and he slapped his hand against his thigh in a reach
for the gun which was not there.

"Look behind you," he said to Calder. "A wolf!"

He made a grab for the marshal's gun, but the latter forestalled him.

"Go easy, partner," he said, grinning, "that's only the running
mate of the horse. He's not a wolf, at least not according to his
owner--and as for being wild--look at that!"

Bart had stalked calmly into the shed and now lay curled up exactly
beneath the feet of the stallion.

The two guests received a warmer welcome from Sam Daniels' wife when
they reached the house. Their son, Buck, had been expected home
for supper, but it was too late for them to delay the meal longer.
Accordingly they sat down at once and the dinner was nearly over when
Buck, having announced himself with a whoop as he rode up, entered,
banging the door loudly behind him. He greeted the strangers with a
careless wave of the hand and sat down at the table. His mother placed
food silently before him. No explanations of his tardiness were asked
and none were offered. The attitude of his father indicated clearly
that the boy represented the earning power of the family. He was a big
fellow with broad, thick wrists, and a straight black eye. When he had
eaten, he broke into breezy conversation, and especially of a vicious
mustang he had ridden on a bet the day before.

"Speakin' of hosses, Buck," said his father, "they's a black out in
the shed right now that'd make your eyes jest nacherally pop out'n
their sockets. No more'n fifteen hands, but a reg'lar picture. Must be
greased lightnin'."

"I've heard talk of these streaks of greased lightnin'," said Buck,
with a touch of scorn, "but I'll stack old Mike agin the best of
them."

"An' there's a dog along with the hoss--a dog that's the nearest to a
wolf of any I ever seen."

There was a sudden change in Buck--a change to be sensed rather than
definitely noted with the eye. It was a stiffening of his body--an
alertness of which he was at pains to make no show. For almost
immediately he began to whistle softly, idly, his eyes roving
carelessly across the wall while he tilted back in his chair. Dan
dropped his hand close to the butt of his gun. Instantly, the eyes of
Buck flashed down and centered on Dan for an instant of keen scrutiny.
Certainly Buck had connected that mention of the black horse and the
wolf-dog with a disturbing idea.

When they went to their room--a room in which there was no bed and
they had to roll down their blankets on the floor--Dan opened the
window and commenced to whistle one of his own wild tunes. It seemed
to Calder that there was a break in that music here and there, and a
few notes grouped together like a call. In a moment a shadowy figure
leaped through the window, and Black Bart landed on the floor with
soft padding feet.

Recovering from his start Calder cursed softly.

"What's the main idea?" he asked.

Dan made a signal for a lower tone.

"There ain't no idea," he answered, "but these Daniels people--do you
know anything about them?"

"No. Why?"

"They interest me, that's all."

"Anything wrong?"

"I guess not."

"Why did you whistle for this infernal wolf? It makes me nervous to
have him around. Get out, Bart."

The wolf turned a languid eye upon the marshal.

"Let him be," said Dan. "I don't feel no ways nacheral without havin'
Bart around."

The marshal made no farther objections, and having rolled himself in
his blankets was almost immediately asleep and breathing heavily. The
moment Dan heard his companion draw breath with a telltale regularity,
he sat up again in his blankets. Bart was instantly at his side. He
patted the shaggy head lightly, and pointed towards the door.

"Guard!" he whispered.

Then he lay down and was immediately asleep. Bart crouched at his feet
with his head pointed directly at the door.

In other rooms there was the sound of the Daniels family going to
bed--noises distinctly heard throughout the flimsy frame of the house.
After that a deep silence fell which lasted many hours, but in that
darkest moment which just precedes the dawn, a light creaking came up
the hall. It was very faint and it occurred only at long intervals,
but at the first sound Black Bart raised his head from his paws and
stared at the door with those glowing eyes which see in the dark.

Now another sound came, still soft, regular. There was a movement of
the door. In the pitch dark a man could never have noticed it, but it
was plainly visible to the wolf. Still more visible, when the door
finally stood wide, was the form of the man who stood in the opening.
In one hand he carried a lantern thoroughly hooded, but not so well
wrapped that it kept back a single ray which flashed on a revolver.
The intruder made a step forward, a step as light as the fall of
feathers, but it was not half so stealthy as the movement of Black
Bart as he slunk towards the door. He had been warned to watch that
door, but it did not need a warning to tell him that a danger was
approaching the sleeping master. In the crouched form of the man, in
the cautious step, he recognized the unmistakable stalking of one who
hunts. Another soft step the man made forward.

Then, with appalling suddenness, a blacker shadow shot up from the
deep night of the floor, and white teeth gleamed before the stranger's
face. He threw up his hand to save his throat. The teeth sank into
his arm--a driving weight hurled him against the wall and then to
the floor--the revolver and the lantern dropped clattering, and the
latter, rolling from its wrapping, flooded the room with light. But
neither man nor wolf uttered a sound.

Calder was standing, gun in hand, but too bewildered to act, while
Dan, as if he were playing a part long rehearsed, stood covering the
fallen form of Buck Daniels.

"Stand back from him, Bart!" he commanded.

The wolf slipped off a pace, whining with horrible eagerness, for he
had tasted blood. Far away a shout came from Sam Daniels. Dan lowered
his gun.

"Stand up," he ordered.

The big fellow picked himself up and stood against the wall with the
blood streaming down his right arm. Still he said nothing and his keen
eyes darted from Calder to Whistling Dan.

"Give me a strip of that old shirt over there, will you, Tex?" said
Dan, "an' keep him covered while I tie up his arm."

Before Calder could move, old Daniels appeared at the door, a heavy
Colt in his hand. For a moment he stood dumbfounded, but then, with a
cry, jerked up his gun--a quick movement, but a fraction of a second
too slow, for the hand of Dan darted out and his knuckles struck the
wrist of the old cattleman. The Colt rattled on the floor. He lunged
after his weapon, but the voice of Buck stopped him short.

"The game's up, Dad," he growled, "that older feller is Tex Calder."

The name, like a blow in the face, straightened old Daniels and left
him white and blinking. Whistling Dan turned his back on the father
and deftly bound up the lacerated arm of Buck.

"In the name o' God, Buck," moaned Sam, "what you been tryin' to do in
here?"

"What you'd do if you had the guts for it. That's Tex Calder an' this
is Dan Barry. They're on the trail of big Jim. I wanted to put 'em off
that trail."

"Look here," said Calder, "how'd you know us?"

"I've said my little say," said Buck sullenly, "an' you'll get no more
out of me between here an' any hell you can take me to."

"He knew us when his father talked about Satan an' Black Bart," said
Dan to Tex. "Maybe he's one of Silent's."

"Buck, for God's sake tell 'em you know nothin' of Silent," cried old
Daniels. "Boy, boy, it's hangin' for you if they get you to Elkhead
an' charge you with that!"

"Dad, you're a fool," said Buck. "I ain't goin' down on my knees to
'em. Not me."

Calder, still keeping Buck covered with his gun, drew Dan a little to
one side.

"What can we do with this fellow, Dan?" he said. "Shall we give up the
trail and take him over to Elkhead?"

"An' break the heart of the ol' man?"

"Buck is one of the gang, that's certain."

"Get Silent an' there won't be no gang left."

"But we caught this chap in red blood--"

"He ain't very old, Tex. Maybe he could change. I think he ain't been
playin' Silent's game any too long."

"We can't let him go. It isn't in reason to do that."

"I ain't thinkin' of reason. I'm thinkin' of old Sam an' his wife."

"And if we turn him loose?"

"He'll be your man till he dies."

Calder scowled.

"The whole range is filled with these silent partners of the
outlaws--but maybe you're right, Dan. Look at them now!"

The father was standing close to his son and pouring out a torrent of
appeal--evidently begging him in a low voice to disavow any knowledge
of Silent and his crew, but Buck shook his head sullenly. He had given
up hope. Calder approached them.

"Buck," he said, "I suppose you know that you could be hung for what
you've tried to do tonight. If the law wouldn't hang you a lynching
party would. No jail would be strong enough to keep them away from
you."

Buck was silent, dogged.

"But suppose we were to let you go scot free?"

Buck started. A great flush covered his face.

"I'm taking the advice of Dan Barry in doing this," said Calder.
"Barry thinks you could go straight. Tell me man to man, if I give you
the chance will you break loose from Silent and his gang?"

A moment before, Buck had been steeled for the worst, but this sudden
change loosened all the bonds of his pride. He stammered and choked.
Calder turned abruptly away.

"Dan," he said, "here's the dawn, and it's time for us to hit the
trail."

They rolled their blankets hastily and broke away from the gratitude
which poured like water from the heart of old Sam. They were in their
saddles when Buck came beside Dan. His pride, his shame, and his
gratitude broke his voice.

"I ain't much on words," he said, "but it's you I'm thankin'!"

His hand reached up hesitatingly, and Dan caught it in a firm grip.

"Why," he said gently, "even Satan here stumbles now an' then, but
that ain't no reason I should get rid of him. Good luck--partner!"

He shook the reins and the stallion leaped off after Calder's trotting
pony. Buck Daniels stood motionless looking after them, and his eyes
were very dim.

For an hour Dan and Tex were on the road before the sun looked over
the hills. Calder halted his horse to watch.

"Dan," he said at last, "I used to think there were only two ways of
handling men--one with the velvet touch and one with the touch of
steel. Mine has been the way of steel, but I begin to see there's a
third possibility--the touch of the panther's paw--the velvet with the
steel claws hid beneath. That's your way, and I wonder if it isn't the
best. I think Buck Daniels would be glad to die for you!"

He turned directly to Dan.

"But all this is aside from the point, which is that the whole country
is full of these silent partners of the outlaws. The law plays a lone
hand in the mountain-desert."

"You've played the lone hand and won twenty times," said Dan.

"Ay, but the twenty-first time I may fail. The difference between
success and failure in this country is just the length of time it
takes to pull a trigger--and Silent is fast with a gun. He's the root
of the outlaw power. We may kill a hundred men, but till he's gone
we've only mowed the weeds, not pulled them. But what's the use of
talking? One second will tell the tale when I stand face to face with
Jim Silent and we go for our six-guns. And somewhere between that
rising sun and those mountains I'll find Jim Silent and the end of
things for one of us."

He started his cattle-pony into a sudden gallop, and they drove on
into the bright morning.




CHAPTER XVIII


CAIN

Hardly a score of miles away, Jim Silent and his six companions topped
a hill. He raised his hand and the others drew rein beside him. Kate
Cumberland shifted her weight a little to one side of the saddle to
rest and looked down from the crest on the sweep of country below. A
mile away the railroad made a streak of silver light across the brown
range and directly before them stood the squat station-house with
red-tiled roof. Just before the house, a slightly broader streak of
that gleaming light showed the position of the siding rails. She
turned her head towards the outlaws. They were listening to the final
directions of their chief, and the darkly intent faces told their own
story. She knew, from what she had gathered of their casual hints,
that this was to be the scene of the train hold-up.

It seemed impossible that this little group of men could hold the
great fabric of a train with all its scores of passengers at their
mercy. In spite of herself, half her heart wished them success. There
was Terry Jordan forgetful of the wound in his arm; Shorty Rhinehart,
his saturnine face longer and more calamitous than ever; Hal Purvis,
grinning and nodding his head; Bill Kilduff with his heavy jaw set
like a bull dog's; Lee Haines, with a lock of tawny hair blowing over
his forehead, smiling faintly as he listened to Silent as if he heard
a girl tell a story of love; and finally Jim Silent himself, huge,
solemn, confident. She began to feel that these six men were worth six
hundred.

She hated them for some reasons; she feared them for others; but the
brave blood of Joe Cumberland was thick in her and she loved the
danger of the coming moment. Their plans were finally agreed upon,
their masks arranged, and after Haines had tied a similar visor over
Kate's face, they started down the hill at a swinging gallop.

In front of the house of the station-agent they drew up, and while the
others were at their horses, Lee Haines dismounted and rapped loudly
at the door. It was opened by a grey-bearded man smoking a pipe.
Haines covered him. He tossed up his hands and the pipe dropped from
his mouth.

"Who's in the house here with you?" asked Haines.

"Not a soul!" stammered the man. "If you're lookin' for money you c'n
run through the house. You won't find a thing worth takin'."

"I don't want money. I want you," said Haines; and immediately
explained, "you're perfectly safe. All you have to do is to be
obliging. As for the money, you just throw open that switch and flag
the train when she rolls along in a few moments. We'll take care of
the rest. You don't have to keep your hands up."

The hands came down slowly. For a brief instant the agent surveyed
Haines and the group of masked men who sat their horses a few paces
away, and then without a word he picked up his flag from behind the
door and walked out of the house. Throughout the affair he never
uttered a syllable. Haines walked up to the head of the siding with
him while he opened the switch and accompanied him back to the point
opposite the station-house to see that he gave the "stop" signal
correctly. In the meantime two of the other outlaws entered the little
station, bound the telegrapher hand and foot, and shattered his
instrument. That would prevent the sending of any call for help after
the hold-up. Purvis and Jordan (since Terry could shoot with his left
hand in case of need) went to the other side of the track and lay down
against the grade. It was their business to open fire on the tops
of the windows as the train drew to a stop. That would keep the
passengers inside. The other four were distributed along the side
nearest to the station-house. Shorty Rhinehart and Bill Kilduff were
to see that no passengers broke out from the train and attempted a
flank attack. Haines would attend to having the fire box of the engine
flooded. For the cracking of the safe, Silent carried the stick of
dynamite.

Now the long wait began. There is a dreamlike quality about bright
mornings in the open country, and everything seemed unreal to Kate.
It was impossible that tragedy should come on such a day. The moments
stole on. She saw Silent glance twice at his watch and scowl.
Evidently the train was late and possibly they would give up the
attempt. Then a light humming caught her ear.

She held her breath and listened again. It was unmistakable--a slight
thing--a tremor to be felt rather than heard. She saw Haines peering
under shaded eyes far down the track, and following the direction of
his gaze she saw a tiny spot of haze on the horizon. The tiny puff of
smoke developed to a deeper, louder note. The station-agent took his
place on the track.

Now the train bulked big, the engine wavering slightly to the
unevenness of the road bed. The flag of the station-agent moved. Kate
closed her eyes and set her teeth. There was a rumbling and puffing
and a mighty grinding--a shout somewhere--the rattle of a score of
pistol shots--she opened her eyes to see the train rolling to a stop
on the siding directly before her.

Kilduff and Shorty Rhinehart, crouching against the grade, were
splintering the windows one by one with nicely placed shots. The
baggage-cars were farther up the siding than Silent calculated. He and
Haines now ran towards the head of the train.

The fireman and engineer jumped from their cab, holding their arms
stiffly above their heads; and Haines approached with poised revolver
to make them flood the fire box. In this way the train would be
delayed for some time and before it could send out the alarm the
bandits would be far from pursuit. Haines had already reached the
locomotive and Silent was running towards the first baggage-car when
the door of that car slid open and at the entrance appeared two men
with rifles at their shoulders. As they opened fire Silent pitched to
the ground. Kate set her teeth and forced her eyes to stay open.

Even as the outlaw fell his revolver spoke and one of the men threw up
his hands with a yell and pitched out of the open door. His companion
still kept his post, pumping shots at the prone figure. Twice more the
muzzle of Silent's gun jerked up and the second man crumpled on the
floor of the car.

A great hissing and a jetting cloud of steam announced that Haines
had succeeded in flooding the fire box. Silent climbed into the first
baggage-car, stepping, as he did so, on the limp body of the Wells
Fargo agent, who lay on the road bed. A moment later he flung out the
body of the second messenger. The man flopped on the ground heavily,
face downwards, and then--greatest horror of all!--dragged himself
to his hands and knees and began to crawl laboriously. Kate ran and
dropped to her knees beside him.

"Are you hurt badly?" she pleaded. "Where? Where?"

He sagged to the ground and lay on his left side, breathing heavily.

"Where is the wound?" she repeated.

He attempted to speak, but only a bloody froth came to his lips. That
was sufficient to tell her that he had been shot through the lungs.

She tore open his shirt and found two purple spots high on the chest,
one to the right, and one to the left. From that on the left ran a
tiny trickle of blood, but that on the right was only a small puncture
in the midst of a bruise. He was far past all help.

"Speak to me!" she pleaded.

His eyes rolled and then checked on her face.

"Done for," he said in a horrible whisper, "that devil done me.
Kid--cut out--this life. I've played this game--myself--an' now--I'm
goin'--to hell for it!"

A great convulsion twisted his face.

"What can I do?" cried Kate.

"Tell the world--I died--game!"

His body writhed, and in the last agony his hand closed hard over
hers. It was like a silent farewell, that strong clasp.

A great hand caught her by the shoulder and jerked her to her feet.

"The charge is goin' off! Jump for it!" shouted Silent in her ear.

She sprang up and at the same time there was a great boom from within
the car. The side bulged out--a section of the top lifted and fell
back with a crash--and Silent ran back into the smoke. Haines, Purvis,
and Kilduff were instantly at the car, taking the ponderous little
canvas sacks of coin as their chief handed them out.

Within two minutes after the explosion ten small sacks were deposited
in the saddlebags on the horses which stood before the station-house.
Silent's whistle called in Terry Jordan and Shorty Rhinehart--a sharp
order forced Kate to climb into her saddle--and the train robbers
struck up the hillside at a racing pace. A confused shouting rose
behind them. Rifles commenced to crack where some of the passengers
had taken up the weapons of the dead guards, but the bullets flew
wide, and the little troop was soon safely out of range.

On the other side of the hill-top they changed their course to the
right. For half an hour the killing pace continued, and then, as there
was not a sign of immediate chase, the lone riders drew down to a
soberer pace. Silent called: "Keep bunched behind me. We're headed for
the old Salton place--an' a long rest."




CHAPTER XIX


REAL MEN

Some people pointed out that Sheriff Gus Morris had never made a
single important arrest in the ten years during which he had held
office, and there were a few slanderers who spoke insinuatingly of the
manner in which the lone riders flourished in Morris's domain. These
"knockers," however, were voted down by the vast majority, who swore
that the sheriff was the finest fellow who ever threw leg over saddle.
They liked him for his inexhaustible good-nature, the mellow baritone
in which he sang the range songs at any one's request, and perhaps
more than all, for the very laxness with which he conducted his work.
They had had enough of the old school of sheriffs who lived a few
months gun in hand and died fighting from the saddle. The office had
never seemed desirable until Gus Morris ran for it and smiled his way
to a triumphant election.

Before his career as an office-holder began, he ran a combined general
merchandise store, saloon, and hotel. That is to say, he ran the
hostelry in name. The real executive head, general manager, clerk,
bookkeeper, and cook, and sometimes even bartender was his daughter,
Jacqueline. She found the place only a saloon, and a poorly patronized
one at that. Her unaided energy gradually made it into a hotel,
restaurant, and store. Even while her father was in office he spent
most of his time around the hotel; but no matter how important he
might be elsewhere, in his own house he had no voice. There the only
law was the will of Jacqueline.

Out of the stable behind this hostelry Dan and Tex Calder walked on
the evening of the train robbery. They had reached the place of the
hold-up a full two hours after Silent's crew departed; and the fireman
and engineer had been working frantically during the interim to clean
out the soaked fire box and get up steam again. Tex looked at the two
dead bodies, spoke to the conductor, and then cut short the voluble
explanations of a score of passengers by turning his horse and riding
away, followed by Dan. All that day he was gloomily silent. It was a
shrewd blow at his reputation, for the outlaws had actually carried
out the robbery while he was on their trail. Not till they came out of
the horse-shed after stabling their horses did he speak freely.

"Dan," he said, "do you know anything about Sheriff Gus Morris?"

"No"

"Then listen to this and salt every word away. I'm an officer of the
law, but I won't tell that to Morris. I hope he doesn't know me. If he
does it will spoil our game. I am almost certain he is playing a close
hand with the lone riders. I'll wager he'd rather see a stick of
dynamite than a marshal. Remember when we get in that place that we're
not after Jim Silent or any one else. We're simply travelling cowboys.
No questions. I expect to learn something about the location of
Silent's gang while we're here, but we'll never find out except by
hints and chance remarks. We have to watch Morris like hawks. If he
suspects us he'll find a way to let Silent know we're here and then
the hunters will be hunted."

In the house they found a dozen cattlemen sitting down at the table in
the dining-room. As they entered the room the sheriff, who sat at the
head of the table, waved his hand to them.

"H'ware ye, boys?" he called. "You'll find a couple of chairs right in
the next room. Got two extra plates, Jac?"

As Dan followed Tex after the chairs he noticed the sheriff beckon
to one of the men who sat near him. As they returned with the chairs
someone was leaving the room by another door.

"Tex," he said, as they sat down side by side, "when we left the
dining-room for the chairs, the sheriff spoke to one of the boys and
as we came back one of them was leavin' through another door. D'you
think Morris knew you when you came in?"

Calder frowned thoughtfully and then shook his head.

"No," he said in a low voice. "I watched him like a hawk when we
entered. He didn't bat an eye when he saw me. If he recognized me he's
the greatest actor in the world, bar none! No, Dan, he doesn't know us
from Adam and Abel."

"All right," said Dan, "but I don't like somethin' about this
place--maybe it's the smell of the air. Tex, take my advice an' keep
your gun ready for the fastest draw you ever made."

"Don't worry about me," smiled Calder. "How about yourself?"

"Hello," broke in Jacqueline from the end of the table. "Look who
we've picked in the draw!"

Her voice was musical, but her accent and manner were those of a girl
who has lived all her life among men and has caught their ways--with
an exaggeration of that self-confidence which a woman always feels
among Western men. Her blue eyes were upon Dan.

"Ain't you a long ways from home?" she went on.

The rest of the table, perceiving the drift of her badgering, broke
into a rumbling bass chuckle.

"Quite a ways," said Dan, and his wide brown eyes looked seriously
back at her.

A yell of delight came from the men at this naive rejoinder. Dan
looked about him with a sort of childish wonder. Calder's anxious
whisper came at his side: "Don't let them get you mad, Dan!"
Jacqueline, having scored so heavily with her first shot, was by no
means willing to give up her sport.

"With them big eyes, for a starter," she said, "all you need is long
hair to be perfect. Do your folks generally let you run around like
this?"

Every man canted his ear to get the answer and already they were
grinning expectantly.

"I don't go out much," returned the soft voice of Dan, "an' when I do,
I go with my friend, here. He takes care of me."

Another thunder of laughter broke out. Jacqueline had apparently
uncovered a tenderfoot, and a rare one even for that absurd species. A
sandy-haired cattle puncher who sat close to Jacqueline now took the
cue from the mistress of the house.

"Ain't you a bit scared when you get around among real men?" he asked,
leering up the table towards Dan.

The latter smiled gently upon him.

"I reckon maybe I am," he said amiably.

"Then you must be shakin' in your boots right now," said the other
over the sound of the laughter.

"No, said Dan," "I feel sort of comfortable."

The other replied with a frown that would have intimidated a balky
horse.

"What d'you mean? Ain't you jest said men made you sort of--nervous?"

He imitated the soft drawl of Dan with his last words and raised
another yell of delight from the crowd. Whistling Dan turned his
gentle eyes upon Jacqueline.

"Pardon me, ma'am," he began.

An instant hush fell on the men. They would not miss one syllable of
the delightful remarks of this rarest of all tenderfoots, and the
prelude of this coming utterance promised something that would eclipse
all that had gone before.

"Talk right out, Brown-eyes," said Jacqueline, wiping the tears of
delight from her eyes. "Talk right out as if you was a man. _I_ won't
hurt you."

"I jest wanted to ask," said Dan, "if these are real men?"

The ready laughter started, checked, and died suddenly away. The
cattlemen looked at each other in puzzled surprise.

"Don't they look like it to you, honey?" asked Jacqueline curiously.

Dan allowed his eyes to pass lingeringly around the table from face to
face.

"I dunno," he said at last, "they look sort of queer to me."

"For God's sake cut this short, Dan," pleaded Tex Calder in an
undertone. "Let them have all the rope they want. Don't trip up our
party before we get started."

"Queer?" echoed Jacqueline, and there was a deep murmur from the men.

"Sure," said Dan, smiling upon her again, "they all wear their guns so
awful high."

Out of the dead silence broke the roar of the sandy-haired man:
"What'n hell d'you mean by that?"

Dan leaned forward on one elbow, his right hand free and resting on
the edge of the table, but still his smile was almost a caress.

"Why," he said, "maybe you c'n explain it to me. Seems to me that all
these guns is wore so high they's more for ornament than use."

"You damned pup--" began Sandy.

He stopped short and stared with a peculiar fascination at Dan, who
started to speak again. His voice had changed--not greatly, for its
pitch was the same and the drawl was the same--but there was a purr
in it that made every man stiffen in his chair and make sure that his
right hand was free. The ghost of his former smile was still on his
lips, but it was his eyes that seemed to fascinate Sandy.

"Maybe I'm wrong, partner," he was saying, "an' maybe you c'n prove
that _your_ gun ain't jest ornamental hardware?"

What followed was very strange. Sandy was a brave man and everyone at
that table knew it. They waited for the inevitable to happen. They
waited for Sandy's lightning move for his gun. They waited for the
flash and the crack of the revolver. It did not come. There followed a
still more stunning wonder.

"You c'n see," went on that caressing voice of Dan, "that everyone
is waitin' for you to demonstrate--which the lady is most special
interested."

And still Sandy did not move that significant right hand. It remained
fixed in air a few inches above the table, the fingers stiffly spread.
He moistened his white lips. Then--most strange of all!--his eyes
shifted and wandered away from the face of Whistling Dan. The others
exchanged incredulous glances. The impossible had happened--Sandy had
taken water! The sheriff was the first to recover, though his forehead
was shining with perspiration.

"What's all this stuff about?" he called. "Hey, Sandy, quit pickin'
trouble with the stranger!"

Sandy seized the loophole through which to escape with his honour. He
settled back in his chair.

"All right, gov'nor," he said, "I won't go spoilin' your furniture. I
won't hurt him."




CHAPTER XX


ONE TRAIL ENDS

But this deceived no one. They had seen him palpably take water. A
moment of silence followed, while Sandy stared whitefaced down at the
table, avoiding all eyes; but all the elements of good breeding exist
under all the roughness of the West. It was Jacqueline who began with
a joke which was rather old, but everyone appreciated it--at that
moment--and the laughter lasted long enough to restore some of the
colour to Sandy's face. A general rapid fire of talk followed.

"How did you do it?" queried Calder. "I was all prepared for a
gun-play."

"Why, you seen I didn't do nothin'."

"Then what in the world made Sandy freeze while his hand was on the
way to his gun?"

"I dunno," sighed Dan, "but when I see his hand start movin' I sort of
wanted his blood--I _wanted_ him to keep right on till he got hold of
his gun--and maybe he seen it in my eyes an' that sort of changed his
mind."

"I haven't the least doubt that it did," said Calder grimly.

At the foot of the table Jacqueline's right-hand neighbour was saying:
"What happened, Jac?"

"Don't ask me," she replied. "All I know is that I don't think any
less of Sandy because he backed down. I saw that stranger's face
myself an' I'm still sort of weak inside."

"How did he look?"

"I dunno. Jest--jest _hungry_. Understand?"

She was silent for a time, but she was evidently thinking hard. At
last she turned to the same man.

"Did you hear Brown-eyes say that the broad-shouldered feller next to
him was his friend?"

"Sure. I seen them ride in together. That other one looks like a hard
nut, eh?"

She returned no answer, but after a time her eyes raised slowly and
rested for a long moment on Dan's face. It was towards the end of
the meal when she rose and went towards the kitchen. At the door
she turned, and Dan, though he was looking down at his plate, was
conscious that someone was observing him. He glanced up and the moment
his eyes met hers she made a significant backward gesture with her
hand. He hesitated a moment and then shoved back his chair. Calder was
busy talking to a table mate, so he walked out of the house without
speaking to his companion. He went to the rear of the house and as he
had expected she was waiting for him.

"Brown-eyes," she said swiftly, "that feller who sat beside you--is he
your partner?"

"I dunno," said Dan evasively, "why are you askin'?"

Her breath was coming audibly as if from excitement.

"Have you got a fast hoss?"

"There ain't no faster."

"Believe me, he can't go none too fast with you tonight. Maybe they're
after you, too."

"Who?"

"I can't tell you. Listen to me, Brown-eyes. Go get your hoss an' feed
him the spur till you're a hundred miles away, an' even then don't
stop runnin'."

He merely stared at her curiously.

She stamped.

"Don't stop to talk. If they're after him and you're his partner, they
probably want you, too."

"I'll stay aroun'. If they're curious about me, I'll tell 'em my
name--I'll even spell it for 'em. Who are they?"

"They are--hell--that's all."

"I'd like to see 'em. Maybe _they're_ real men."

"They're devils. If I told you their names you'd turn stiff."

"I'll take one chance. Tell me who they are."

"I don't dare tell you."

She hesitated.

"I _will_ tell you! You've made a fool out of me with them big baby
eyes. Jim Silent is in that house!"

He turned and ran, but not for the horse-shed; he headed straight for
the open door of the house.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the dining-room two more had left the table, but the rest,
lingering over their fresh filled coffee cups, sat around telling
tales, and Tex Calder was among them. He was about to push back his
chair when the hum of talk ceased as if at a command. The men on the
opposite side of the table were staring with fascinated eyes at the
door, and then a big voice boomed behind him: "Tex Calder, stan' up.
You've come to the end of the trail!"

He whirled as he rose, kicking down the chair behind him, and stood
face to face with Jim Silent. The great outlaw was scowling; but his
gun was in its holster and his hands rested lightly on his hips. It
was plain for all eyes to see that he had come not to murder but to
fight a fair duel. Behind him loomed the figure of Lee Haines scarcely
less imposing.

All eternity seemed poised and waiting for the second when one of the
men would make the move for his gun. Not a breath was drawn in the
room. Hands remained frozen in air in the midst of a gesture. Lips
which had parted to speak did not close. The steady voice of the clock
broke into the silence--a dying space between every tick. For the
second time in his life Tex Calder knew fear.

He saw no mere man before him, but his own destiny. And he knew that
if he stood before those glaring eyes another minute he would become
like poor Sandy a few minutes before--a white-faced, palsied coward.
The shame of the thought gave him power.

"Silent," he said, "there's a quick end to the longest trail,
because--"

His hand darted down. No eye could follow the lightning speed with
which he whipped out his revolver and fanned it, but by a mortal
fraction of a second the convulsive jerk of Silent's hand was faster
still. Two shots followed--they were rather like one drawn-out report.
The woodwork splintered above the outlaw's head; Tex Calder seemed to
laugh, but his lips made no sound. He pitched forward on his face.

"He fired that bullet," said Silent, "after mine hit him."

Then he leaped back through the door.

"Keep 'em back one minute, Lee, an' then after me!" he said as he ran.
Haines stood in the door with folded arms. He knew that no one would
dare to move a hand.

Two doors slammed at the same moment--the front door as Silent leaped
into the safety of the night, and the rear door as Whistling Dan
rushed into the house. He stood at the entrance from the kitchen to
the dining-room half crouched, and swaying from the suddenness with
which he had checked his run. He saw the sprawled form of Tex Calder
on the floor and the erect figure of Lee Haines just opposite him.

"For God's sake!" screamed Gus Morris, "don't shoot, Haines! He's done
nothin'. Let him go!"

"My life--or his!" said Haines savagely. "He's not a man--he's a
devil!"

Dan was laughing low--a sound like a croon.

"Tex," he said, "I'm goin' to take him alive for you!"

As if in answer the dying man stirred on the floor. Haines went for
his gun, a move almost as lightning swift as that of Jim Silent, but
now far, far too late. The revolver was hardly clear of its holster
when Whistling Dan's weapon spoke. Haines, with a curse, clapped his
left hand over his wounded right forearm, and then reached after his
weapon as it clattered to the floor. Once more he was too late. Dan
tossed his gun away with a snarl like the growl of a wolf; cleared the
table at a leap, and was at Haines's throat. The bandit fought back
desperately, vainly. One instant they struggled erect, swaying, the
next Haines was lifted bodily, and hurled to the floor. He writhed,
but under those prisoning hands he was helpless.

The sheriff headed the rush for the scene of the struggle, but Dan
stopped them.

"All you c'n do," he said, "is to bring me a piece of rope."

Jacqueline came running with a stout piece of twine which he twisted
around the wrists of Haines. Then he jerked the outlaw to his feet,
and stood close, his face inhumanly pale.

"If he dies," he said, pointing with a stiff arm back at the prostrate
figure of Tex Calder, "you--you'll burn alive for it!"

The sheriff and two of the other men turned the body of Calder on his
back. They tore open his shirt, and Jacqueline leaned over him with
a basin of water trying to wipe away the ever recurrent blood which
trickled down his breast. Dan brushed them away and caught the head of
his companion in his arms.

"Tex!" he moaned, "Tex! Open your eyes, partner, I got him for you. I
got him alive for you to look at him! Wake up!"

As if in obedience to the summons the eyes of Calder opened wide. The
lids fluttered as if to clear his vision, but even then his gaze was
filmed with a telltale shadow.

"Dan--Whistling Dan," he said, "I'm seeing you a long, long ways off.
Partner, I'm done for."

The whole body of Dan stiffened.

"Done? Tex, you can't be! Five minutes ago you sat at that there
table, smilin' an' talkin'!"

"It doesn't take five minutes. Half a second can take a man all the
way to hell!"

"If you're goin', pal, if you goin', Tex, take one comfort along with
you! I got the man who killed you! Come here!"

He pulled the outlaw to his knees beside the dying marshal whose face
had lighted wonderfully. He strained his eyes painfully to make out
the face of his slayer. Then he turned his head.

He said: "The man who killed me was Jim Silent."

Dan groaned and leaned close to Calder.

"Then I'll follow him to the end--" he began.

The feeble accent of Calder interrupted him.

"Not that way. Come close to me. I can't hear my own voice, hardly."

Dan bowed his head. A whisper murmured on for a moment, broken here
and there as Dan nodded his head and said, "Yes!"

"Then hold up your hand, your right hand," said Calder at last,
audibly.

Dan obeyed.

"You swear it?"

"So help me God!"

"Then here's the pledge of it!"

Calder fumbled inside his shirt for a moment, and then withdrawing his
hand placed it palm down in that of Dan. The breath of the marshal was
coming in a rattling gasp.

He said very faintly: "I've stopped the trails of twenty men. It took
the greatest of them all to get me. He got me fair. He beat me to the
draw!"

He stopped as if in awe.

"He played square--he's a better man than I. Dan, when you get him,
do it the same way--face to face--with time for him to think of hell
before he gets there. Partner, I'm going. Wish me luck."

"Tex--partner--good luck!"

It seemed as if that parting wish was granted, for Calder died with a
smile.

When Dan rose slowly Gus Morris stepped up and laid a hand on his
arm: "Look here, there ain't no use of bein' sad for Tex Calder. His
business was killin' men, an' his own time was overdue."

Dan turned a face that made Morris wince.

"What's the matter?" he asked, with an attempt at bluff good nature.
"Do you hate everyone because one man is dead? I'll tell you what I'll
do. I'll loan you a buckboard an' a pair of hosses to take Tex back to
Elkhead. As for this feller Haines, I'll take care of him."

"I sure need a buckboard," said Dan slowly, "but I'll get the loan
from a--white man!"

He turned his back sharply on the sheriff and asked if any one else
had a wagon they could lend him. One of the men had stopped at
Morris's place on his way to Elkhead. He immediately proposed that
they make the trip together.

"All right," said Morris carelessly. "I won't pick trouble with a
crazy man. Come with me, Haines."

He turned to leave the room.

"Wait!" said Dan.

Haines stopped as though someone had seized him by the shoulder.

"What the devil is this now?" asked Morris furiously. "Stranger, d'you
think you c'n run the world? Come on with me, Haines!"

"He stays with me," said Dan.

"By God," began Morris, "if I thought--"

"This ain't no place for you to begin thinkin'," said the man who had
offered his buckboard to Dan. "This feller made the capture an' he's
got the right to take him into Elkhead if he wants. They's a reward on
the head of Lee Haines."

"The arrest is made in my county," said Morris stoutly, "an' I've got
the say as to what's to be done with a prisoner."

"Morris," said Haines earnestly, "if I'm taken to Elkhead it'll be
simply a matter of lynching. You know the crowd in that town."

"Right--right," said Morris, eagerly picking up the word. "It'd be
plain lynchin'--murder--"

Dan broke in: "Haines, step over here behind me!"

For one instant Haines hesitated, and then obeyed silently.

"This is contempt of the law and an officer of the law," said Morris.
"An" I'll see that you get fined so that--"

"Better cut it short there, sheriff," said one of the men. "I wouldn't
go callin' the attention of folks to the way Jim Silent walked into
your own house an' made his getaway without you tryin' to raise a
hand. Law or no law, I'm with this stranger."

"Me too," said another; "any man who can fan a gun like him don't need
no law."

The sheriff saw that the tide of opinion had set strongly against him
and abandoned his position with speed if not with grace. Dan ordered
Haines to walk before him outside the house. They faced each other in
the dim moonlight.

"I've got one question to ask you," he said.

"Make it short," said Haines calmly. "I've got to do my talking before
the lynching crowd."

"You can answer it in one word. Does Kate Cumberland--what is she to
you?"

Lee Haines set his teeth.

"All the world," he said.

Even in the dim light he saw the yellow glow of Dan's eyes and he
felt as if a wolf stood there trembling with eagerness to leap at his
throat.

"An' what are you to her?"

"No more than the dirt under her feet!"

"Haines, you lie!"

"I tell you that if she cared for me as much as she does for the horse
she rides on, I'd let the whole world know if I had to die for it the
next moment."

Truth has a ring of its own.

"Haines, if I could hear that from her own lips, I'd let you go free.
If you'll show me the way to Kate, I'll set you loose the minute I see
her."

"I can't do it. I've given my faith to Silent and his men. Where she
is, they are."

"Haines, that means death for you."

"I know it."

Another plan had come to Dan as they talked. He took Haines inside
again and coming out once more, whistled for Bart. The wolf appeared
as if by magic through the dark. He took out Kate's glove, which the
wolf had brought to him in the willows, and allowed him to smell it.
Bart whined eagerly. If he had that glove he would range the hills
until he found its owner, directed to her by that strange instinct
of the wild things. If Kate still loved him the glove would be more
eloquent than a thousand messages. And if she managed to escape, the
wolf would guide her back to his master.

He sat on his heels, caught the wolf on either side of the shaggy
head, and stared into the glow of the yellow green eyes. It was as if
the man were speaking to the wolf.

At last, as if satisfied, he drew a deep breath, rose, and dropped the
glove. It was caught in the flashing teeth. For another moment Bart
stood whining and staring up to the face of his master. Then he
whirled and fled out into the night.




CHAPTER XXI


ONE WAY OUT

In a room of the Salton place, on the evening of the next day after
Calder's death, sat Silent, with Kilduff, Rhinehart, and Jordan about
him. Purvis was out scouting for the news of Haines, whose long
absence commenced to worry the gang. Several times they tried to
induce Kate to come out and talk with them, but she was resolute
in staying alone in the room which they had assigned to her.
Consequently, to while away the time, Bill Kilduff produced his mouth
organ and commenced a dolorous ballad. He broke short in the midst of
it and stared at the door. The others followed the direction of his
eyes and saw Black Bart standing framed against the fading daylight.
They started up with curses; Rhinehart drew his gun.

"Wait a minute," ordered Silent.

"Damn it!" exclaimed Jordan, "don't you see Whistling Dan's wolf? If
the wolf's here, Dan isn't far behind."

Silent shook his head.

"If there's goin' to be any shootin' of that wolf leave it to Hal
Purvis. He's jest nacherally set his heart on it. An' Whistlin' Dan
ain't with the wolf. Look! there's a woman's glove hangin' out of his
mouth. He picked that up in the willows, maybe, an' followed the girl
here. Watch him!"

The wolf slunk across the room to the door which opened on Kate's
apartment. Kate threw the door open--cried out at the sight of
Bart--and then snatched up the glove he let drop at her feet.

"No cause for gettin' excited," said Silent. "Whistlin' Dan ain't
comin' here after the wolf."

For answer she slammed the door.

At the same moment Hal Purvis entered. He stepped directly to Silent,
and stood facing him with his hands resting on his hips. His smile was
marvellously unpleasant.

"Well," said the chief, "what's the news? You got eloquent eyes, Hal,
but I want words."

"The news is plain hell," said Purvis, "Haines--"

"What of him?"

"He's in Elkhead!"

"Elkhead?"

"Whistling Dan got him at Morris's place and took him in along with
the body of Tex Calder. Jim, you got to answer for it to all of us.
You went to Morris's with Lee. You come away without him and let him
stay behind to be nabbed by that devil Whistlin' Dan."

"Right," said Kilduff, and his teeth clicked. "Is that playin' fair?"

"Boys," said Silent solemnly, "if I had knowed that Whistlin' Dan was
there, I'd of never left Haines to stay behind. Morris said nothin'
about Calder havin' a runnin' mate. Me an' Haines was in the upstairs
room an' about suppertime up came a feller an' told us that Tex Calder
had jest come into the dinin'-room. That was all. Did Whistlin' Dan
get Lee from behind?"

"He got him from the front. He beat Lee to the draw so bad that Haines
hardly got his gun out of its leather!"

"The feller that told you that lied," said Silent. "Haines is as fast
with his shootin' iron as I am--almost!"

The rest of the outlaws nodded to each other significantly.

Purvis went on without heeding the interruption. "After I found out
about the fight I swung towards Elkhead. About five miles out of town
I met up with Rogers, the deputy sheriff at Elkhead. I thought you had
him fixed for us, Jim?"

"Damn his hide, I did. Is he playing us dirt now?"

"A frosty mornin' in December was nothin' to the way he talked."

"Cut all that short," said Rhinehart, "an' let's know if Rogers is
goin' to be able to keep the lynching party away from Haines!"

"He says he thinks it c'n be done for a couple of days," said Purvis,
"but the whole range is risin'. All the punchers are ridin' into
Elkhead an' wantin' to take a look at the famous Lee Haines. Rogers
says that when enough of 'em get together they'll take the law in
their own hands an' nothin' can stop 'em then."

"Why don't the rotten dog give Haines a chance to make a getaway?"
asked Silent. "Ain't we paid him his share ever since we started
workin' these parts?"

"He don't dare take the chance," said Purvis. "He says the boys are
talkin' mighty strong. They want action. They've put up a guard all
around the jail an' they say that if Haines gets loose they'll string
up Rogers. Everyone's wild about the killin' of Calder. Jim, ol'
Saunderson, he's put up five thousand out of his own pocket to raise
the price on your head!"

"An' this Whistlin' Dan," said Silent. "I s'pose they're makin' a hero
out of him?"

"Rogers says every man within ten miles is talkin' about him. The
whole range'll know of him in two days. He made a nice play when he
got in. You know they's five thousand out on Haines's head. It was
offered to him by Rogers as soon as Dan brought Lee in. What d'you
think he done? Pocketed the cheque? No, he grabbed it, an' tore it up
small: 'I ain't after no blood money,' he says."

"No," said Silent. "He ain't after no money--he's after me!"

"Tomorrow they bury Calder. The next day Whistlin' Dan'll be on our
trail again--an' he'll be playin' the same lone hand. Rogers offered
him a posse. He wouldn't take it."

"They's one pint that ain't no nearer bein' solved," said Bill Kilduff
in a growl, "an' that's how you're goin' to get Haines loose. Silent,
it's up to you. Which you rode away leavin' him behind."

Silent took one glance around that waiting circle. Then he nodded.

"It's up to me. Gimme a chance to think."

He started walking up and down the room, muttering. At last he stopped
short.

"Boys, it can be done! They's nothin' like talkin' of a woman to make
a man turn himself into a plumb fool, an' I'm goin' to make a fool out
of Whistlin' Dan with this girl Kate!"

"But how in the name of God c'n you make her go out an' talk to him?"
said Rhinehart.

"Son," answered Silent, "they's jest one main trouble with you--you
talk a hell of a pile too much. When I've done this I'll tell you how
it was figgered out!"




CHAPTER XXII


THE WOMAN'S WAY

It was a day later, in the morning, that a hand knocked at Kate's door
and she opened it to Jim Silent. He entered, brushing off the dust of
a long journey.

"Good-mornin', Miss Cumberland."

He extended a hand which she overlooked.

"You still busy hatin' me?"

"I'm simply--surprised that you have come in here to talk to me."

"You look as if you seen somethin' in my face?" he said suspiciously.
"What is it? Dirt?"

He brushed a hand across his forehead.

"Whatever it is," she answered, "you can't rub it away."

"I'm thinkin' of givin' you a leave of absence--if you'll promise to
come back."

"Would you trust my honour?"

"In a pinch like this," he said amiably, "I would. But here's my
business. Lee Haines is jailed in Elkhead. The man that put him behind
the bars an' the only one that can take him out agin is Whistlin' Dan.
An' the one person who can make Dan set Lee loose is you. Savvy? Will
you go an' talk with Dan? This wolf of his would find him for you."

She shook her head.

"Why not?" cried Silent in a rising voice.

"The last time he saw me," she said, "he had reason to think that I
tried to betray him because of Lee Haines. If I went to him now to
plead for Haines he'd be sure that I was what he called me--Delilah!"

"Is that final?"

"Absolutely!"

"Now get me straight. They's a crowd of cowpunchers gatherin' in
Elkhead, an' today or tomorrow they'll be strong enough to take the
law into their own hands and organize a little lynchin' bee, savvy?"

She shuddered.

"It ain't pleasant, is it, the picture of big, good-lookin' Lee
danglin' from the end of a rope with the crowd aroun' takin' pot-shots
at him? No, it ain't, an' you're goin' to stop it. You're goin' to
start from here in fifteen minutes with your hoss an' this wolf, after
givin' me your promise to come back when you've seen Whistlin' Dan.
You're goin' to make Dan go an' set Lee loose."

She smiled in derision.

"If Dan did that he'd be outlawed."

"You won't stir?"

"Not a step!"

"Well, kid, for everything that happens to Lee somethin' worse will
happen to someone in the next room. Maybe you'd like to see him?"

He opened the door and she stepped into the entrance. Almost opposite
her sat old Joe Cumberland with his hands tied securely behind his
back. At sight of her he rose with a low cry. She turned on big Silent
and whipped the six-gun from his hip. He barely managed to grasp her
wrist and swing the heavy revolver out of line with his body.

"You little fiend," he snarled, "drop the gun, or I'll wring your
neck."

"I don't fear you," she said, never wincing under the crushing grip on
her wrists, "you murderer!"

He said, calmly repossessing himself of his gun, "Now take a long look
at your father an' repeat all the things you was just saying' to me."

She stared miserably at her father. When Silent caught Kate's hand
Cumberland had started forward, but Kilduff and Rhinehart held him.

"What is it, Kate," he cried. "What does it mean?"

She explained it briefly: "This is Jim Silent!"

He remained staring at her with open mouth as if his brain refused to
admit what his ear heard.

"There ain't no use askin' questions how an' why she's here," said
Silent. "This is the pint. Lee Haines is behind the bars in Elkhead.
Whistlin' Dan put him there an' maybe the girl c'n persuade Dan to
bring him out again. If she don't--then everything the lynchin' gang
does to Haines we're goin' to do to you. Git down on your ol' knees,
Cumberland, an' beg your daughter to save your hide!"

The head of Kate dropped down.

"Untie his hands," she said. "I'll talk with Dan."

"I knew you'd see reason," grinned Silent.

"Jest one minute," said Cumberland. "Kate, is Lee Haines one of
Silent's gang?"

"He is."

"An' Dan put him behind the bars?"

"Yes."

"If Dan takes him out again the boy'll be outlawed, Kate."

"Cumberland," broke in Kilduff savagely, "here's your call to stop
thinkin' about Whistlin' Dan an' begin figgerin' for yourself."

"Don't you see?" said Kate, "it's your death these cowards mean."

Cumberland seemed to grow taller, he stood so stiffly erect with his
chin high like a soldier.

"You shan't make no single step to talk with Dan!"

"Can't you understand that it's _you_ they threaten?" she cried.

"I understan' it all," he said evenly. "I'm too old to have a young
man damned for my sake."

"Shut him up!" ordered Silent. "The old fool!"

The heavy hand of Terry Jordan clapped over Joe's mouth effectually
silenced him. He struggled vainly to speak again and Kate turned to
Silent to shut out the sight.

"Tell your man to let him go," she said, "I will do what you wish."

"That's talkin' sense," said Silent. "Come out with me an' I'll saddle
your hoss. Call the wolf."

He opened the door and in response to her whistle Black Bart trotted
out and followed them out to the horse shed. There the outlaw quickly
saddled Kate's pony.

He said: "Whistlin' Dan is sure headin' back in this direction because
he's got an idea I'm somewhere near. Bart will find him on the way."

Silent was right. That morning Dan had started back towards Gus
Morris's place, for he was sure that the outlaws were camped in that
neighbourhood. A little before noon he veered half a mile to the right
towards a spring which welled out from a hillside, surrounded by a
small grove of willows. Having found it, he drank, and watered Satan,
then took off the saddle to ease the stallion, and lay down at a
little distance for a ten-minute siesta, one of those half wakeful
sleeps the habit of which he had learned from his wolf.

He was roused from the doze by a tremendous snorting and snarling and
found Black Bart playing with Satan. It was their greeting after
an absence, and they dashed about among the willows like creatures
possessed. Dan brought horse and dog to a motionless stand with a
single whistle, and then ran out to the edge of the willows. Down the
side of the hill rode Kate at a brisk gallop. In a moment she saw him
and called his name, with a welcoming wave of her arm. Now she was off
her horse and running to him. He caught her hands and held her for
an instant far from him like one striving to draw out the note of
happiness into a song. They could not speak.

At last: "I knew you'd find a way to come."

"They let me go, Dan."

He frowned, and her eyes faltered from his.

"They sent me to you to ask you--to free Lee Haines!"

He dropped her hands, and she stood trying to find words to explain,
and finding none.

"To free Haines?" he repeated heavily.

"It is Dad," she cried. "They have captured him, and they are holding
him. They keep him in exchange for Haines."

"If I free Haines they'll outlaw me. You know that, Kate?"

She made a pace towards him, but he retreated.

"What can I do?" she pleaded desperately. "It is for my father--"

His face brightened as he caught at a new hope.

"Show me the way to Silent's hiding place and I'll free your father
an' reach the end of this trail at the same time, Kate!"

She blenched pitifully. It was hopeless to explain.

"Dan--honey--I can't!"

She watched him miserably.

"I've given them my word to come back alone."

His head bowed. Out of the willows came Satan and Black Bart and stood
beside him, the stallion nosing his shoulder affectionately.

"Dan, dear, won't you speak to me? Won't you tell me that you try to
understand?"

He said at last: "Yes. I'll free Lee Haines."

The fingers of his right hand trailed slowly across the head of Black
Bart. His eyes raised and looked past her far across the running
curves of the hills, far away to the misty horizon.

"Kate--"

"Dan, you _do_ understand?"

"I didn't know a woman could love a man the way you do Lee Haines.
When I send him back to you tell him to watch himself. I'm playin'
your game now, but if I meet him afterwards, I'll play my own."

All she could say was: "Will you listen to me no more, Dan?"

"Here's where we say good-bye."

He took her hand and his eyes were as unfathomable as a midnight sky.
She turned to her horse and he helped her to the saddle with a steady
hand.

That was all. He went back to the willows, his right arm resting on
the withers of Black Satan as if upon the shoulder of a friend. As she
reached the top of the hill she heard a whistling from the willows, a
haunting complaint which brought the tears to her eyes. She spurred
her tired horse to escape the sound.




CHAPTER XXIII


HELL STARTS

Between twilight and dark Whistling Dan entered Elkhead. He rose in
the stirrups, on his toes, stretching the muscles of his legs. He was
sensing his strength. So the pianist before he plays runs his fingers
up and down the keys and sees that all is in tune and the touch
perfect.

Two rival saloons faced each other at the end of the single street.
At the other extremity of the lane stood the house of deputy sheriff
Rogers, and a little farther was the jail. A crowd of horses stood in
front of each saloon, but from the throngs within there came hardly a
sound. The hush was prophetic of action; it was the lull before the
storm. Dan slowed his horse as he went farther down the street.

The shadowy figure of a rider showed near the jail. He narrowed his
eyes and looked more closely. Another, another, another horseman
showed--four in sight on his side of the jail and probably as many
more out of his vision. Eight cattlemen guarded the place from which
he must take Lee Haines, and every one of the eight, he had no doubt,
was a picked man. Dan pulled up Satan to a walk and commenced to
whistle softly. It was like one of those sounds of the wind, a thing
to guess at rather than to know, but the effect upon Satan and Black
Bart was startling.

The ears of the stallion dropped flat on his neck. He began to slink
along with a gliding step which was very like the stealthy pace of
Black Bart, stealing ahead. His footfall was as silent as if he had
been shod with felt. Meantime Dan ran over a plan of action. He saw
very clearly that he had little time for action. Those motionless
guards around the jail made his task difficult enough, but there was a
still greater danger. The crowds in the two saloons would be starting
up the street for Haines before long. Their silence told him that.

A clatter of hoofs came behind him. He did not turn his head, but his
hand dropped down to his revolver butt. The fast riding horseman swept
and shot on down the street, leaving a pungent though invisible cloud
of dust behind him. He stopped in front of Rogers's house and darted
up the steps and through the door. Acting upon a premonition, Dan
dismounted a short distance from Rogers's house and ran to the door.
He opened it softly and found himself in a narrow hall dimly lighted
by a smoking lamp. Voices came from the room to his right.

"What d'you mean, Hardy?" the deputy sheriff was saying.

"Hell's startin'!"

"There's a good many kinds of hell. Come out with it, Lee. I ain't no
mind reader."

"They're gettin' ready for the big bust!"

"What big bust?"

"It ain't no use bluffin'. Ain't Silent told you that I'm on the
inside of the game?"

"You fool!" cried Rogers. "Don't use that name!"

Dan slipped a couple of paces down the hall and flattened himself
against the wall just as the door opened. Rogers looked out, drew a
great breath of relief, and went back into the room. Dan resumed his
former position.

"Now talk fast!" said Rogers.

"About time for you to drop that rotten bluff. Why, man, I could even
tell you jest how much you've cost Jim Silent."

Rogers growled: "Tell me what's up."

"The boys are goin' for the jail tonight. They'll get out Haines an'
string him up."

"It's comin' to him. He's played a hard game for a long time."

"An' so have you, Rogers, for a damn long time!"

Rogers swallowed the insult, apparently.

"What can I do?" he asked plaintively. "I'm willin' to give Silent and
his gang a square deal."

"You should of done something while they was only a half-dozen
cowpunchers in town. Now the town's full of riders an' they're all
after blood."

"An' my blood if they don't get Haines!" broke in the deputy sheriff.

Hardy grunted.

"They sure are," he said. "I've heard 'em talk, an' they mean
business. All of 'em. But how'd you answer to Jim Silent, Rogers? If
you let 'em get Haines--well, Haines is Silent's partner an' Jim'll
bust everything wide to get even with you."

"I c'n explain," said Rogers huskily. "I c'n show Silent how I'm
helpless."

Footsteps went up and down the room.

"If they start anything," said Rogers, "I'll mark down the names of
the ringleaders and I'll give 'em hell afterwards. That'll soothe Jim
some."

"You won't know 'em. They'll wear masks."

Dan opened the door and stepped into the room. Rogers started up with
a curse and gripped his revolver.

"I never knew you was so fond of gun play," said Dan. "Maybe that gun
of yours would be catchin' cold if you was to leave it out of the
leather long?"

The sheriff restored his revolver slowly to the holster, glowering.

"An' Rogers won't be needin' you for a minute or two," went on Dan to
Hardy.

They seemed to fear even his voice. The Wells Fargo agent vanished
through the door and clattered down the steps.

"How long you been standin' at that door?" said Rogers, gnawing his
lips.

"Jest for a breathin' space," said Dan.

Rogers squinted his eyes to make up for the dimness of the lamplight.

"By God!" he cried suddenly. "You're Whistlin' Dan Barry!"

He dropped into his chair and passed a trembling hand across his
forehead.

He stammered: "Maybe you've changed your mind an' come back for that
five thousand?"

"No, I've come for a man, not for money."

"A man?"

"I want Lee Haines before the crowd gets him."

"Would you really try to take Haines out?" asked Rogers with a touch
of awe.

"Are there any guards in the jail?"

"Two. Lewis an' Patterson."

"Give me a written order for Haines."

The deputy wavered.

"If I do that I'm done for in this town!"

"Maybe. I want the key for Haines's handcuffs."

"Go over an' put your hoss up in the shed behind the jail," said
Rogers, fighting for time, "an' when you come back I'll have the order
written out an' give it to you with the key."

"Why not come over with me now?"

"I got some other business."

"In five minutes I'll be back," said Dan, and left the house.

Outside he whistled to Satan, and the stallion trotted up to him. He
swung into the saddle and rode to the jail. There was not a guard in
sight. He rode around to the other side of the building to reach the
stable. Still he could not sight one of those shadowy horsemen who
had surrounded the place a few minutes before. Perhaps the crowd had
called in the guards to join the attack.

He put Satan away in the stable and as he led him into a stall he
heard a roar of many voices far away. Then came the crack of half
a dozen revolvers. Dan set his teeth and glanced quickly over the
half-dozen horses in the little shed. He recognized the tall bay of
Lee Haines at once and threw on its back the saddle which hung on a
peg directly behind it. As he drew up the cinch another shout came
from the street, but this time very close.

When he raced around the jail he saw the crowd pouring into the house
of the deputy sheriff. He ran on till he came to the outskirts of the
mob. Every man was masked, but in the excitement no one noticed that
Dan's face was bare. Squirming his way through the press, Dan reached
the deputy's office. It was almost filled. Rogers stood on a chair
trying to argue with the cattlemen.

"No more talk, sheriff," thundered one among the cowpunchers, "we've
had enough of your line of talk. Now we want some action of our own
brand. For the last time: Are you goin' to order Lewis an' Patterson
to give up Haines, or are you goin' to let two good men die fightin'
for a damn lone rider?"

"What about the feller who's goin' to take Lee Haines out of Elkhead?"
cried another.

The crowd yelled with delight.

"Yes, where is he? What about him?"

Rogers, glancing down from his position on the chair, stared into the
brown eyes of Whistling Dan. He stretched out an arm that shook with
excitement.

"That feller there!" he cried, "that one without a mask! Whistlin' Dan
Barry is the man!"




CHAPTER XXIV


THE RESCUE

The throng gave back from Dan, as if from the vicinity of a panther.
Dan faced the circle of scowling faces, smiling gently upon them.

"Look here, Barry," called a voice from the rear of the crowd, "why
do you want to take Haines away? Throw in your cards with us. We need
you."

"If it's fightin' you want," cried a joker, "maybe Lewis an' Patterson
will give us all enough of it at the jail."

"I ain't never huntin' for trouble," said Dan.

"Make your play quick," said another. "We got no time to waste even on
Dan Barry. Speak out, Dan. Here's a lot of good fellers aimin' to take
out Haines an' give him what's due him--no more. Are you with us?"

"I'm not."

"Is that final?"

"It is."

"All right. Tie him up, boys. There ain't no other way!"

"Look out!" shouted a score of voices, for a gun flashed in Dan's
hand.

He aimed at no human target. The bullet shattered the glass lamp into
a thousand shivering and tinkling splinters. Thick darkness blotted
the room. Instantly thereafter a blow, a groan, and the fall of a
body; then a confused clamour.

"He's here!"

"Give up that gun, damn you!"

"You got the wrong man!"

"I'm Bill Flynn!"

"Guard the door!"

"Lights, for God's sake!"

"Help!"

A slender figure leaped up against the window and was dimly outlined
by the starlight outside. There was a crash of falling glass, and as
two or three guns exploded the figure leaped down outside the house.

"Follow him!"

"Who was that?"

"Get a light! Who's got a match?"

Half the men rushed out of the room to pursue that fleeing figure. The
other half remained to see what had happened. It seemed impossible
that Whistling Dan had escaped from their midst. Half a dozen sulphur
matches spurted little jets of blue flame and discovered four men
lying prone on the floor, most of them with the wind trampled from
their bodies, but otherwise unhurt. One of them was the sheriff.

He lay with his shoulders propped against the wall. His mouth was a
mass of blood.

"Who got you, Rogers?"

"Where's Barry?"

"The jail, the jail!" groaned Rogers. "Barry has gone for the jail!"

Revolvers rattled outside.

"He's gone for Haines," screamed the deputy. "Go get him, boys!"

"How can he get Haines? He ain't got the keys."

"He has, you fools! When he shot the lights out he jumped for me and
knocked me off the chair. Then he went through my pockets and got the
keys. Get on your way! Quick!"

The lynchers, yelling with rage, were already stamping from the room.

With the jangling bunch of keys in one hand and his revolver in the
other, Dan started full speed for the jail as soon as he leaped down
from the window. By the time he had covered half the intervening
distance the first pursuers burst out of Rogers's house and opened
fire after the shadowy fugitive. He whirled and fired three shots high
in the air. No matter how impetuous, those warning shots would make
the mob approach the jail with some caution.

On the door of the jail he beat furiously with the bunch of keys.

"What's up? Who's there?" cried a voice within.

"Message from Rogers. Hell's started! He's sent me with the keys!"

The door jerked open and a tall man, with a rifle slung across one
arm, blocked the entrance.

"What's the message?" he asked.

"This!" said Dan, and drove his fist squarely into the other's face.

He fell without a cry and floundered on the floor, gasping. Dan picked
him up and shoved him through the door, bolting it behind him.
A narrow hall opened before him and ran the length of the small
building. He glanced into the room on one side. It was the kitchen and
eating-room in one. He rushed into the one on the other side. Two men
were there. One was Haines, sitting with his hands manacled. The other
was the second guard, who ran for Dan, whipping his rifle to his
shoulder. As flame spurted from the mouth of the gun, Dan dived at the
man's knees and brought him to the floor with a crash. He rose quickly
and leaned over the fallen man, who lay without moving, his arms
spread wide. He had struck on his forehead when he dropped. He was
stunned for the moment, but not seriously hurt. Dan ran to Haines, who
stood with his hands high above his head. Far away was the shout of
the coming crowd.

"Shoot and be damned!" said Haines sullenly.

For answer Dan jerked down the hands of the lone rider and commenced
to try the keys on the handcuffs. There were four keys. The fourth
turned the lock. Haines shouted as his hands fell free.

"After me!" cried Dan, and raced for the stable.

As they swung into their saddles outside the shed, the lynchers raced
their horses around the jail.

"Straightaway!" called Dan. "Through the cottonwoods and down the
lane. After me. Satan!"

The stallion leaped into a full gallop, heading straight for a tall
group of cottonwoods beyond which was a lane fenced in with barbed
wire. Half a dozen of the pursuers were in a position to cut them off,
and now rushed for the cottonwoods, yelling to their comrades to join
them. A score of lights flashed like giant fireflies as the lynchers
opened fire.

"They've blocked the way!" groaned Haines.

Three men had brought their horses to a sliding stop in front of the
cottonwoods and their revolvers cracked straight in the faces of Dan
and Haines. There was no other way for escape. Dan raised his revolver
and fired twice, aiming low. Two of the horses reared and pitched
to the ground. The third rider had a rifle at his shoulder. He was
holding his fire until he had drawn a careful bead. Now his gun
spurted and Dan bowed far over his saddle as if he had been struck
from behind.

Before the rifleman could fire again Black Bart leaped high in the
air. His teeth closed on the shoulder of the lyncher and the man
catapulted from his saddle to the ground. With his yell in their ears,
Dan and Haines galloped through the cottonwoods, and swept down the
lane.




CHAPTER XXV


THE LONG RIDE

A cheer of triumph came from the lynchers. In fifty yards the
fugitives learned the reason, for they glimpsed a high set of bars
blocking the lane. Dan pulled back beside Haines.

"Can the bay make it?" he called.

"No. I'm done for."

For answer Dan caught the bridle of Lee's horse close to the bit. They
were almost to the bars. A dark shadow slid up and over them. It was
Black Bart, with his head turned to look back even as he jumped, as if
he were setting an example which he bid them follow. Appallingly high
the bars rose directly in front of them.

"Now!" called Dan to the tall bay, and jerked up on the bit.

Satan rose like a swallow to the leap. The bay followed in gallant
imitation. For an instant they hung poised in air. Then Satan pitched
to the ground, landing safely and lightly on four cat-like feet. A
click and a rattle behind them--the bay was also over, but his hind
hoofs had knocked down the top bar. He staggered, reeled far to
one side, but recovering, swept on after Satan and Dan. A yell of
disappointment rang far behind.

Glancing back Haines saw the foremost of the pursuers try to imitate
the feat of the fugitives, but even with the top bar down he failed.
Man and horse pitched to the ground.

For almost a mile the lane held straight on, and beyond stretched
the open country. They were in that free sweep of hills before the
pursuers remounted beyond the bars. In daytime a mile would have been
a small handicap, but with the night and the hills to cover their
flight, and with such mounts as Satan and the tall bay, they were
safe. In half an hour all sound of them died out, and Haines,
following Dan's example, slowed his horse to an easy gallop.

The long rider was puzzled by his companion's horsemanship, for Dan
rode leaning far to the right of his saddle, with his head bowed.
Several times Haines was on the verge of speaking, but he refrained.
He commenced to sing in the exultation of freedom. An hour before he
had been in the "rat-trap" with a circle of lynchers around him, and
only two terror-stricken guards to save him from the most horrible of
deaths. Then came Fate and tore him away and gave him to the liberty
of the boundless hills. Fate in the person of this slender, sombre
man. He stared at Dan with awe.

At the top of a hill his companion drew rein, reeling in the saddle
with the suddenness of the halt. However, in such a horseman, this
could not be. It must be merely a freak feature of his riding.

"Move," said Dan, his breath coming in pants. "Line out and get to
her."

"To who?" said Haines, utterly bewildered.

"Delilah!"

"What?"

"Damn you, she's waitin' for you."

"In the name of God, Barry, why do you talk like this after you've
saved me from hell?"

He stretched out his hand eagerly, but Dan reined Satan back.

"Keep your hand. I hate you worse'n hell. There ain't room enough in
the world for us both. If you want to thank me do it by keepin' out of
my path. Because the next time we meet you're goin' to die, Haines.
It's writ in a book. Now feed your hoss the spur and run for Kate
Cumberland. But remember--I'm goin' to get you again if I can."

"Kate--" began Haines. "She sent you for me?"

Only the yellow blazing eyes made answer and the wail of a coyote far
away on the shadowy hill.

"Kate!" cried Haines again, but now there was a world of new meaning
in his voice. He swung his horse and spurred down the slope.

At the next hill-crest he turned in the saddle, saw the motionless
rider still outlined against the sky, and brought the bay to a halt.
He was greatly troubled. For a reason mysterious and far beyond the
horizon of his knowledge, Dan was surrendering Kate Cumberland to him.

"He's doing it while he still loves her," muttered Haines, "and am I
cur enough to take her from him after he has saved me from God knows
what?"

He turned his horse to ride back, but at that moment he caught
the weird, the unearthly note of Dan's whistling. There was both
melancholy and gladness in it. The storm wind running on the hills and
exulting in the blind terror of the night had such a song as this to
sing.

"If he was a man," Haines argued briefly with himself, "I'd do it. But
he isn't a man. He's a devil. He has no more heart than the wolf which
owns him as master. Shall I give a girl like Kate Cumberland to that
wild panther? She's mine--all mine!"

Once more he turned his horse and this time galloped steadily on into
the night.

When Haines dropped out of sight, Dan's whistling stopped. He looked
up to the pitiless glitter of the stars. He looked down to the sombre
sweep of black hills. The wind was like a voice saying over and over
again: "Failure." Everything was lost.

He slipped from the saddle and took off his coat. From his left
shoulder the blood welled slowly, steadily. He tore a strip from his
shirt and attempted to make a bandage, but he could not manage it with
one hand.

The world thronged with hostile forces eager to hunt him to the death.
He needed all his strength, and now that was ebbing from a wound which
a child could have staunched for him, but where could he find even a
friendly child? Truly all was lost! The satyr or the black panther
once had less need of man's help than had Dan, but now he was hurt in
body and soul. That matchless co-ordination of eye with hand and foot
was gone. He saw Kate smiling into the eyes of Haines; he imagined
Bill Kilduff sitting on the back of Satan, controlling all that
glorious force and speed; he saw Hal Purvis fighting venomously with
Bart for the mastery which eventually must belong to the man.

He turned to the wild pair. Vaguely they sensed a danger threatening
their master, and their eyes mourned for his hurt. He buried his face
on the strong, smooth shoulder of Satan, and groaned. There came the
answering whinny and the hot breath of the horse against the side of
his face. There was the whine of Black Bart behind him, then the rough
tongue of the wolf touched the dripping fingers. Then he felt a hot
gust of the wolf's breath against his hand.

Too late he realized what that meant. He whirled with a cry of
command, but the snarl of Black Bart cut it short. The wolf stood
bristling, trembling with eagerness for the kill, his great white
fangs gleaming, his snarl shrill and guttural with the frenzy of his
desire, for he had tasted blood. Dan understood as he stared into the
yellow green fury of the wolf's eyes, yet he felt no fear, only a
glory in the fierce, silent conflict. He could not move the fingers of
his left hand, but those of his right curved, stiffened. He desired
nothing more in the world than the contact with that great, bristling
black body, to leap aside from those ominous teeth, to set his fingers
in the wolf's throat. Reason might have told him the folly of such a
strife, but all that remained in his mind was the love of combat--a
blind passion. His eyes glowed like those of the wolf, yellow fire
against the green. Black Bart crouched still lower, gathering himself
for the spring, but he was held by the man's yellow gleaming eyes.
They invited the battle. Fear set its icy hand on the soul of the
wolf.

The man seemed to tower up thrice his normal height. His voice rang,
harsh, sudden, unlike the utterance of man or beast: "_Down!_"

Fear conquered Black Bart. The fire died from his eyes. His body sank
as if from exhaustion. He crawled on his belly to the feet of his
master and whined an unutterable submission.

And then that hand, warm and wet with the thing whose taste set the
wolf's heart on fire with the lust to kill, was thrust against his
nose. He leaped back with bared teeth, growling horribly. The eyes
commanded him back, commanded him relentlessly. He howled dismally to
the senseless stars, yet he came; and once more that hand was thrust
against his nose. He licked the fingers.

That blood-lust came hotter than before, but his fear was greater.
He licked the strange hand again, whining. Then the master kneeled.
Another hand, clean, and free from that horrible warm, wet sign of
death, fell upon his shaggy back. The voice which he knew of old came
to him, blew away the red mist from his soul, comforted him.

"Poor Bart!" said the voice, and the hand went slowly over his head.
"It weren't your fault."

The stallion whinnied softly. A deep growl formed in the throat of the
wolf, a mighty effort at speech. And now, like a gleam of light in a
dark room, Dan remembered the house of Buck Daniels. There, at least,
they could not refuse him aid. He drew on his coat, though the
effort set him sweating with agony, got his foot in the stirrup with
difficulty, and dragged himself to the saddle. Satan started at a
swift gallop.

"Faster, Satan! Faster, partner!"

What a response! The strong body settled a little closer to the
earth as the stride increased. The rhythm of the pace grew quicker,
smoother. There was no adequate phrase to describe the matchless
motion. And in front--always just a little in front with the plunging
forefeet of the horse seeming to threaten him at every stride, ran
Black Bart with his head turned as if he were the guard and guide of
the fugitive.

Dan called and Black Bart yelped in answer. Satan tossed up his
head and neighed as he raced along. The two replies were like human
assurances that there was still a fighting chance.

The steady loss of blood was telling rapidly now. He clutched the
pommel, set his teeth, and felt oblivion settle slowly and surely upon
him. As his senses left him he noted the black outlines of the next
high range of hills, a full ten miles away.

He only knew the pace of Satan never slackened. There seemed no effort
in it. He was like one of those fabled horses, the offspring of the
wind, and like the wind, tireless, eternal of motion.

A longer oblivion fell upon Dan. As he roused from it he found
himself slipping in the saddle. He struggled desperately to grasp the
saddlehorn and managed to draw himself up again; but the warning was
sufficient to make him hunt about for some means of making himself
more secure in the saddle. It was a difficult task to do anything
with only one hand, but he managed to tie his left arm to the
bucking-strap. If the end came, at least he was sure to die in the
saddle. Vaguely he was aware as he looked around that the black hills
were no longer in the distance. He was among them.

On went Satan. His breath was coming more and more laboured. It seemed
to Dan's dim consciousness that some of the spring was gone from that
glorious stride which swept on and on with the slightest undulation,
like a swallow skimming before the wind; but so long as strength
remained he knew that Satan would never falter in his pace. As the
delirium swept once more shadow-like on his brain, he allowed himself
to fall forward, and wound his fingers as closely as possible in the
thick mane. His left arm jerked horribly against the bonds. Black
night swallowed him once more.

Only his invincible heart kept Satan going throughout that last
stretch. His ears lay flat on his neck, lifting only when the master
muttered and raved in his fever. Foam flew back against his throat
and breast. His breath came shorter, harder, with a rasp; but the
gibbering voice of his rider urged him on, faster, and faster. They
topped a small hill, and a little to the left and a mile away, rose
a group of cottonwoods, and Dan, recovering consciousness, knew the
house of Buck. He also knew that his last moment of consciousness was
come. Surges of sleepy weakness swept over his brain. He could never
guide Satan to the house.

"Bart!" he called feebly.

The wolf whining, dropped back beside him. Dan pointed his right arm
straight ahead. Black Bart leaped high into the air and his shrill
yelp told that he had seen the cottonwoods and the house.

Dan summoned the last of his power and threw the reins over the head
of Satan.

"Take us in, Bart," he said, and twisting his fingers into Satan's
mane fell across the saddlehorn.

Satan, understanding the throwing of the reins as an order to halt,
came to a sharp stop, and the body of the senseless rider sagged to
one side. Black Bart caught the reins. They were bitter and salt with
blood of the master.

He tugged hard. Satan whinnied his doubt, and the growl of Black Bart
answered, half a threat. In a moment more they were picking their way
through the brush towards the house of Buck Daniels.

Satan was far gone with exhaustion. His head drooped; his legs
sprawled with every step; his eyes were glazed. Yet he staggered on
with the great black wolf pulling at the reins. There was the salt
taste of blood in the mouth of Black Bart; so he stalked on, saliva
dripping from his mouth, and his eyes glazed with the lust to kill.
His furious snarling was the threat which urged on the stallion.




CHAPTER XXVI


BLACK BART TURNS NURSE

It was old Mrs. Daniels who woke first at the sound of scratching and
growling. She roused her husband and son, and all three went to the
door, Buck in the lead with his six-gun in his hand. At sight of the
wolf he started back and raised the gun, but Black Bart fawned about
his feet.

"Don't shoot--it's a dog, an' there's his master!" cried Sam. "By the
Lord, they's a dead man tied on that there hoss!"

Dan lay on Satan, half fallen from the saddle, with his head hanging
far down, only sustained by the strength of the rein. The stallion,
wholly spent, stood with his legs braced, his head low, and his breath
coming in great gasps. The family ran to the rescue. Sam cut the rein
and Buck lowered the limp body in his arms.

"Buck, is he dead?" whispered Mrs. Daniels.

"I don't feel no heart beat," said Buck. "Help me fetch him into the
house, Dad!"

"Look out for the hoss!" cried Sam.

Buck started back with his burden just in time, for Satan,
surrendering to his exhaustion, pitched to the ground, and lay with
sprawling legs like a spent dog rather than a horse.

"Let the hoss be," said Buck. "Help me with the man. He's hurt bad."

Mrs. Daniels ran ahead and lighted a lamp. They laid the body
carefully upon a bed. It made a ghastly sight, the bloodless face with
the black hair fallen wildly across the forehead, the mouth loosely
open, and the lips black with dust.

"Dad!" said Buck. "I think I've seen this feller. God knows if he's
livin' or dead."

He dropped to his knees and pressed his ear over Dan's heart.

"I can't feel no motion. Ma, get that hand mirror--"

She had it already and now held it close to the lips of the wounded
man. When she drew it away their three heads drew close together.

"They's a mist on it! He's livin'!" cried Buck.

"It ain't nothing," said Sam. "The glass ain't quite clear, that's
all."

Mrs. Daniels removed the last doubt by running her finger across the
surface of the glass. It left an unmistakable mark.

They wasted no moment then. They brought hot and cold water, washed
out his wound, cleansed away the blood; and while Mrs. Daniels and her
husband fixed the bandage, Buck pounded and rubbed the limp body to
restore the circulation. In a few minutes his efforts were rewarded by
a great sigh from Dan.

He shouted in triumph, and then: "By God, it's Whistlin' Dan Barry."

"It is!" said Sam. "Buck, they's been devils workin' tonight. It sure
took more'n one man to nail him this way."

They fell to work frantically. There was a perceptible pulse, the
breathing was faint but steady, and a touch of colour came in the
face.

"His arm will be all right in a few days," said Mrs. Daniels, "but he
may fall into a fever. He's turnin' his head from side to side and
talkin'. What's he sayin', Buck?"

"He's sayin': 'Faster, Satan.'"

"That's the hoss," interpreted Sam.

"'Hold us straight, Bart!' That's what he's sayin' now."

"That's the wolf."

"'An' it's all for Delilah!' Who's Delilah, Dad?"

"Maybe it's some feller Dan knows."

"Some feller?" repeated Mrs. Daniels with scorn. "It's some worthless
girl who got Whistlin' Dan into this trouble."

Dan's eyes opened but there was no understanding in them.

"Haines, I hate you worse'n hell!"

"It's Lee Haines who done this!" cried Sam.

"If it is, I'll cut out his heart!"

"It can't be Haines," broke in Mrs. Daniels. "Old man Perkins, didn't
he tell us that Haines was the man that Whistlin' Dan Barry had
brought down into Elkhead? How could Haines do this shootin' while he
was in jail?"

"Ma," said Sam, "you watch Whistlin' Dan. Buck an' me'll take care of
the hoss--that black stallion. He's pretty near all gone, but he's
worth savin'. What I don't see is how he found his way to us. It's
certain Dan didn't guide him all the way."

"How does the wind find its way?" said Buck. "It was the wolf that
brought Dan here, but standin' here talkin' won't tell us how. Let's
go out an' fix up Satan."

It was by no means an easy task. As they approached the horse he
heaved himself up, snorting, and stood with legs braced, and pendant
head. Even his eyes were glazed with exhaustion, but behind them
it was easy to guess the dauntless anger which raged against these
intruders. Yet he would have been helpless against them. It was Black
Bart who interfered at this point. He stood before them, his hair
bristling and his teeth bared.

Sam suggested: "Leave the door of the house open an' let him hear
Whistlin' Dan's voice."

It was done. At once the delirious voice of Dan stole out to them
faintly. The wolf turned his head to Satan with a plaintive whine, as
if asking why the stallion remained there when that voice was audible.
Then he raced for the open door and disappeared into the house.

"Hurry in, Buck!" called Sam. "Maybe the wolf'll scare Ma!"

They ran inside and found Black Bart on the bed straddling the body of
Whistling Dan, and growling at poor Mrs. Daniels, who crouched in a
corner of the room. It required patient work before he was convinced
that they actually meant no harm to his master.

"What's the reason of it?" queried Sam helplessly. "The damn wolf let
us take Dan off the hoss without makin' any fuss."

"Sure he did," assented Buck, "but he ain't sure of me yet, an' every
time he comes near me he sends the cold chills up my back."

Having decided that he might safely trust them to touch Dan's body,
the great wolf went the round and sniffed them carefully, his hair
bristling and the forbidding growl lingering in his throat. In the end
he apparently decided that they might be tolerated, though he must
keep an eye upon their actions. So he sat down beside the bed and
followed with an anxious eye every movement of Mrs. Daniels. The men
went back to the stallion. He still stood with legs braced far apart,
and head hanging low. Another mile of that long race and he would have
dropped dead beneath his rider.

Nevertheless at the coming of the strangers he reared up his head a
little and tried to run away. Buck caught the dangling reins near
the bit. Satan attempted to strike out with his forehoof. It was a
movement as clumsy and slow as the blow of a child, and Buck easily
avoided it. Realizing his helplessness Satan whinnied a heart-breaking
appeal for help to his unfailing friend, Black Bart. The wail of the
wolf answered dolefully from the house.

"Good Lord," groaned Buck. "Now we'll have that black devil on our
hands again."

"No, we won't," chuckled Sam, "the wolf won't leave Dan. Come on
along, old hoss."

Nevertheless it required hard labour to urge and drag the stallion
to the stable. At the end of that time they had the saddle off and a
manger full of fodder before him. They went back to the house with the
impression of having done a day's work.

"Which it shows the fool nature of a hoss," moralized Sam. "That
stallion would be willin' to lay right down and die for the man
that's jest rode him up to the front door of death, but he wishes
everlastingly that he had the strength to kick the daylight out of you
an' me that's been tryin' to take care of him. You jest write this
down inside your brain, Buck: a hoss is like a woman. They jest
nacherally ain't no reason in 'em!"

They found Dan in a heavy sleep, his breath coming irregularly. Mrs.
Daniels stated that it was the fever which she had feared and she
offered to sit up with the sick man through the rest of that night.
Buck lifted her from the chair and took her place beside the bed.

"No one but me is goin' to take care of Whistlin' Dan," he stated.

So the vigil began, with Buck watching Dan, and Black Bart alert,
suspicious, ready at the first wrong move to leap at the throat of
Buck.




CHAPTER XXVII


NOBODY LAUGHS

That night the power which had sent Dan into Elkhead, Jim Silent,
stood his turn at watch in the narrow canyon below the old Salton
place. In the house above him sat Terry Jordan, Rhinehart, and Hal
Purvis playing poker, while Bill Kilduff drew a drowsy series of airs
from his mouth-organ. His music was getting on the nerves of the other
three, particularly Jordan and Rhinehart, for Purvis was winning
steadily.

"Let up!" broke out Jordan at last, pounding on the table with his
fist. "Your damn tunes are gettin' my goat. Nobody can think while
you're hittin' it up like that. This ain't no prayer meetin', Bill."

For answer Kilduff removed the mouth-organ to take a deep breath,
blinked his small eyes, and began again in a still higher key.

"Go slow, Terry," advised Rhinehart in a soft tone. "Kilduff ain't
feelin' none too well tonight."

"What's the matter with him?" growled the scar-faced man, none too
anxious to start an open quarrel with the formidable Kilduff.

Rhinehart jerked his thumb over his shoulder.

"The gal in there. He don't like the game the chief has been workin'
with her."

"Neither do I," said Purvis, "but I'd do worse than the chief done to
get Lee Haines back."

"Get Haines back?" said Kilduff, his voice ominously deep. "There
ain't no chance of that. If there was I wouldn't have no kick against
the chief for what he's done to Kate."

"Maybe there's _some_ chance," suggested Rhinehart.

"Chance, hell!" cried Kilduff. "One man agin a whole town full? I say
all that Jim has done is to get Whistlin' Dan plugged full of lead."

"Well," said Purvis, "if that's done, ain't the game worth while?"

The rest of the men chuckled and even Kilduff smiled.

"Old Joe Cumberland is sure takin' it hard," said "Calamity"
Rhinehart. "All day he's been lightin' into the girl."

"The funny part," mused Purvis, "is that the old boy really means it.
I think he'd of sawed off his right hand to keep her from goin' to
Whistlin' Dan."

"An' her sittin' white-faced an' starin' at nothin' an' tryin' to
comfort _him!_" rumbled Kilduff, standing up under the stress of his
unwonted emotion. "My God, she was apologizin' for what she done, an'
tryin' to cheer him up, an' all the time her heart was bustin'."

He pulled out a violently coloured bandana and wiped his forehead.

"When we all get down to hell," he said, "they'll be quite a little
talkin' done about this play of Jim's--you c'n lay to that."

"Who's that singin' down the canyon?" asked Jordan. "It sounds
like--"

He would not finish his sentence as if he feared to prove a false
prophet. They rose as one man and stared stupidly at one another.

"Haines!" broke out Rhinehart at last.

"It ain't no ways possible!" said Kilduff. "And yet--by God, it is!"

They rushed for the door and made out two figures approaching, one on
horseback, and the other on foot.

"Haines!" called Purvis, his shrill voice rising to a squeak with his
excitement.

"Here I am!" rang back the mellow tones of the big lone rider, and in
a moment he and Jim Silent entered the room.

Glad faces surrounded him. There was infinite wringing of his hand and
much pounding on the back. Kilduff and Rhinehart pushed him back into
a chair. Jordan ran for a flask of whisky, but Haines pushed the
bottle away.

"I don't want anything on my breath," he said, "because I have to talk
to a woman. Where's Kate?"

The men glanced at each other uneasily.

"She's here, all right," said Silent hastily. "Now tell us how you got
away."

"Afterwards," said Haines. "But first Kate."

"What's your hurry to see her?" said Kilduff.

Haines laughed exultantly.

"You're jealous, Bill! Why, man, she sent for me! Sent Whistling Dan
himself for me."

"Maybe she did," said Kilduff, "but that ain't no partic'lar sign I'm
jealous. Tell us about the row in Elkhead."

"That's it," said Jordan. "We can't wait, Lee."

"Just one word explains it," said Haines. "Barry!"

"What did he do?" This from every throat at once.

"Broke into the jail with all Elkhead at his heels flashing their
six-guns--knocked down the two guards--unlocked my bracelets (God
knows where he got the key!)--shoved me onto the bay--drove away with
me--shot down two men while his wolf pulled down a third--made my
horse jump a set of bars as high as my head--and here I am!"

There was a general loosening of bandanas. The eyes of Jim Silent
gleamed.

"And all Elkhead knows that he's the man who took you out of jail?" he
asked eagerly.

"Right. He's put his mark on them," responded Haines, "but the girl,
Jim!"

"By God!" said Silent. "I've got him! The whole world is agin him--the
law an' the outlaws. He's done for!"

He stopped short.

"Unless you're feelin' uncommon grateful to him for what he done for
you, Lee?"

"He told me he hated me like hell," said Haines. "I'm grateful to him
as I'd be to a mountain lion that happened to do me a good turn. Now
for Kate!"

"Let him see her," said Silent. "That's the quickest way. Call her
out, Haines. We'll take a little walk while you're with her."

The moment they were gone Haines rushed to the door and knocked
loudly. It was opened at once and Kate stood before him. She winced at
sight of him.

"It's I, Kate!" he cried joyously. "I've come back from the dead."

She stepped from the room and closed the door behind her.

"What of Dan? Tell me! Was--was he hurt?"

"Dan?" he repeated with an impatient smile. "No, he isn't hurt. He
pulled me through--got me out of jail and safe into the country. He
had to drop two or three of the boys to do it."

Her head fell back a little and in the dim light, for the first time,
he saw her face with some degree of clearness, and started at its
pallor.

"What's the matter, Kate--dear?" he said anxiously.

"What of Dan?" she asked faintly.

"I don't know. He's outlawed. He's done for. The whole range will be
against him. But why are you so worried about him, Kate?--when he told
me that you loved me--"

She straightened.

"Love? _You?_"

His face lengthened almost ludicrously.

"But why--Dan came for me--he said you sent him--he--" he broke down,
stammering, utterly confused.

"This is why I sent him!" she answered, and throwing open the door
gestured to him to enter.

He followed her and saw the lean figure of old Joe Cumberland lying on
a blanket close to the wall.

"That's why!" she whispered.

"How does he come here?"

"Ask the devil in his human form! Ask your friend, Jim Silent!"

He walked into the outer room with his head low. He found the others
already returned. Their carefully controlled grins spoke volumes.

"Where's Silent?" he asked heavily.

"He's gone," said Jordan.

Hal Purvis took Haines to one side.

"Take a brace," he urged.

"She hates me, Hal," said the big fellow sadly. "For God's sake, was
there no other way of getting me out?"

"Not one! Pull yourself together, Lee. There ain't no one for you to
hold a spite agin. Would you rather be back in Elkhead dangling from
the end of a rope?"

"It seems to have been a sort of--joke," said Haines.

"Exactly. But at that sort of a joke nobody laughs!"

"And Whistling Dan Barry?"

"He's done for. We're all agin him, an' now even the rangers will
help us hunt him down. Think it over careful, Haines. You're agin him
because you want the girl. I want that damned wolf of his, Black Bart.
Kilduff would rather get into the saddle of Satan than ride to heaven.
An' Jim Silent won't never rest till he sees Dan lyin' on the ground
with a bullet through his heart. Here's four of us. Each of us want
something that belongs to him, from his life to his dog. Haines, I'm
askin' you man to man, was there any one ever born who could get away
from four men like us?"




CHAPTER XXVIII


WHISTLING DAN, DESPERADO

It was an urgent business which sent Silent galloping over the hills
before dawn. When the first light came he was close to the place
of Gus Morris. He slowed his horse to a trot, but after a careful
reconnoitring, seeing no one stirring around the sheriff's house, he
drew closer and commenced to whistle a range song, broken here and
there with a significant phrase which sounded like a signal. Finally a
cloth was waved from a window, and Silent, content, turned his back on
the house, and rode away at a walk.

Within half an hour the pounding of a horse approached from behind.
The plump sheriff came to a halt beside him, jouncing in the saddle
with the suddenness of the stop.

"What's up?" he called eagerly.

"Whistlin' Dan."

"What's new about him? I know they're talkin' about that play he made
agin Haines. They's some says he's a faster man than you, Jim!"

"They say too damned much!" snarled Silent. "This is what's new.
Whistlin' Dan Barry--no less--has busted open the jail at Elkhead an'
set Lee Haines free."

The sheriff could not speak.

"I fixed it, Gus. I staged the whole little game."

"_You_ fixed it with Whistlin' Dan?"

"Don't ask me how I worked it. The pint is that he did the job. He got
into the jail while the lynchers was guardin' it, gettin' ready for a
rush. They opened fire. It was after dark last night. Haines an' Dan
made a rush for it from the stable on their hosses. They was lynchers
everywhere. Haines didn't have no gun. Dan wouldn't trust him with
one. He did the shootin' himself. He dropped two of them with two
shots. His devil of a wolf-dog brung down another."

"Shootin' at night?"

"Shootin' at night," nodded Silent. "An" now, Gus, they's only one
thing left to complete my little game--an' that's to get Whistlin' Dan
Barry proclaimed an outlaw an' put a price on his head, savvy?"

"Why d'you hate him so?" asked Morris curiously.

"Morris, why d'you hate smallpox?"

"Because a man's got no chance fightin' agin it."

"Gus, that's why I hate Whistlin' Dan, but I ain't here to argue. I
want you to get Dan proclaimed an outlaw."

The sheriff scowled and bit his lip.

"I can't do it, Jim."

"Why the hell can't you?"

"Don't go jumpin' down my throat. It ain't human to double cross
nobody the way you're double crossin' that kid. He's clean. He fights
square. He's jest done you a good turn. I can't do it, Jim."

There was an ominous silence.

"Gus," said the outlaw, "how many thousand have I given you?"

The sheriff winced.

"I dunno," he said, "a good many, Jim."

"An' now you're goin' to lay down on me?"

Another pause.

"People are gettin' pretty excited nowadays," went on Silent
carelessly. "Maybe they'd get a lot more excited if they was to know
jest how much I've paid you, Gus."

The sheriff struck his forehead with a pudgy hand.

"When a man's sold his soul to the devil they ain't no way of buyin'
it back."

"When you're all waked up," said Silent soothingly, "they ain't no
more reasonable man than you, Gus. But sometimes you get to seein'
things cross-eyed. Here's my game. What do you think they'd do in
Elkhead if a letter came for Dan Barry along about now?"

"The boys must be pretty hot," said the sheriff. "I suppose the
letter'd be opened."

"It would," said the outlaw. "You're sure a clever feller, Gus. You
c'n see a white hoss in the sunlight. Now what d'you suppose they'd
think if they opened a letter addressed to Dan Barry and read
something like this:

"'Dear Dan: You made great play for L.H. None of us is going to
forget it. Maybe the thing for you to do is to lay low for a while.
Then join us any time you want to. We all think nobody could of worked
that stunt any smoother than you done. The rest of the boys say that
two thousand ain't enough for the work you've done. They vote that you
get an extra thousand for it. I'm agreeable about that, and when you
get short of cash just drop up and see us--you know where.

"'That's a great bluff you've made about being on my trail. Keep it
up. It'll fool everybody for a while. They'll think, maybe, that what
you did for L.H. was because he was your personal friend. They won't
suspect that you're now one of us.                   Adios,
                                                      "'J.S.'"

Silent waited for the effect of this missive to show in Morris's face.

"Supposin' they was to read a letter like that, Gus. D'you think maybe
it'd sort of peeve them?"

"He'd be outlawed inside of two days!"

"Right. Here's the letter. An' you're goin' to see that it's delivered
in Elkhead, Morris."

The sheriff looked sombrely on the little square of white.

"I sort of think," he said at last, "that this here's the death
warrant for Whistlin' Dan Barry."

"So do I," grinned Silent, considerably thirsty for action. "That's
your chance to make one of your rarin', tarin' speeches. Then you hop
into the telegraph office an' send a wire to the Governor askin' that
a price be put on the head of the bloodthirsty desperado, Dan Barry,
commonly known as Whistlin' Dan."

"It's like something out of a book," said the sheriff slowly. "It's
like some damned horror story."

"The minute you get the reply to that telegram swear in forty deputies
and announce that they's a price on Barry's head. So long, Gus. This
little play'll make the boys figger you're the most efficient sheriff
that never pulled a gun."

He turned his horse, laughing loudly, and the sheriff, with that
laughter in his ears, rode back towards his hotel with a downward
head.

       *       *       *       *       *

All day at the Daniels's house the fever grew perceptibly, and that
night the family held a long consultation.

"They's got to be somethin' done," said Buck. "I'm goin' to ride into
town tomorrow an' get ahold of Doc Geary."

"There ain't no use of gettin' that fraud Geary," said Mrs. Daniels
scornfully. "I think that if the boy c'n be saved I c'n do it as well
as that doctor. But there ain't no doctor c'n help him. The trouble
with Dan ain't his wound--it's his mind that's keepin' him low."

"His mind?" queried old Sam.

"Listen to him now. What's all that talkin' about Delilah?"

"If it ain't Delilah it's Kate," said Buck. "Always one of the two
he's talkin' about. An' when he talks of them his fever gets worse.
Who's Delilah, an' who's Kate?"

"They's one an' the same person," said Mrs. Daniels. "It do beat all
how blind men are!"

"Are we now?" said her husband with some heat. "An' what good would it
do even if we knowed that they was the same?"

"Because if we could locate the girl they's a big chance she'd bring
him back to reason. She'd make his brain quiet, an' then his body'll
take care of itself, savvy?"

"But they's a hundred Kates in the range," said Sam. "Has he said her
last name, Buck, or has he given you any way of findin' out where she
lives?"

"There ain't no way," brooded Buck, "except that when he talks about
her sometimes he speaks of Lee Haines like he wanted to kill him.
Sometimes he's dreamin' of havin' Lee by the throat. D'you honest
think that havin' the girl here would do any good, ma?"

"Of course it would," she answered. "He's in love, that poor boy is,
an' love is worse than bullets for some men. I don't mean you or Sam.
Lord knows you wouldn't bother yourselves none about a woman."

Her eyes challenged them.

"He talks about Lee havin' the girl?" asked Sam.

"He sure does," said Buck, "which shows that he's jest ravin'. How
could Lee have the girl, him bein' in jail at Elkhead?"

"But maybe Lee had her before Whistlin' Dan got him at Morris's place.
Maybe she's up to Silent's camp now."

"A girl in Jim Silent's camp?" repeated Buck scornfully. "Jim'd as
soon have a ton of lead hangin' on his shoulders."

"Would he though?" broke in Mrs. Daniels. "You're considerable young,
Buck, to be sayin' what men'll do where they's women concerned. Where
is this camp?"

"I dunno," said Buck evasively. "Maybe up in the hills. Maybe at the
old Salton place. If I thought she was there, I'd risk goin' up and
gettin' her--with her leave or without it!"

"Don't be talkin' fool stuff like that," said his mother anxiously.
"You ain't goin' near Jim Silent agin, Buck!"

He shrugged his shoulders, with a scowl, and turned away to go back to
the bedside of Whistling Dan.

In the morning Buck was hardly less haggard than Dan. His mother, with
clasped hands and an anxious face, stood at the foot of the bed,
but her trouble was more for her son than for Dan. Old Sam was out
saddling Buck's horse, for they had decided that the doctor must be
brought from Elkhead at once.

"I don't like to leave him," growled Buck. "I misdoubt what may be
happenin' while I'm gone."

"Don't look at me like that," said his mother. "Why, Buck, a body
would think that if he dies while you're gone you'll accuse your
father an' mother of murder."

"Don't be no minute away from him," urged Buck, "that's all I ask."

"Cure his brain," said his mother monotonously, "an' his body'll take
care of itself. Who's that talkin' with your dad outside?"

Very faintly they caught the sound of voices, and after a moment the
departing clatter of a galloping horse. Old Sam ran into the house
breathless.

"Who was it? What's the matter, pa?" asked his wife, for the old
cowpuncher's face was pale even through his tan.

"Young Seaton was jest here. He an' a hundred other fellers is combin'
the range an' warnin' everyone agin that Dan Barry. The bullet in his
shoulder--he got it while he was breaking jail with Lee Haines. An' he
shot down the hosses of two men an' his dog pulled down a third one."

"Busted jail with Lee Haines!" breathed Buck. "It ain't no ways
nacheral. Which Dan hates Lee Haines!"

"He was bought off by Jim Silent," said old Sam. "They opened a letter
in Elkhead, an' the letter told everything. It was signed "J.S." an'
it thanked Dan for gettin' "L.H." free."

"It's a lie!" said Buck doggedly.

"Buck! Sam!" cried Mrs. Daniels, seeing the two men of her family
glaring at each other with something like hate in their eyes. "Sam,
have you forgot that this lad has eat your food in your house?"

Sam turned as crimson as he had been pale before.

"I forgot," he muttered. "I was scared an' forgot!"

"An' maybe you've forgot that I'd be swingin' on the end of a rope in
Elkhead if it wasn't for Dan Barry?" suggested Buck.

"Buck," said his father huskily, "I'm askin' your pardon. I got sort
of panicky for a minute, that's all. But what are we goin' to do with
him? If he don't get help he'll be a dead man quick. An' you can't go
to Elkhead for the doctor. They'd doctor Dan with six-guns, that's
what they'd do."

"What could of made him do it?" said Mrs. Daniels, wiping a sudden
burst of tears from her eyes.

"Oh, God," said Buck. "How'd I know why he done it? How'd I know why
he turned me loose when he should of took me to Elkhead to be lynched
by the mob there? The girl's the only thing to help him outside of a
doctor. I'm goin' to get the girl."

"Where?"

"I dunno. Maybe I'll try the old Salton place."

"And take her away from Jim Silent?" broke in his father. "You might
jest as well go an' shoot yourse'f before startin'. That'll save your
hoss the long ride, an' it'll bring you to jest the same end."

"Listen!" said Buck, "they's the wolf mournin'!"

"Buck, you're loco!"

"Hush, pa!" whispered Mrs. Daniels.

She caught the hand of her brawny son.

"Buck, I'm no end proud of you, lad. If you die, it's a good death!
Tell me, Buck dear, have you got a plan?"

He ground his big hand across his forehead, scowling.

"I dunno," he said, drawing a long breath. "I jest know that I got to
get the girl. Words don't say what I mean. All I know is that I've got
to go up there an' get that girl, and bring her back so's she can save
Dan, not from the people that's huntin' him, but from himself."

"There ain't no way of changin' you?" said his father.

"Pa," said Mrs. Daniels, "sometimes you're a plumb fool!"

Buck was already in the saddle. He waved farewell, but after he set
his face towards the far-away hills he never turned his head. Behind
him lay the untamed three. Before him, somewhere among those naked,
sunburned hills, was the woman whose love could reclaim the wild.

A dimness came before his eyes. He attempted to curse at this
weakness, but in place of the blasphemy something swelled in his
throat, and a still, small music filled his heart. And when at last
he was able to speak his lips framed a vow like that of the old
crusaders.




CHAPTER XXIX


"WEREWOLF"

Buck's cattle pony broke from the lope into a steady dog-trot. Now and
then Buck's horse tossed his head high and jerked his ears quickly
back and forth as if he were trying to shake off a fly. As a matter of
fact he was bothered by his master's whistling. The only sound which
he was accustomed to hear from the lips of his rider was a grunted
curse now and then. This whistling made the mustang uneasy.

Buck himself did not know what the music meant, but it brought into
his mind a thought of strong living and of glorious death. He had
heard it whistled several times by Dan Barry when the latter lay
delirious. It seemed to Buck, while he whistled this air, that the
spirit of Dan travelled beside him, nerving him to the work which lay
ahead, filling the messenger with his own wild strength.

As Buck dropped into a level tract of country he caught sight of a
rider coming from the opposite direction. As they drew closer the
other man swung his mount far to one side. Buck chuckled softly,
seeing that the other evidently desired to pass without being
recognized. The chuckle died when the stranger changed direction and
rode straight for Buck. The latter pulled his horse to a quick stop
and turned to face the on-comer. He made sure that his six-gun was
loose in the holster, for it was always well to be prepared for the
unusual in these chance meetings in the mountain-desert.

"Hey, Buck!" called the galloping horseman.

The hand of Daniels dropped away from his revolver, for he recognized
the voice of Hal Purvis, who swiftly ranged alongside.

"What's the dope?" asked Buck, producing his tobacco and the
inevitable brown papers.

"Jest lookin' the landscape over an' scoutin' around for news,"
answered Purvis.

"Pick up anything?"

"Yeh. Ran across some tenderfoot squatters jest out of Elkhead."

Buck grunted and lighted his cigarette.

"Which you've been sort of scarce around the outfit lately," went on
Purvis.

"I'm headin' for the bunch now," said Buck.

"D'you bring along that gun of mine I left at your house?"

"Didn't think of it."

"Let's drop back to your house an' get it. Then I'll ride up to the
camp with you."

Buck drew a long puff on his cigarette. He drew a quick mental picture
of Purvis entering the house, finding Dan, and then--

"Sure," he said, "you c'n go back to the house an' ask pa for the gun,
if you want to. I'll keep on for the hills."

"What's your hurry? It ain't more'n three miles back to your house.
You won't lose no time to speak of."

"It ain't time I'm afraid of losin'," said Buck significantly.

"Then what the devil is it? I can't afford to leave that gun."

"All right," said Buck, forcing a grin of derision, "so long, Hal."

Purvis frowned at him with narrowing eyes.

"Spit it out, Buck. What's the matter with me goin' back for that gun?
Ain't I apt to find it?"

"Sure. That's the point. You're apt to find _lots_ of guns. Here's
what I mean, Hal. Some of the cowpunchers are beginnin' to think I'm a
little partial to Jim Silent's crowd. An' they're watchin' my house."

"The hell!"

"You're right. It is. That's one of the reasons I'm beatin' it for the
hills."

He started his horse to a walk. "But of course if you're bound to have
that gun, Hal--"

Purvis grinned mirthlessly, his lean face wrinkling to the eyes, and
he swung his horse in beside Buck.

"Anyway," said Buck, "I'm glad to see you ain't a fool. How's things
at the camp?"

"Rotten. They's a girl up there--"

"A girl?"

"You look sort of pleased. Sure they's a girl. Kate Cumberland, she's
the one. She seen us hold up the train, an' now we don't dare let
her go. She's got enough evidence to hang us all if it came to a
show-down."

"Kate! Delilah."

"What you sayin'?"

"I say it's damn queer that Jim'll let a girl stay at the camp."

"Can't be helped. She's makin' us more miserable than a whole army of
men. We had her in the house for a while, an' then Silent rigged up
the little shack that stands a short ways--"

"I know the one you mean."

"She an' her dad is in that. We have to guard 'em at night. She ain't
had no good word for any of us since she's been up there. Every time
she looks at a feller she makes you feel like you was somethin'
low-down--a snake, or somethin'."

"D'you mean to say none of the boys please her?" asked Buck curiously.
He understood from Dan's delirious ravings that the girl was in love
with Lee Haines and had deserted Barry for the outlaw. "Say, ain't
Haines goodlookin' enough to please her?"

Purvis laughed unpleasantly.

"He'd like to be, but he don't quite fit her idea of a man. We'd all
like to be, for that matter. She's a ravin' beauty, Buck. One of these
blue-eyed, yaller-haired kind, see, with a voice like silk. Speakin'
personal, I'm free to admit she's got me stopped."

Buck drew so hard on the diminishing butt of his cigarette that he
burned his fingers.

"Can't do nothin' with her?" he queried.

"What you grinnin' about?" said Purvis hotly. "D'you think _you'd_
have any better luck with her?"

Buck chuckled.

"The trouble with you fellers," he said complacently, "is that you're
all too damned afraid of a girl. You all treat 'em like they was
queens an' you was their slaves. They like a master."

The thin lips of Purvis curled.

"You're quite a man, ain't you?"

"Man enough to handle any woman that ever walked."

Purvis broke into loud laughter.

"That's what a lot of us thought," he said at last, "but she breaks
all the rules. She's got her heart set on another man, an' she's that
funny sort that don't never love twice. Maybe you'll guess who the man
is?"

Buck frowned thoughtfully to cover his growing excitement.

"Give it up, Buck," advised Purvis. "The feller she loves is Whistlin'
Dan Barry. You wouldn't think no woman would look without shiverin'
at that hell-raiser. But she's goin' on a hunger strike on account of
him. Since yesterday she wouldn't eat none. She says she'll starve
herself to death unless we turn her loose. The hell of it is that she
will. I know it an' so does the rest of the boys."

"Starve herself to death?" said Buck exuberantly. "Wait till I get
hold of her!"

"_You?_"

"Me!"

Purvis viewed him with compassion.

"Me bein' your friend, Buck," he said, "take my tip an' don't try no
fool stunts around that girl. Which she once belongs to Whistlin' Dan
Barry an' therefore she's got the taboo mark on her for any other man.
Everything he's ever owned is different, damned different!"

His voice lowered to a tone which was almost awe.

"Speakin' for myself, I don't hanker after his hoss like Bill Kilduff;
or his girl, like Lee Haines; or his life, like the chief. All I want
is a shot at that wolf-dog, that Black Bart!"

"You look sort of het up, Hal."

"He come near puttin' his teeth into my leg down at Morgan's place the
day Barry cleaned up the chief."

"Why, any dog is apt to take a snap at a feller."

"This ain't a dog. It's a wolf. An' Whistlin' Dan--" he stopped.

"You look sort of queer, Hal. What's up?"

"You won't think I'm loco?"

"No."

"They's some folks away up north that thinks a man now an' then turns
into a wolf."

Buck nodded and shrugged his shoulders. A little chill went up and
down his back.

"Here's my idea, Buck. I've been thinkin'--no, it's more like dreamin'
than thinkin'--that Dan Barry is a wolf turned into a man, an' Black
Bart is a man turned into a wolf."

"Hal, you been drinkin'."

"Maybe."

"What made you think--" began Buck, but the long rider put spurs to
his horse and once more broke into a fast gallop.




CHAPTER XXX


"THE MANHANDLING"

It was close to sunset time when they reached the old Salton place,
where they found Silent sitting on the porch with Haines, Kilduff,
Jordan, and Rhinehart. They stood up at sight of the newcomers and
shouted a welcome. Buck waved his hand, but his thoughts were not for
them. The music he had heard Dan whistle formed in his throat. It
reached his lips not in sound but as a smile.

At the house he swung from the saddle and shook hands with Jim Silent.
The big outlaw retained Buck's fingers.

"You're comin' in mighty late," he growled, "Didn't you get the
signal?"

Buck managed to meet the searching eyes.

"I was doin' better work for you by stayin' around the house," he
said.

"How d'you mean?"

"I stayed there to pick up things you might want to know. It wasn't
easy. The boys are beginnin' to suspect me."

"The cowpunchers is gettin' so thick around those parts," broke in
Purvis, "that Buck wouldn't even let me go back to his house with him
to get my gun."

The keen eyes of Silent never left the face of Daniels.

"Don't you know that Gus Morris gives us all the news we need, Buck?"

Rhinehart and Jordan, who were chatting together, stopped to listen.
Buck smiled easily.

"I don't no ways doubt that Morris tells you all he knows," he said,
"but the pint is that he don't know everything."

"How's that?"

"The rangers is beginnin' to look sidewise an' whisper when Morris
is around. He's played his game with us too long, an' the boys are
startin' to think. Thinkin' is always dangerous."

"You seem to have been doin' some tall thinkin' yourself," said Silent
drily; "you guess the cowpunchers are goin' on our trail on their own
hook?"

"There ain't no doubt of it."

"Where'd you hear it?"

"Young Seaton."

"He's one of them?"

"Yes."

"I'll remember him. By the way, I see you got a little token of
Whistlin' Dan on your arm."

He pointed to the bandage on Buck's right forearm.

"It ain't nothin'," said Buck, shrugging his shoulders. "The cuts are
all healin' up. The arm's as good as ever now."

"Anyway," said Silent, "you got somethin' comin' to you for the play
you made agin that devil."

He reached into his pocket, drew out several twenty dollar gold pieces
(money was never scarce with a lone rider) and passed them to Buck.
The latter received the coin gingerly, hesitated, and then returned it
to the hand of the chief.

"What the hell's the matter?" snarled the big outlaw. "Ain't it
enough?"

"I don't want no money till I earn it," said Buck.

"Life's gettin' too peaceful for you, eh?" grinned Silent.

"Speakin' of peace," chimed in Purvis, with a liberal wink at the rest
of the gang, "Buck allows he's the boy who c'n bring the dove o' the
same into this camp. He says he knows the way to bring the girl over
there to see reason."

Buck followed the direction of Purvis's eyes and saw Kate sitting on a
rock at a little distance from the shanty in which she lived with her
father. She made a pitiful figure, her chin cupped in her hand, and
her eyes staring fixedly down the valley. He was recalled from her by
the general laughter of the outlaws.

"You fellers laugh," he said complacently, "because you don't know no
more about women than a cow knows about pictures."

"What do you think we should do with her, Solomon?" Buck met the cold
blue eye of Haines.

"Maybe I ain't Solomon," he admitted genially, "but I don't need no
million wives to learn all there is to know about women."

"Don't make a fool of yourself, Buck," said Silent. "There ain't no
way of movin' that damn girl. She's gone on a hunger strike an' she'll
die in it. We can't send her out of the valley. It's hell to have her
dyin' on our hands here. But there ain't no way to make her change her
mind. I've tried pleadin' with her--I've even offered her money. It
don't do no good. Think of that!"

"Sure it don't," sneered Buck. "Why, you poor bunch of yearlin'
calves, she don't need no coaxin'. What she needs is a manhandlin'.
She wants a master, that's what she wants."

"I suppose," said Haines, "you think you're man enough to change her?"

"None of that!" broke in Silent. "D'you really think you could do
somethin' with her, Buck?"

"Can I do somethin' with her?" repeated Buck scornfully. "Why, boys,
there ain't nothin' I can't do with a woman."

"Is it because of your pretty face or your winnin' smile?" growled the
deep bass of Bill Kilduff.

"Both!" said Buck, promptly. "The wilder they are the harder they fall
for me. I've had a thirty-year old maverick eatin' out of my hand like
she'd been trained for it all her life. The edyoucated ones say I'm
'different'; the old maids allow that I'm 'naïve'; the pretty ones
jest say I'm a 'man,' but they spell the word with capital letters."

"Daniels, you're drunk," said Haines.

"Am I? It'll take a better man than you to make me sober, Haines!"

The intervening men jumped back, but the deep voice of Silent rang
out like a pistol shot: "Don't move for your six-guns, or you'll be
playin' agin me!"

Haines transferred his glare to Silent, but his hand dropped from his
gun. Daniels laughed.

"I ain't no mile post with a hand pointin' to trouble," he said
gently. "All I say is that the girl needs excitement. Life's so damned
dull for her that she ain't got no interest in livin'."

"If you're fool enough to try," said Silent, "go ahead. What are you
plannin' to do?"

"You'll learn by watchin'," grinned Buck, taking the reins of his
horse. "I'm goin' to ask the lady soft an' polite to step up to her
cabin an' pile into some ham an' eggs. If she don't want to I'll rough
her up a little, an' she'll love me for it afterwards!"

"The way she loves a snake!" growled Kilduff.

"By God, Silent," said Haines, his face white with emotion, "if Buck
puts a hand on her I'll--"

"Act like a man an' not like a damn fool boy," said Silent, dropping a
heavy hand on the shoulder of his lieutenant. "He won't hurt her none,
Lee. I'll answer for that. Come on, Buck. Speakin' personal, I wish
that calico was in hell."

Leading his horse, Buck followed Silent towards the girl. She did not
move when they approached. Her eyes still held far down the valley.
The steps of the big outlaw were shorter and shorter as they drew
close to the girl. Finally he stopped and turned to Buck with a
gesture of resignation.

"Look at her! This is what she's been doin' ever since yesterday.
Buck, it's up to you to make good. There she is!"

"All right," said Buck, "it's about time for you amachoors to exit an'
leave the stage clear for the big star. Now jest step back an' take
notes on the way I do it. In fifteen minutes by the clock she'll be
eatin' out of my hand."

Silent, expectant but baffled, retired a little. Buck removed his hat
and bowed as if he were in a drawing-room.

"Ma'am," he said, "I got the honour of askin' you to side-step up to
the shanty with me an' tackle a plate of ham an' eggs. Are you on?"

To this Chesterfieldian outpouring of the heart, she responded with a
slow glance which started at Buck's feet, travelled up to his face,
and then returned to the purple distance down the canyon. In spite of
himself the tell-tale crimson flooded Buck's face. Far away he caught
the muffled laughter of the outlaws. He replaced his hat.

"Don't make no mistake," he went on, his gesture including the bandits
in the background, and Silent particularly, "I ain't the same sort as
these other fellers. I c'n understand the way you feel after bein'
herded around with a lot of tin horns like these. I'm suggestin'
that you take a long look at me an' notice the difference between an
imitation an' a real man."

She did look at him. She even smiled faintly, and the smile made
Buck's face once more grow very hot. His voice went hard.

"For the last time, I'm askin' if you'll go up to the cabin."

There was both wonder and contempt in her smile.

In an instant he was in his saddle. He swung far to one side and
caught her in his arms. Vaguely he heard the yell of excitement from
the outlaws. All he was vividly conscious of was the white horror of
her face. She fought like a wildcat. She did not cry out. She struck
him full in the face with the strength of a man, almost. He prisoned
her with a stronger grip, and in so doing nearly toppled from the
saddle, for his horse reared up, snorting.

A gun cracked twice and two bullets hummed close to his head. From
the corner of his eye he was aware of Silent and Rhinehart flinging
themselves upon Lee Haines, who struggled furiously to fire again. He
drove his spurs deep and the cattle pony started a bucking course for
the shanty.

"Dan!" he muttered at her ear.

The yells of the men drowned his voice. She managed to jerk her right
arm free and struck him in the face. He shook her furiously.

"For Whistling Dan!" he said more loudly. "He's dying!"

She went rigid in his arms.

"Don't speak!" he panted. "Don't let them know!"

The outlaws were running after them, laughing and waving their hats.

"Dan!"

"_Faint, you fool!_"

Her eyes widened with instant comprehension. Every muscle of her body
relaxed; her head fell back; she was a lifeless burden in his arms.
Buck dismounted from the saddle before the shanty. He was white,
shaking, but triumphant. Rhinehart and Purvis and Jordan ran up to
him. Silent and Kilduff were still struggling with Haines in the
distance.

Rhinehart dropped his head to listen at her breast for the heartbeat.

"She's dead!" cried Jordan.

"You're a fool," said Buck calmly. "She's jest fainted, an' when she
comes to, she'll begin tellin' me what a wonderful man I am."

"She ain't dead," said Rhinehart, raising his head from her heart,
"but Haines'll kill you for this, Buck!"

"Kate!" cried an agonized voice from the shanty, and old white-haired
Joe Cumberland ran towards them.

"Jest a little accident happened to your daughter," explained Buck.
"Never mind. I c'n carry her in all right. You fellers stay back. A
crowd ain't no help. Ain't no cause to worry, Mr. Cumberland. She
ain't hurt!"

He hastened on into the shanty and laid her on the bunk within. Her
father hurried about to bathe her face and throat. Buck pushed the
other three men out of the room.

"She ain't hurt," he said calmly, "she's jest a little fussed up.
Remember I said in fifteen minutes I'd have her eatin' out of my hand.
I've still got ten minutes of that time. When the ten minutes is up
you all come an' take a look through that window. If you don't see the
girl eatin' at that table, I'll chaw up my hat."

He crowded them through the door and shut it behind them. A cry of joy
came from old Joe Cumberland and Buck turned to see Kate sitting up on
the bunk.




CHAPTER XXXI


"LAUGH, DAMN IT!"

She brushed her father's anxious arms aside and ran to Buck.

"Shut up!" said Buck. "Talk soft. Better still, don't say nothin'!"

"Kate," stammered her father, "what has happened?"

"Listen an' you'll learn," said Buck. "But get busy first. I got to
get you out of here tonight. You'll need strength for the work ahead
of you. You got to eat. Get me some eggs. Eggs and ham. Got 'em? Good.
You, there!" (This to Joe.) "Rake down them ashes. On the jump, Kate.
Some wood here. I got only ten minutes!"

In three minutes the fire was going, and the eggs in the pan, while
Joe set out some tin dishes on the rickety table, under orders from
Buck, making as much noise as possible. While they worked Buck talked.
By the time Kate's plate was ready his tale was done. He expected
hysterics. She was merely white and steady-eyed.

"You're ready?" he concluded.

"Yes."

"Then begin by doin' what I say an' ask no questions. Silent an' his
crew'll be lookin' through the window over there pretty soon. You got
to be eatin' an' appearin' to enjoy talkin' to me. Get that an' don't
forget it. Mix in plenty of smiles. Cumberland, you get back into the
shadow an' stay there. Don't never come out into the light. Your face
tells more'n a whole book, an' believe me, Jim Silent is a quick
reader."

Joe retreated to a corner of the room into which the light of the lamp
did not penetrate.

"Sit down at that table!" ordered Buck, and he placed a generous
portion of fried eggs and ham before her.

"I can't eat. Is Dan--"

"I hear 'em at the window!"

He slipped onto a box on the opposite side of the table and leaned
towards her, supporting his chin in his hands. Kate began to eat
hurriedly.

"No! no!" advised Buck. "You eat as if you was scared. You want to be
slow an' deliberate. Watch out! They've moved the board that covers
the window!"

For he saw a group of astonished faces outside.

"Smile at me!"

Her response made even Buck forget her pallor. Outside the house there
was a faint buzz of whispers.

"Keep it up!"

"I'll do my best," she said faintly.

Buck leaned back and burst into uproarious laughter.

"That's a good one!" he cried, slamming the broad palm of his hand
against the table so that the tin dishes jumped. "I never heard the
beat of it!" And in a whispered tone aside: "_Laugh, damn it!_"

Her laughter rang true enough, but it quavered perilously close to a
sob towards the close.

"I always granted Jim Silent a lot of sense," he said, "an' has he
really left you alone all this time? Damn near died of homesickness,
didn't you?"

She laughed again, more confidently this time. The board was suddenly
replaced at the window.

"Now I got to go out to them," he said. "After what Silent has seen
he'll trust me with you. He'll let me come back."

She dropped her soft hands over his clenched fist.

"It will be soon? Minutes are greater than hours."

"I ain't forgot. Tonight's the time."

Before he reached the door she ran to him. Two arms went round his
neck, two warm lips fluttered against his.

"God bless you!" she whispered.

Buck ran for the door. Outside he stood bareheaded, breathing deeply.
His face was hot with shame and delight, and he had to walk up and
down for a moment before he could trust himself to enter the ranch
house. When he finally did so he received a greeting which made him
think himself a curiosity rather than a man. Even Jim Silent regarded
him with awe.

"Buck," said Jordan, "you don't never need to work no more. All you
got to do is to walk into a town, pick out the swellest heiress, an'
marry her."

"The trouble with girls in town," said Buck, "is that there ain't no
room for a man to operate. You jest nacherally can't ride a hoss into
a parlour."

Lee Haines drew Buck a little to one side.

"What message did you bring to her, Buck?" he said.

"What d'you mean?"

"Look here, friend, these other boys are too thick-headed to
understand Kate Cumberland, but I know her kind."

"You're a little peeved, ain't you Lee?" grinned Buck. "It ain't my
fault that she don't like you."

Haines ground his teeth.

"It was a very clever little act that you did with her, but it
couldn't quite deceive me. She was too pale when she laughed."

"A jealous feller sees two things for every one that really happens,
Lee."

"Who was the message from?"

"Did she ever smile at you like she done at me?"

"Was it from Dan Barry that you brought word?"

"Did she ever let her eyes go big an' soft when she looked at you?"

"Damn you."

"Did she ever lean close to you, so's you got the scent of her hair,
Lee?"

"I'll kill you for this, Daniels!"

"When I left she kissed me good-bye, Lee."

In spite of his bravado, Buck was deeply anxious. He watched Haines
narrowly. Only two men in the mountain-desert would have had a chance
against this man in a fight, and Buck knew perfectly well that he was
not one of the two.

"Watch yourself, Daniels," said Haines. "I know you're lying and I'm
going to keep an eye on you."

"Thanks," grinned Buck. "I like to have a friend watchin' out for me."

Haines turned on his heel and went back to the card table, where Buck
immediately joined the circle.

"Wait a minute, Lee," said Silent. "Ain't it your turn to stand guard
on the Cumberlands tonight?"

"Right--O," answered Haines cheerfully, and rose from the table.

"Hold on," said Buck. "Are you goin' to spoil all the work I done
today with that girl?"

"What's the matter?" asked Silent.

"Everything's the matter! Are you goin' to put a man she hates out
there watchin' her."

"Damn you, Daniels," said Haines fiercely, "you're rolling up a long
account, but it only takes a bullet to collect that sort of a bill!"

"If it hadn't been for Haines, would the girl's father be here?" asked
Buck. "Besides, she don't like blonds."

"What type does she like?" asked Silent, enjoying the quarrel between
his lieutenant and the recruit.

"Likes 'em with dark hair an' eyes," said Buck calmly. "Look at me,
for instance!"

Even Haines smiled, though his lips were white with anger.

"D'you want to stand guard over her yourself?" said the chief.

"Sure," grinned Buck, "maybe she'd come out an' pass the time o' night
with me."

"Go ahead and take the job," nodded Silent. "I got an idea maybe she
will."

"Silent," warned Haines, "hasn't it occurred to you that there's
something damned queer about the ease with which Buck slid into the
favour of the girl?"

"Well?"

"All his talk about manhandling her is bunk. He had some message for
her. I saw him speak to her when she was struggling in his arms. Then
she conveniently fainted."

Silent turned on Buck.

"Is that straight?"

"It is," said Daniels easily.

The outlaws started and their expectant grins died out.

"By God, Buck!" roared Silent, "if you're double crossin' me--but I
ain't goin' to be hasty now. What happened? Tell it yourself! What did
you say to her?"

"While she was fightin' with me," said Buck, "she hollered: 'Let me
go!' I says: 'I'll see you in hell first!' Then she fainted."

The roar of laughter drowned Haines's further protest.

"You win, Buck," said Silent. "Take the job."

As Buck started for the door Haines called to him:

"Hold on, Buck, if you're aboveboard you won't mind giving your word
to see that no one comes up the valley and that you'll be here in the
morning?"

The words set a swirling blackness before Buck's eyes. He turned
slowly.

"That's reasonable," said Silent. "Speak up, Daniels."

"All right," said Buck, his voice very low. "I'll be here in the
morning, and I'll see that no one comes up the valley."

There was the slightest possible emphasis on the word "up."

On a rock directly in front of the shanty Buck took up his watch. The
little house behind him was black. Presently he heard the soft call of
Kate: "Is it time?"

His eyes wandered to the ranch house. He could catch the drone of many
voices. He made no reply.

"Is it time?" she repeated.

Still he would not venture a reply, however guarded. She called a
third time, and when he made no response he heard her voice break to
a moan of hopelessness. And yet he waited, waited, until the light in
the ranch house went out, and there was not a sound.

"Kate!" he said, gauging his voice carefully so that it could not
possibly travel to the ranch house, which all the while he carefully
scanned.

For answer the front door of the shanty squeaked.

"Back!" he called. "Go back!"

The door squeaked again.

"They're asleep in the ranch house," she said. "Aren't we safe?"

"S--sh!" he warned. "Talk low! They aren't all asleep. There's one in
the ranch house who'll never take his eyes off me till morning."

"What can we do?"

"Go out the back way. You won't be seen if you're careful. Haines has
his eyes on me, not you. Go for the stable. Saddle your horses. Then
lead them out and take the path on the other side of the house. Don't
mount them until you're far below the house. Go slow all the way.
Sounds travel far up this canyon."

"Aren't you coming with us?"

"No."

"But when they find us gone?"

"Think of Dan--not me!"

"God be merciful to you!"

In a moment the back door of the shanty creaked. They must be opening
it by inches. When it was wide they would run for the stable. He
wished now that he had warned Kate to walk, for a slow moving object
catches the eye more seldom than one which travels fast. If Lee Haines
was watching at that moment his attention must be held to Buck for one
all important minute. He stood up, rolled a cigarette swiftly, and
lighted it. The spurt and flare of the match would hold even the most
suspicious eye for a short time, and in those few seconds Kate and her
father might pass out of view behind the stable.

He sat down again. A muffled sneeze came from the ranch house and Buck
felt his blood run cold. The forgotten cigarette between his fingers
burned to a dull red and then went out. In the stable a horse stamped.
He leaned back, locked his hands idly behind his head, and commenced
to whistle. Now there was a snort, as of a horse when it leaves the
shelter of a barn and takes the first breath of open air.

All these sounds were faint, but to Buck, straining his ears in an
agony of suspense, each one came like the blast of a trumpet. Next
there was a click like that of iron striking against rock. Evidently
they were leading the horses around on the far side of the house.
With a trembling hand he relighted his cigarette and waited, waited,
waited. Then he saw them pass below the house! They were dimly
stalking figures in the night, but to Buck it seemed as though they
walked in the blaze of ten thousand searchlights. He held his breath
in expectancy of that mocking laugh from the house--that sharp command
to halt--that crack of the revolver.

Yet nothing happened. Now he caught the click of the horses' iron
shoes against the rocks farther and farther down the valley. Still no
sound from the ranch house. They were safe!

It was then that the great temptation seized on Buck.

It would be simple enough for him to break away. He could walk to the
stable, saddle his horse, and tear past the ranch house as fast as his
pony could gallop. By the time the outlaws were ready for the pursuit,
he would be a mile or more away, and in the hills such a handicap was
enough. One thing held him. It was frail and subtle like the invisible
net of the enchanter--that word he had passed to Jim Silent, to see
that nothing came up the valley and to appear in the ranch house at
sunrise.

In the midst of his struggle, strangely enough, he began to whistle
the music he had learned from Dan Barry, the song of The Untamed,
those who hunt for ever, and are for ever hunted. When his whistling
died away he touched his hand to his lips where Kate had kissed him,
and then smiled. The sun pushed up over the eastern hills.

When he entered the ranch house the big room was a scene of much arm
stretching and yawning as the outlaws dressed. Lee Haines was already
dressed. Buck smiled ironically.

"I say, Lee," he said, "you look sort of used up this mornin', eh?"

The long rider scowled.

"I'd make a guess you've not had much sleep, Haines," went on Buck.
"Your eyes is sort of hollow."

"Not as hollow as your damned lying heart!"

"Drop that!" commanded Silent. "You hold a grudge like a woman, Lee!
How was the watch, Buck? Are you all in?"

"Nothin' come up the valley, an' here I am at sunrise," said Buck. "I
reckon that speaks for itself."

"It sure does," said Silent, "but the gal and her father are kind of
slow this mornin'. The old man generally has a fire goin' before dawn
is fairly come. There ain't no sign of smoke now."

"Maybe he's sleepin' late after the excitement of yesterday," said
Bill Kilduff. "You must of thrown some sensation into the family,
Buck."

The eyes of Haines had not moved from the face of Buck.

"I think I'll go over and see what's keeping them so late in bed," he
said, and left the house.

"He takes it pretty hard," said Jordan, his scarred face twisted with
Satanic mirth, "but don't go rubbin' it into him, Buck, or you'll be
havin' a man-sized fight on your hands. I'd jest about as soon mix
with the chief as cross Haines. When he starts the undertaker does the
finishin'!"

"Thanks for remindin' me," said Buck drily. Through the window he saw
Haines throw open the door of the shanty.

The outcry which Buck expected did not follow. For a long moment the
long rider stood there without moving. Then he turned and walked
slowly back to the house, his head bent, his forehead gathered in a
puzzled frown.

"What's the matter, Lee?" called Silent as his lieutenant entered the
room again. "You look sort of sick. Didn't she have a bright mornin'
smile for you?"

Haines raised his head slowly. The frown was not yet gone.

"They aren't there," he announced.

His eyes shifted to Buck. Everyone followed his example, Silent
cursing softly.

"As a joker, Lee," said Buck coldly, "you're some Little Eva. I s'pose
they jest nacherally evaporated durin' the night, maybe?"

"Haines," said Silent sharply, "are you serious?"

The latter nodded.

"Then by God, Buck, you'll have to say a lot in a few words. Lee, you
suspected him all the time, but I was a fool!"

Daniels felt the colour leaving his face, but help came from the
quarter from which he least expected it.

"Jim, don't draw!" cried Haines.

The eyes of the chief glittered like the hawk's who sees the field
mouse scurrying over the ground far below.

"He ain't your meat, Lee," he said. "It's me he's double crossed."

"Chief," said Haines, "last night while he watched the shanty, I
watched _him!_"

"Well?"

"I saw him keep his post in front of the cabin all night without
moving. And he was wide awake all the time."

"Then how in hell--"

"The back door of the cabin!" said Kilduff suddenly.

"By God, that's it! They sneaked out there and then went down on the
other side of the house."

"If I had let them go," interposed Buck, "do you suppose I'd be here?"

The keen glance of Silent moved from Buck to Haines, and then back
again. He turned his back on them.

The quiet which had fallen on the room was now broken by the usual
clatter of voices, cursing, and laughter. In the midst of it Haines
stepped close to Buck and spoke in a guarded voice.

"Buck," he said, "I don't know how you did it, but I have an idea--"

"Did what?"

The eyes of Haines were sad.

"I was a clean man, once," he said quietly, "and you've done a clean
man's work!"

He put out his hand and that of Buck's advanced slowly to meet it.

"Was it for Dan or Kate that you did it?"

The glance of Buck roamed far away.

"I dunno," he said softly. "I think it was to save my own rotten
soul!"

On the other side of the room Silent beckoned to Purvis.

"What is it?" asked Hal, coming close.

"Speak low," said Silent. "I'm talking to you, not to the crowd.
I think Buck is crooked as hell. I want you to ride down to the
neighbourhood of his house. Scout around it day and night. You may see
something worth while."

Meanwhile, in that utter blackness which precedes the dawn, Kate and
her father reached the mouth of the canyon.

"Kate," said old Joe in a tremulous voice, "if I was a prayin' man I'd
git down on my knees an' thank God for deliverin' you tonight."

"Thank Buck Daniels, who's left his life in pawn for us. I'll go
straight for Buck's house. You must ride to Sheriff Morris and tell
him that an honest man is up there in the power of Silent's gang."

"But--" he began.

She waved her hand to him, and spurring her horse to a furious gallop
raced off into the night. Her father stared after her for a few
moments, but then, as she had advised, rode for Gus Morris.




CHAPTER XXXII


THOSE WHO SEE IN THE DARK

It was still early morning when Kate swung from her horse before the
house of Buck Daniels. Instinct seemed to lead her to the sick-room,
and when she reached it she paid not the slightest attention to the
old man and his wife, who sat nodding beside the bed. They started up
when they heard the challenging growl of Black Bart, which relapsed
into an eager whine of welcome as he recognized Kate.

She saw nothing but the drawn white face of Dan and his blue pencilled
eyelids. She ran to him. Old Sam, hardly awake, reached out to stop
her. His wife held him back.

"It's Delilah!" she whispered. "I seen her face!"

Kate was murmuring soft, formless sounds which made the old man and
his wife look to each other with awe. They retreated towards the door
as if they had been found intruding where they had no right.

They saw the fever-bright eyes of Dan open. They heard him murmur
petulantly, his glance wandering. Her hand passed across his forehead,
and then her touch lingered on the bandage which surrounded his left
shoulder. She cried out at that, and Dan's glance checked in its
wandering and fixed upon the face which leaned above him. They saw his
eyes brighten, widen, and a frown gradually contract his forehead.
Then his hand went up slowly and found hers.

He whispered something.

"What did he say?" murmured Sam.

"I dunno," she answered. "I think it was 'Delilah!' See her shrink!"

"Shut up!" cautioned Sam. "Ma, he's comin' to his senses!"

There was no doubt of it now, for a meaning had come into his eyes.

"Shall I take her away?" queried Sam in a hasty whisper. "He may do
the girl harm. Look at the yaller in his eyes!"

"No," said his wife softly, "it's time for us to leave 'em alone."

"But look at him now!" he muttered. "He's makin' a sound back in his
throat like the growl of a wolf! I'm afeard for the gal, ma!"

"Sam, you're an old fool!"

He followed her reluctantly from the room.

"Now," said his wife, "we c'n leave the door a little open--jest
a crack--an' you c'n look through and tell when she's in any reel
danger."

Sam obeyed.

"Dan ain't sayin' a word," he said. "He's jest glarin' at her."

"An' what's she doin'?" asked Mrs. Daniels.

"She's got her arm around his shoulders. I never knew they could be
such a pile of music in a gal's voice, ma!"

"Sam, you was always a fool!"

"He's pushin' her away to the length of his arm."

"An' she? An' she?" whispered Mrs. Daniels.

"She's talkin' quick. The big wolf is standin' close to them an'
turnin' his head from one face to the other like he was wonderin'
which was right in the argyment."

"The ways of lovers is as queer as the ways of the Lord, Sam!"

"Dan has caught an arm up before his face, an' he's sayin' one word
over an' over. She's dropped on her knees beside the bed. She's
talkin'. Why does she talk so low, ma?"

"She don't dare speak loud for fear her silly heart would bust. Oh, I
know, I know! What fools all men be! What fools! She's askin' him to
forgive her."

"An' he's tryin' all his might not to," whispered Mrs. Daniels in an
awe-stricken voice.

"Black Bart has put his head on the lap of the gal. You c'n hear him
whine! Dan looks at the wolf an' then at the girl. He seems sort of
dumbfoundered. She's got her one hand on the head of Bart. She's got
the other hand to her face, and she's weepin' into that hand. Martha,
she's give up tryin' to persuade him."

There was a moment of silence.

"He's reachin' out his hand for Black Bart. His fingers is on those of
the girl. They's both starin'."

"Ay, ay!" she said. "An' what now?"

But Sam closed the door and set his back to it, facing his wife.

"I reckon the rest of it's jest like the endin' of a book, ma," he
said.

"Men is all fools!" whispered Mrs. Daniels, but there were tears in
her eyes.

Sam went out to put up Kate's horse in the stable. Mrs. Daniels sat in
the dining-room, her hands clasped in her lap while she watched the
grey dawn come up the east. When Sam entered and spoke to her, she
returned no answer. He shook his head as if her mood completely
baffled him, and then, worn out by the long watching, he went to bed.

For a long time Mrs. Daniels sat without moving, with the same strange
smile transfiguring her. Then she heard a soft step pause at the
entrance to the room, and turning saw Kate. There was something in
their faces which made them strangely alike. A marvellous grace and
dignity came to Mrs. Daniels as she rose.

"My dear!" she said.

"I'm so happy!" whispered Kate.

"Yes, dear! And Dan?"

"He's sleeping like a child! Will you look at him? I think the fever's
gone!"

They went hand in hand--like two girls, and they leaned above the bed
where Whistling Dan lay smiling as he slept. On the floor Black Bart
growled faintly, opened one eye on them, and then relapsed into
slumber. There was no longer anything to guard against in that house.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was several days later that Hal Purvis, returning from his scouting
expedition, met no less a person that Sheriff Gus Morris at the mouth
of the canyon leading to the old Salton place.

"Lucky I met you, Hal," said the genial sheriff. "I've saved you from
a wild-goose chase."

"How's that?"

"Silent has jest moved."

"Where?"

"He's taken the trail up the canyon an' cut across over the hills to
that old shanty on Bald-eagle Creek. It stands--"

"I know where it is," said Purvis. "Why'd he move?"

"Things was gettin' too hot. I rode over to tell him that the boys was
talkin' of huntin' up the canyon to see if they could get any clue of
him. They knowed from Joe Cumberland that the gang was once here."

"Cumberland went to you when he got out of the valley?" queried Purvis
with a grin.

"Straight."

"And then where did Cumberland go?"

"I s'pose he went home an' joined his gal."

"He didn't," said Purvis drily.

"Then where is he? An' who the hell cares where he is?"

"They're both at Buck Daniels's house."

"Look here, Purvis, ain't Buck one of your own men? Why, I seen him up
at the camp jest a while ago!"

"Maybe you did, but the next time you call around he's apt to be
missin'."

"D'you think--"

"He's double crossed us. I not only seen the girl an' her father at
Buck's house, but I also seen a big dog hangin' around the house.
Gus, it was Black Bart, an' where that wolf is you c'n lay to it that
Whistlin' Dan ain't far away!"

The sheriff stared at him in dumb amazement, his mouth open.

"They's a price of ten thousand on the head of Whistlin' Dan,"
suggested Purvis.

The sheriff still seemed too astonished to understand.

"I s'pose," said Purvis, "that you wouldn't care special for an easy
lump sum of ten thousand, what?"

"In Buck Daniels's house!" burst out the sheriff.

"Yep," nodded Purvis, "that's where the money is if you c'n get enough
men together to gather in Whistlin' Dan Barry."

"D'you really think I'd get some boys together to round up Whistlin'
Dan? Why, Hal, you know there ain't no real reason for that price on
his head!"

"D'you always wait for 'real reasons' before you set your fat hands on
a wad of money?"

The sheriff moistened his lips.

"Ten thousand dollars!"

"Ten thousand dollars!" echoed Purvis.

"By God, I'll do it! If I got him, the boys would forget all about
Silent. They're afraid of Jim, but jest the thought of Barry paralyzes
them! I'll start roundin' up the boys I need today. Tonight we'll do
our plannin'. Tomorrer mornin' bright an' early we'll hit the trail."

"Why not go after him tonight?"

"Because he'd have an edge on us. I got a hunch that devil c'n see in
the dark."

He grinned apologetically for this strange idea, but Purvis nodded
with perfect sympathy, and then turned his horse up the canyon. The
sheriff rode home whistling. On ten thousand dollars more he would be
able to retire from this strenuous life.




CHAPTER XXXIII


THE SONG OF THE UNTAMED

Buck and his father were learning of a thousand crimes charged against
Dan. Wherever a man riding a black horse committed an outrage it was
laid to the account of this new and most terrible of long riders.
Two cowpunchers were found dead on the plains. Their half-emptied
revolvers lay close to their hands, and their horses were not far off.
In ordinary times it would have been accepted that they had killed
each other, for they were known enemies, but now men had room for one
thought only. And why should not a man with the courage to take an
outlaw from the centre of Elkhead be charged with every crime on the
range? Jim Silent had been a grim plague, but at least he was human.
This devil defied death.

These were both sad and happy days for Kate. The chief cause of her
sadness, strangely enough, was the rapidly returning strength of
Dan. While he was helpless he belonged to her. When he was strong
he belonged to his vengeance on Jim Silent; and when she heard Dan
whistling softly his own wild, weird music, she knew its meaning as
she would have known the wail of a hungry wolf on a winter night. It
was the song of the untamed. She never spoke of her knowledge. She
took the happiness of the moment to her heart and closed her eyes
against tomorrow.

Then came an evening when she watched Dan play with Black Bart--a
game of tag in which they darted about the room with a violence
which threatened to wreck the furniture, but running with such soft
footfalls that there was no sound except the rattle of Bart's claws
against the floor and the rush of their breath. They came to an abrupt
stop and Dan dropped into a chair while Black Bart sank upon his
haunches and snapped at the hand which Dan flicked across his face
with lightning movements. The master fell motionless and silent. His
eyes forgot the wolf. Rising, they rested on Kate's face. They rose
again and looked past her.

She understood and waited.

"Kate," he said at last, "I've got to start on the trail."

Her smile went out. She looked where she knew his eyes were staring,
through the window and far out across the hills where the shadows
deepened and dropped slanting and black across the hollows. Far away
a coyote wailed. The wind which swept the hills seemed to her like a
refrain of Dan's whistling--the song and the summons of the untamed.

"That trail will never bring you home," she said.

There was a long silence.

"You ain't cryin', honey?"

"I'm not crying, Dan."

"I got to go."

"Yes."

"Kate, you got a dyin' whisper in your voice."

"That will pass, dear."

"Why, honey, you _are_ cryin'!"

He took her face between his hands, and stared into her misted eyes,
but then his glance wandered past her, through the window, out to the
shadowy hills.

"You won't leave me now?" she pleaded.

"I must!"

"Give me one hour more!"

"Look!" he said, and pointed.

She saw Black Bart reared up with his forepaws resting on the
window-sill, while he looked into the thickening night with the eyes
of the hunter which sees in the dark.

"The wolf knows, Kate," he said, "but I can't explain."

He kissed her forehead, but she strained close to him and raised her
lips.

She cried, "My whole soul is on them."

"Not that!" he said huskily. "There's still blood on my lips an' I'm
goin' out to get them clean."

He was gone through the door with the wolf racing before him.

She stumbled after him, her arms outspread, blind with tears; and
then, seeing that he was gone indeed, she dropped into the chair,
buried her face against the place where his head had rested, and wept.
Far away the coyote wailed again, and this time nearer.




CHAPTER XXXIV


THE COWARD

Before the coyote cried again, three shadows glided into the night.
The lighted window in the house was like a staring eye that searched
after them, but Satan, with the wolf running before, vanished quickly
among the shadows of the hills. They were glad. They were loosed in
the void of the mountain-desert with no destiny save the will of the
master. They seemed like one being rather than three. The wolf was the
eyes, the horse the strong body to flee or pursue, and the man was the
brain which directed, and the power which struck.

He had formulated no plan of action to free Buck and kill Silent. All
he knew was that he must reach the long riders at once, and he would
learn their whereabouts from Morris. He rode more slowly as he
approached the hotel of the sheriff. Lights burned at the dining-room
windows. Probably the host still sat at table with his guests, but it
was strange that they should linger over their meal so late. He had
hoped that he would be able to come upon Morris by surprise. Now he
must take him in the midst of many men. With Black Bart slinking at
his heels he walked softly across the porch and tiptoed through the
front room.

The door to the dining-room was wide. Around the table sat a dozen
men, with the sheriff at their head. The latter, somewhat red of face,
as if from the effort of a long speech, was talking low and earnestly,
sometimes brandishing his clenched fist with such violence that it
made his flabby cheeks quiver.

"We'll get to the house right after dawn," he was saying, "because
that's the time when most men are so thick-headed with sleep that--"

"Not Whistling Dan Barry," said one of the men, shaking his head. "He
won't be thick-headed. Remember, I seen him work in Elkhead, when he
slipped through the hands of a roomful of us."

A growl of agreement went around the table, and Black Bart in
sympathy, echoed the noise softly.

"What's that?" called the sheriff, raising his head sharply.

Dan, with a quick gesture, made Black Bart slink a pace back.

"Nothin'," replied one of the men. "This business is gettin' on your
nerves, sheriff. I don't blame you. It's gettin' on mine."

"I'm trustin' to you boys to stand back of me all through," said the
sheriff with a sort of whine, "but I'm thinkin' that we won't have no
trouble. When we see him we won't stop for no questions to be asked,
but turn loose with our six-guns an' shoot him down like a dog. He's
not human an' he don't deserve--Oh, God!"

He started up from his chair, white faced, his hands high above his
head, staring at the apparition of Whistling Dan, who stood with two
revolvers covering the posse. Every man was on his feet instantly,
with arms straining stiffly up. The muzzles of revolvers are like the
eyes of some portraits. No matter from what angle you look at them,
they seem directed straight at you. And every cowpuncher in the room
was sure that he was the main object of Dan's aim.

"Morris!" said Dan.

"For God's sake, don't shoot!" screamed the sheriff. "I--"

"Git down on your knees! Watch him, Bart!"

As the sheriff sank obediently to his knees, the wolf slipped up to
him with a stealthy stride and stood half crouched, his teeth bared,
silent. No growl could have made Bart more terribly threatening.
Dan turned completely away from Morris so that he could keep a more
careful watch on the others.

"Call off your wolf!" moaned Morris, a sob of terror in his voice.

"I ought to let him set his teeth in you," said Dan, "but I'm goin' to
let you off if you'll tell me what I want to know."

"Yes! Anything!"

"Where's Jim Silent?"

All eyes flashed towards Morris. The latter, as the significance of
the question came home to him, went even a sicklier white, like the
belly of a dead fish. His eyes moved swiftly about the circle of his
posse. Their answering glares were sternly forbidding.

"Out with it!" commanded Dan.

The sheriff strove mightily to speak, but only a ghastly whisper came:
"You got the wrong tip, Dan. I don't know nothin' about Silent. I'd
have him in jail if I did!"

"Bart!" said Dan.

The wolf slunk closer to the kneeling man. His hot breath fanned the
face of the sheriff and his lips grinned still farther back from the
keen, white teeth.

"Help!" yelled Morris. "He's at the shanty up on Bald-eagle Creek."

A rumble, half cursing and half an inarticulate snarl of brute rage,
rose from the cowpunchers.

"Bart," called Dan again, and leaped back from the door, raced out to
Satan, and drove into the night at a dead gallop.

Half the posse rushed after him. A dozen shots were pumped after the
disappearing shadowy figure. Two or three jumped into their saddles.
The others called them back.

"Don't be an ass, Monte," said one. "You got a good hoss, but you
ain't fool enough to think he c'n catch Satan?"

They trooped back to the dining-room, and gathered in a silent circle
around the sheriff, whose little fear-bright eyes went from face to
face.

"Ah, this is the swine," said one, "that was guardin' our lives!"

"Fellers," pleaded the sheriff desperately, "I swear to you that I
jest heard of where Silent was today. I was keepin' it dark until
after we got Whistling Dan. Then I was goin' to lead you--"

The flat of a heavy hand struck with a resounding thwack across his
lips. He reeled back against the wall, sputtering the blood from his
split mouth.

"Pat," said Monte, "your hoss is done for. Will you stay here an' see
that he don't get away? We'll do somethin' with him when we get back."

Pat caught the sheriff by his shirt collar and jerked him to a chair.
The body of the fat man was trembling like shaken jelly. The posse
turned away.

They could not overtake Whistling Dan on his black stallion, but they
might arrive before Silent and his gang got under way. Their numbers
were over small to attack the formidable long riders, but they wanted
blood. Before Whistling Dan reached the valley of Bald-eagle Creek
they were in the saddle and riding hotly in pursuit.




CHAPTER XXXV


CLOSE IN!

In that time ruined shack towards which the posse and Dan Barry rode,
the outlaws sat about on the floor eating their supper when Hal
Purvis entered. He had missed the trail from the Salton place to the
Bald-eagle half a dozen times that day, and that had not improved his
bitter mood.

"You been gone long enough," growled Silent. "Sit down an' chow an'
tell us what you know."

"I don't eat with no damned traitors," said Purvis savagely. "Stan' up
an' tell us that you're a double crossin' houn', Buck Daniels!"

"You better turn in an' sleep," said Buck calmly. "I've knowed men
before that loses their reason for want of sleep!"

"Jim," said Purvis, turning sharply on the chief, "Barry is at Buck's
house!"

"You lie!" said Buck.

"Do I lie?" said Purvis, grinding his teeth. "I seen Black Bart
hangin' around your house."

Jim Silent reached out a heavy paw and dropped it on the shoulder of
Buck. Their eyes met through a long moment, and then the glance of
Buck wavered and fell.

"Buck," said Silent, "I like you. I don't want to believe what Purvis
says. Give me your word of honour that Whistlin' Dan--"

"He's right, Jim," said Buck.

"An' he dies like a yaller cur!" broke in Purvis, snarling.

"No," said Silent, "when one of the boys goes back on the gang, they
pay _me_, not the rest of you! Daniels, take your gun and git down to
the other end of the room an' stand with your face to the wall. I'll
stay at this end. Keep your arms folded. Haines, you stand over there
an' count up to three. Then holler: 'Fire!' an' we'll turn an' start
shootin'. The rest of you c'n be judge if that's fair."

"Too damned fair," said Kilduff. "I say: String him up an' drill the
skunk full of holes."

Without a word Buck turned on his heel.

"One moment," said Haines.

"He ain't your meat, Lee," said Silent. "Jest keep your hand out of
this."

"I only wish to ask him a question," said Haines. He turned to Buck:
"Do you mean to say that after Barry's wolf cut up your arm, you've
been giving Whistling Dan a shelter from the law--and from us?"

"I give him a place to stay because he was damned near death," said
Buck. "An' there's one thing you'll answer for in hell, Haines, an'
that's ridin' off an' leavin' the man that got you out of Elkhead. He
was bleedin' to death."

"Shot?" said Haines, changing colour.

Silent broke in: "Buck, go take your place and say your prayers."

"Stay where you are!" commanded Haines. "And the girl?"

"He was lyin' sick in bed, ravin' about 'Delilah' an' 'Kate.' So I
come an' got the girl."

Haines dropped his head.

"An' when he was lyin' there," said Silent fiercely, "you could of
made an' end of him without half liftin' your hand, an' you didn't."

"Silent," said Haines, "if you want to talk, speak to me."

"What in hell do you mean, Lee?"

"You can't get at Buck except through me."

"Because that devil Barry got a bullet for your sake are you goin'
to--"

"I've lived a rotten life," said Haines.

"An' I suppose you think this is a pretty good way of dyin'?" sneered
Silent.

"I have more cause to fight for Barry than Buck has," said Haines.

"Lee, we've been pals too long."

"Silent, I've hated you like a snake ever since I met you. But outlaws
can't choose their company."

His tawny head rose. He stared haughtily around the circle of lowering
faces.

"By God," said Silent, white with passion, "I'm beginnin' to think
you do hate me! Git down there an' take your place. You're first an'
Daniels comes next. Kilduff, you c'n count!"

He stalked to the end of the room. Haines lingered one moment.

"Buck," he said, "there's one chance in ten thousand that I'll make
this draw the quickest of the two. If I don't, you may live through
it. Tell Kate--"

"Haines, git to your mark, or I'll start shootin'!"

Haines turned and took his place. The others drew back along the walls
of the room. Kilduff took the lamp from the table and held it high
above his head. Even then the light was dim and uncertain and the
draughts set the flame wavering so that the place was shaken with
shadows. The moon sent a feeble shaft of light through the window.

"One!" said Kilduff.

The shoulders of Haines and Silent hunched slightly.

"Two!" said Kilduff.

"God," whispered someone.

"Three. Fire!"

They whirled, their guns exploding at almost the same instant, and
Silent lunged for the floor, firing twice as he fell. Haines's second
shot split the wall behind Silent. If the outlaw chief had remained
standing the bullet would have passed through his head. But as Silent
fired the third time the revolver dropped clattering from the hand of
Haines. Buck caught him as he toppled inertly forward, coughing blood.

Silent was on his feet instantly.

"Stand back!" he roared to his men, who crowded about the fallen long
rider. "Stand back in your places. I ain't finished. I'm jest started.
Buck, take your place!"

"Boys!" pleaded Buck, "he's not dead, but he'll bleed to death
unless--"

"Damn him, let him bleed. Stand up, Buck, or by God I'll shoot you
while you kneel there!"

"_Shoot and be damned!_"

He tore off his shirt and ripped away a long strip for a bandage.

The revolver poised in Silent's hand.

"Buck, I'm warnin' you for the last time!"

"Fellers, it's murder an' damnation for all if you let Haines die this
way!" cried Buck.

The shining barrel of the revolver dropped to a level.

"I've given you a man's chance," said Silent, "an' now you'll have the
chance of--"

The door at the side of the room jerked open and a revolver cracked.
The lamp shivered to a thousand pieces in the hands of Bill Kilduff.
All the room was reduced to a place of formless shadow, dimly lighted
by the shaft of moonlight. The voice of Jim Silent, strangely changed
and sharpened from his usual bass roar, shrilled over the sudden
tumult: "Each man for himself! _It's Whistling Dan!_"

Terry Jordan and Bill Kilduff rushed at the dim figure, crouched to
the floor. Their guns spat fire, but they merely lighted the way to
their own destruction. Twice Dan's revolver spoke, and they dropped,
yelling. Pandemonium fell on the room.

The long riders raced here and there, the revolvers coughing fire. For
an instant Hal Purvis stood framed against the pallid moonshine at the
window. He stiffened and pointed an arm toward the door.

"The werewolf," he screamed.

As if in answer to the call, Black Bart raced across the room. Twice
the revolver sounded from the hand of Purvis. Then a shadow leaped
from the floor. There was a flash of white teeth, and Purvis lurched
to one side and dropped, screaming terribly. The door banged. Suddenly
there was silence. The clatter of a galloping horse outside drew
swiftly away.

"Dan!"

"Here!"

"Thank God!"

"Buck, one got away! If it was Silent--Here! Bring some matches."

Someone was dragging himself towards the door in a hopeless effort to
escape. Several others groaned.

"You, there!" called Buck. "Stay where you are!"

The man who struggled towards the door flattened himself against the
floor, moaning pitifully.

"Quick," said Dan, "light a match. Morris's posse is at my heels. No
time. If Silent escaped--"

A match flared in the hands of Buck.

"Who's that? Haines!"

"Let him alone, Dan! I'll tell you why later. There's Jordan and
Kilduff. That one by the door is Rhinehart."

They ran from one to the other, greeted by groans and deep curses.

"Who's that beneath the window?"

"Too small for Silent. It's Purvis, and he's dead!"

"Bart got him!"

"No! It was fear that killed him. Look at his face!"

"Bart, go out to Satan!"

The wolf trotted from the room.

"My God, Buck, I've done all this for nothin'! It was Silent that got
away!"

"What's that?"

Over the groans of the wounded came the sound of running horses, not
one, but many, then a call: "Close in! Close in!"

"The posse!" said Dan.

As he jerked open the door a bullet smashed the wood above his head.
Three horsemen were closing around Satan and Black Bart. He leaped
back into the room.

"They've got Satan, Buck. We've got to try it on foot. Go through the
window."

"They've got nothing on me. I'll stick with Haines."

Dan jumped through the window, and raced to the shelter of a big rock.
He had hardly dropped behind it when four horsemen galloped around the
corner of the house.

"Johnson and Sullivan," ordered the voice of Monte sharply, "watch
the window. They're lying low inside, but we've got Barry's horse and
wolf. Now we'll get him."

"Come out or we'll burn the house down!" thundered a voice from the
other side.

"We surrender!" called Buck within.

A cheer came from the posse. Sullivan and Johnson ran for the window
they had been told to guard. The door on the other side of the house
slammed open.

"It's a slaughter house!" cried one of the posse.

Dan left the sheltering rock and raced around the house, keeping a
safe distance, and dodging from rock to rock. He saw Satan and Black
Bart guarded by two men with revolvers in their hands. He might have
shot them down, but the distance was too great for accurate gun-play.
He whistled shrilly. The two guards wheeled towards him, and as they
did so, Black Bart, leaping, caught one by the shoulder, whirling him
around and around with the force of the spring. The other fired at
Satan, who raced off towards the sound of the whistle. It was an easy
shot, but in the utter surprise of the instant the bullet went wide.
Before he could fire again Satan was coming to a halt beside Dan.

"Help!" yelled the cattleman. "Whistling Dan!"

The other guard opened fire wildly. Three men ran from the house. All
they saw was a black shadow which melted instantly into the night.




CHAPTER XXXVI


FEAR

Into the dark he rode. Somewhere in the mountains was Silent, and
now alone. In Dan's mouth the old salt taste of his own blood was
unforgotten.

It was a wild chase. He had only the faintest clues to guide him,
yet he managed to keep close on the trail of the great outlaw. After
several days he rode across a tall red-roan stallion, a mere wreck of
a horse with lean sides and pendant head and glazed eye. It was a long
moment before Dan recognized Silent's peerless mount, Red Pete. The
outlaw had changed his exhausted horse for a common pony. The end of
the long trail must be near.

The whole range followed that chase with breathless interest. It was
like the race of Hector and Achilles around the walls of Troy. And
when they met there would be a duel of giants. Twice Whistling Dan was
sighted. Once Jim Silent fought a running duel with a posse fresh from
Elkhead. The man hunters were alert, but it was their secret hope that
the two famous outlaws would destroy each other, but how the wild
chase would end no one could know. At last Buck Daniels rode to tell
Kate Cumberland strange news.

When he stumbled into the ranch house, Kate and her father rose,
white-faced. There was an expression of waiting terror in their eyes.

"Buck!" cried Joe.

"Hush! Dad," said Kate. "It hasn't come yet! Buck, what has happened?"

"The end of the world has come for Dan," he said. "That devil
Silent--"

"Dan," cried old Joe, and rushed around the table to Buck.

"Silent has dared Dan to meet him at three o'clock tomorrow afternoon
in Tully's saloon in Elkhead! He's held up four men in the last
twenty-four hours and told them that he'll be at Tully's tomorrow and
will expect Dan there!"

"It isn't possible!" cried Kate. "That means that Silent is giving
himself up to the law!"

Buck laughed bitterly.

"The law will not put a hand on them if it thinks that they'll fight
it out together," he said.

"There'll be a crowd in the saloon, but not a hand will stir to arrest
Silent till after the fight."

"But Dan won't go to Tully's," broke in old Joe. "If Silent is crazy
enough to do such a thing, Dan won't be."

"He will," said Kate. "I know!"

"You've got to stop him," urged Buck. "You've got to get to Elkhead
and turn Dan back."

"Ay," said Joe, "for even if he kills Silent, the crowd will tackle
him after the fight--a hundred against one."

She shook her head.

"You won't go?"

"Not a step."

"But Kate, don't you understand--?"

"I couldn't turn Dan back. There is his chance to meet Silent. Do you
dream any one could turn him back?"

The two men were mute.

"You're right," said Buck at last. "I hoped for a minute that you
could do it, but now I remember the way he was in that dark shanty up
the Bald-eagle Creek. You can't turn a wolf from a trail, and Whistling
Dan has never forgotten the taste of his own blood."

"Kate!" called her father suddenly. "What's the matter, honey?"

With bowed head and a faltering step she was leaving the room. Buck
caught old Joe by the arm and held him back as he would have followed.

"Let her be!" said Buck sharply. "Maybe she'll want to see you at
three o'clock tomorrow afternoon, but until then she'll want to be
alone. There'll be ghosts enough with her all the time. You c'n lay to
that."

Joe Cumberland wiped his glistening forehead.

"There ain't nothin' we c'n do, Buck, but sit an' wait."

Buck drew a long breath.

"What devil gave Silent that idea?"

"_Fear_!"

"Jim Silent don't know what fear is!"

"Any one who's seen the yaller burn in Dan's eyes knows what fear is."

Buck winced.

Cumberland went on: "Every night Silent has been seein' them eyes that
glow yaller in the dark. They lie in wait for him in every shadow.
Between dark and dawn he dies a hundred deaths. He can't stand it no
more. He's goin' to die. Somethin' tells him that. But he wants to die
where they's humans around him, and when he dies he wants to pull Dan
down with him."

They sat staring at each other for a time.

"If he lives through that fight with Silent," said Buck sadly, "the
crowd will jump in on him. Their numbers'll make 'em brave."

"An' then?"

"Then maybe he'd like a friend to fight by his side," said Buck
simply. "So long, Joe!"

The old man wrung his hand and then followed him out to the
hitching-rack where Buck's horse stood.

"Ain't Dan got no friends among the crowd?" asked Cumberland. "Don't
they give him no thanks for catching the rest of Silent's gang?"

"They give him lots of credit," said Buck. "An' Haines has said a lot
in favour of Dan, explainin' how the jail bustin' took place. Lee is
sure provin' himself a white man. He's gettin' well of his wounds
and it's said the Governor will pardon him. You see, Haines went bad
because the law done him dirt a long time ago, and the Governor is
takin' that into account."

"But they'd still want to kill Dan?"

"Half of the boys wouldn't," said Buck. "The other half is all wrought
up over the killings that's been happenin' on the range in the last
month. Dan is accused of about an even half of 'em, an' the friends of
dead men don't waste no time listenin' to arguments. They say Dan's an
outlawed man an' that they're goin' to treat him like one."

"Damn them!" groaned Cumberland. "Don't Morris's confession make no
difference?"

"Morris was lynched before he had a chance to swear to what he said in
Dan's favour. Kilduff an' Jordan an' Rhinehart might testify that Dan
wasn't never bought over by Silent, but they know they're done for
themselves, an' they won't try to help anybody else, particular the
man that put 'em in the hands of the law. Kilduff has swore that Dan
_was_ bribed by Silent, that he went after Silent not for revenge, but
to get some more money out of him, an' that the fight in the shanty up
at Bald-eagle Creek was because Silent refused to give Dan any more
money."

"Then there ain't no hope," muttered Cumberland. "But oh, lad, it
breaks my heart to think of Kate! Dan c'n only die once, but every
minute is a death to her!"




CHAPTER XXXVII


DEATH

Before noon of the next day Buck joined the crowd which had been
growing for hours around Tully's saloon. Men gave way before him,
whispering. He was a marked man--the friend of Whistling Dan Barry.
Cowpunchers who had known him all his life now avoided his eyes, but
caught him with side glances. He smiled grimly to himself, reading
their minds. He was more determined than ever to stand or fall with
Whistling Dan that day.

There was not an officer of the law in sight. If one were present it
would be his manifest duty to apprehend the outlaws as soon as they
appeared, and the plan was to allow them to fight out their quarrel
and perhaps kill each other.

Arguments began to rise among separate groups, where the crimes
attributed to Whistling Dan Barry were numbered and talked over. It
surprised Buck to discover the number who believed the stories which
he and Haines had told. They made a strong faction, though manifestly
in the minority.

Hardly a man who did not, from time to time, nervously fumble the butt
of his six-gun. As three o'clock drew on the talk grew less and less.
It broke out now and again in little uneasy bursts. Someone would tell
a joke. Half hysterical laughter would greet it, and die suddenly,
as it began. These were all hard-faced men of the mountain-desert,
warriors of the frontier. What unnerved them was the strangeness of
the thing which was about to happen. The big wooden clock on the side
of the long barroom struck once for half-past two. All talk ceased.

Men seemed unwilling to meet each other's eyes. Some of them drummed
lightly on the top of the bar and strove to whistle, but the only
sound that came through their dried lips was a whispering rush of
breath. A grey-haired cattle ranger commenced to hum a tune, very low,
but distinct. Finally a man rose, strode across the room, shook the
old fellow by the shoulder with brutal violence, and with a curse
ordered him to stop his "damned death song!"

Everyone drew a long breath of relief. The minute hand crept on
towards three o'clock. Now it was twenty minutes, now fifteen, now
ten, now five; then a clatter of hoofs, a heavy step on the porch, and
the giant form of Jim Silent blocked the door. His hands rested on the
butts of his two guns. Buck guessed at the tremendous strength of that
grip. The eyes of the outlaw darted about the room, and every glance
dropped before his, with the exception of Buck's fascinated stare.

For he saw a brand on the face of the great long rider. It lay in no
one thing. It was not the unusual hollowness of eyes and cheeks. It
was not the feverish brightness of his glance. It was something which
included all of these. It was the fear of death by night! His hands
fell away from the guns. He crossed the room to the bar and nodded his
head at the bartender.

"Drink!" he said, and his voice was only a whisper without body of
sound.

The bartender, with pasty face, round and blank, did not move either
his hand or his fascinated eyes. There was a twitch of the outlaw's
hand and naked steel gleamed. Instantly revolvers showed in every
hand. A youngster moaned. The sound seemed to break the charm.

Silent put back his great head and burst into a deep-throated
laughter. The gun whirled in his hand and the butt crashed heavily on
the bar.

"Drink, damn you!" he thundered. "Step up an' drink to the health of
Jim Silent!"

The wavering line slowly approached the bar. Silent pulled out his
other gun and shoved them both across the bar.

"Take 'em," he said. "I don't want 'em to get restless an' muss up
this joint."

The bartender took them as if they were covered with some deadly
poison, and the outlaw stood unarmed! It came suddenly to Buck what
the whole manoeuvre meant. He gave away his guns in order to tempt
someone to arrest him. Better the hand of the law than the yellow
glare of those following eyes. Yet not a man moved to apprehend him.
Unarmed he still seemed more dangerous than six common men.

The long rider jerked a whisky bottle upside down over a glass. Half
the contents splashed across the bar. He turned and faced the crowd,
his hand dripping with the spilled liquor.

"Whose liquorin'?" he bellowed.

Not a sound answered him.

"Damn your yaller souls! Then all by myself I'll drink to--"

He stopped short, his eyes wild, his head tilted back. One by one the
cowpunchers gave back, foot by foot, softly, until they stood close to
the opposite wall of the saloon. All the bar was left to Silent. The
whisky glass slipped from his hand and crashed on the floor. In his
face was the meaning of the sound he heard, and now it came to their
own ears--a whistle thin with distance, but clear.

Only phrases at first, but now it rose more distinct, the song of the
untamed; the terror and beauty of the mountain-desert; a plea and a
threat.

The clock struck, sharp, hurried, brazen--one, two, three! Before the
last quick, unmusical chime died out Black Bart stood in the entrance
to the saloon. His eyes were upon Jim Silent, who stretched out his
arms on either side and gripped the edge of the bar. Yet even when the
wolf glided silently across the room and crouched before the bandit,
at watch, his lips grinned back from the white teeth, the man had no
eyes for him. Instead, his stare held steadily upon that open door and
on his raised face there was still the terror of that whistling which
swept closer and closer.

It ceased. A footfall crossed the porch. How different from the
ponderous stride of Jim Silent! This was like the padding step of the
panther. And Whistling Dan stood in the door. He did not fill it as
the burly shoulders of Silent had done. He seemed almost as slender as
a girl, and infinitely boyish in his grace--a strange figure, surely,
to make all these hardened fighters of the mountain-desert crouch, and
stiffen their fingers around the butts of their revolvers! His eyes
were upon Silent, and how they lighted! His face changed as the
face of the great god Pan must have altered when he blew into the
instrument of reeds and made perfect music, the first in the world.

"Bart," said the gentle voice, "go out to Satan."

The wolf turned and slipped from the room. It was a little thing, but,
to the men who saw it, it was terrible to watch an untamed beast obey
the voice of a man.

Still with that light, panther-step he crossed the barroom, and now he
was looking up into the face of the giant. The huge long rider loomed
above Dan. That was not terror which set his face in written lines--it
was horror, such as a man feels when he stands face to face with the
unearthly in the middle of night. This was open daylight in a room
thronged with men, yet in it nothing seemed to live save the smile of
Whistling Dan. He drew out the two revolvers and slipped them onto the
bar. They stood unarmed, yet they seemed no less dangerous.

Silent's arms crept closer to his sides. He seemed gathering himself
by degrees. The confidence in his own great size showed in his face,
and the blood-lust of battle in his eyes answered the yellow light in
Dan's.

Dan spoke.

"Silent, once you put a stain of blood on me. I've never forgot the
taste. It's goin' to be washed out today or else made redder. It was
here that you put the stain."

He struck the long rider lightly across the mouth with the back of
his hand, and Silent lunged with the snarl of a beast. His blow spent
itself on thin air. He whirled and struck again. Only a low laughter
answered him. He might as well have battered away at a shadow.

"Damnation!" he yelled, and leaped in with both arms outspread.

The impetus of his rush drove them both to the floor, where they
rolled over and over, and before they stopped thin fingers were locked
about the bull neck of the bandit, and two thumbs driven into the
hollow of his throat. With a tremendous effort he heaved himself from
the floor, his face convulsed.

He beat with both fists against the lowered head of Dan. He tore at
those hands. They were locked as if with iron. Only the laughter, the
low, continual laughter rewarded him.

He screamed, a thick, horrible sound. He flung himself to the floor
again and rolled over and over, striving to crush the slender,
remorseless body. Once more he was on his feet, running hither and
thither, dragging Dan with him. His eyes swelled out; his face
blackened. He beat against the walls. He snapped at the wrists of Dan
like a beast, his lips flecked with a bloody froth.

That bull-dog grip would not unlock. That animal, exultant laughter
ran on in demoniac music. In his great agony the outlaw rolled his
eyes in appeal to the crowd which surrounded the struggling two. Every
man seemed about to spring forward, yet they could not move. Some had
their fingers stiffly extended, as if in the act of gripping with
hands too stiff to close.

Silent slipped to his knees. His head fell back, his discoloured
tongue protruding. Dan wrenched him back to his feet. One more
convulsive effort from the giant, and then his eyes glazed, his body
went limp. The remorseless hands unlocked. Silent fell in a shapeless
heap to the floor.

Still no one moved. There was no sound except the deadly ticking of
the clock. The men stared fascinated at that massive, lifeless figure
on the floor. Even in death he was terrible. Then Dan's hand slid
inside his shirt, fumbled a moment, and came forth again bearing a
little gleaming circle of metal. He dropped it upon the body of Jim
Silent, and turning, walked slowly from the room. Still no one moved
to intercept him. Passing through the door he pushed within a few
inches of two men. They made no effort to seize him, for their eyes
were upon the body of the great lone rider.

The moment Dan was gone the hypnotic silence which held the crowd,
broke suddenly. Someone stirred. Another cursed beneath his breath.
Instantly all was clamour and a running hither and thither. Buck
Daniels caught from the body of Jim Silent the small metal circle
which Dan had dropped. He stood dumbfounded at the sight of it, and
then raised his hand, and shouted in a voice which gathered the others
swiftly around him. They cursed deeply with astonishment, for what
they saw was the marshal's badge of Tex Calder. The number on it was
known throughout the mountain-desert, and seeing it, the worst of
Dan's enemies stammered, gaped, and could not speak. There were more
impartial men who could. In five minutes the trial of Whistling Dan
was under way. The jury was every cowpuncher present. The judge was
public opinion. It was a grey-haired man who finally leaped upon the
bar and summed up all opinion in a brief statement.

"Whatever Whistlin' Dan has done before," he said, "this day he's done
a man-sized job in a man's way. Morris, before he died, said enough to
clear up most of this lad's past, particular about the letter from Jim
Silent that talked of a money bribe. Morris didn't have a chance to
swear to what he said, but a dying man speaks truth. Lee Haines had
cleared up most of the rest. We can't hold agin Dan what he done in
breakin' jail with Haines. Dan Barry was a marshal. He captured Haines
and then let the outlaw go. He had a right to do what he wanted as
long as he finally got Haines back. And Haines has told us that when
he was set free Barry said he would get him again. And Barry did get
him again. Remember that, and he got all the rest of Silent's gang,
and now there lies Jim Silent dead. They's two things to remember. The
first is that Whistlin' Dan has rid away without any shootin' irons on
his hip. That looks as if he's come to the end of his long trail. The
second is that he was a bunkie of Tex Calder, an' a man Tex could
trust for the avengin' of his death is good enough for me."

There was a pause after this speech, and during the quiet the
cowpunchers were passing from hand to hand the marshal's badge which
Calder, as he died, had given to Dan. The bright small shield was a
more convincing proof than a hundred arguments. The bitterest of
Dan's enemies realized that the crimes of which he was accused were
supported by nothing stronger than blind rumour. The marshal's badge
and the dead body of Jim Silent kept them mute. So an illegal judge
and one hundred illegal jurymen found Whistling Dan "not guilty."

Buck Daniels took horse and galloped for the Cumberland house with the
news of the verdict. He knew that Whistling Dan was there.




CHAPTER XXXVIII


THE WILD GEESE

So when the first chill days of the late autumn came the four were
once more together, Dan, Kate, Black Bart, and Satan. Buck and old Joe
Cumberland made the background of their happiness. It was the latter's
request which kept the wedding a matter of the indefinite future. He
would assign no reason for his wish, but Kate guessed it.

All was not well, she knew. Day after day, as the autumn advanced,
Dan went out with the wolf and the wild black stallion and ranged the
hills alone. She did not ask him where or why, for she understood that
to be alone was as necessary to him as sleep is to others. Yet she
could not explain it all and the cold fear grew in her. Sometimes she
surprised a look of infinite pity in the eyes of Buck or her father.
Sometimes she found them whispering and nodding together. At last on
an evening when the three sat before the fire in solemn silence and
Dan was away, they knew not where, among the hills, she could bear it
no longer.

"Do you really think," she burst out, "that the old wildness is still
in Dan?"

"Wild?" said her father gently. "Wild? I don't say he's still
wild--but why is he so late tonight, Kate? The ground's all covered
with snow. The wind's growin' sharper an' sharper. This is a time for
all reasonable folk to stay home an' git comfortable beside the fire.
But Dan ain't here. Where is he?"

"Hush!" said Buck, and raised a hand for silence.

Far away they heard the wail of a wolf crying to the moon. She rose
and went out on the porch of the house. The others followed her.
Outside they found nothing but the low moaning of the wind, and the
snow, silver glimmering where the moonlight fell upon it. Then they
heard the weird, inhuman whistling, and at last they saw Dan riding
towards the house. A short distance away he stopped Satan. Black Bart
dropped to his haunches and wailed again. Dan was staring upwards.

"Look!" said Kate, and pointed.

Across the white circle of the moon drove a flying wedge of wild
geese. The wail of the wolf died out. A faint honking was blown to
them by the wind, now a distant, jangling chorus, now a solitary sound
repeated like a call.

Without a word the three returned to their seats close by the fire,
and sat silent, staring. Presently the rattle of the wolf's claws came
on the floor; then Dan entered with his soft step and stood behind
Kate's chair. They were used to his silent comings and goings. Black
Bart was slinking up and down the room with a restless step. His eyes
glowed from the shadow, and as Joe looked up to the face of Dan he
saw the same light repeated there, yellow and strange. Then, like the
wolf, Dan turned and commenced that restless pacing up and down, up
and down, a padding step like the fall of a panther's paw.

"The wild geese--" he said suddenly, and then stopped.

"They are flying south?" said Kate.

"South!" he repeated.

His eyes looked far away. The wolf slipped to his side and licked his
hand.

"Kate, I'd like to follow the wild geese."

Old Joe shaded his eyes and the big hands of Buck were locked
together.

"Are you unhappy, Dan?" she said.

"The snow is come," he muttered uneasily.

He began pacing again with that singular step.

"When I went out to Satan in the corral this evenin', I found him
standin' lookin' south."

She rose and faced him with a little gesture of surrender.

"Then you must follow the wild geese, Dan!"

"You don't mind me goin', Kate?"

"No."

"But your eyes are shinin'!"

"It's only the reflection of the firelight."

Black Bart whined softly. Suddenly Dan straightened and threw up his
arms, laughing low with exultation. Buck Daniels shuddered and dropped
his head.

"I am far behind," said Dan, "but I'll go fast."

He caught her in his arms, kissed her eyes and lips, and then whirled
and ran from the room with that noiseless, padding step.

"Kate!" groaned Buck Daniels, "you've let him go! We've all lost him
for ever!"

A sob answered him.

"Go call him back," pleaded Joe. "He will stay for your sake."

She whispered: "I would rather call back the wild geese who flew
across the moon. And they are only beautiful when they are wild!"

"But you've lost him, Kate, don't you understand?"

"The wild geese fly north again in spring," said Buck, "and he'll--"

"Hush!" she said. "Listen!"

Far off, above the rushing of the wind, they heard the weird
whistling, a thrilling and unearthly music. It was sad with the beauty
of the night. It was joyous with the exultation of the wind. It might
have been the voice of some god who rode the northern storm south,
south after the wild geese, south with the untamed.


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Untamed, by Max Brand

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNTAMED ***

***** This file should be named 10886-8.txt or 10886-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/8/8/10886/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Gene Smethers and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


