The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and
Instruction, Vol. 13, Issue 368, May 2, 1829, by Various


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and Instruction, Vol. 13,
Issue 368, May 2, 1829

Author: Various

Release Date: February 27, 2004  [eBook #11348]

Language: English

Character set encoding: iso-8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE,
AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION, VOL. 13, ISSUE 368, MAY 2, 1829***


E-text prepared by Jonathan Ingram, Keith M. Eckrich, David Garcia, and
the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 11348-h.htm or 11348-h.zip:
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/1/3/4/11348/11348-h/11348-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/1/3/4/11348/11348-h.zip)




THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.

VOL. 13, No. 368.] SATURDAY, MAY 2, 1829. [PRICE 2d.



       *       *       *       *       *




CLARENDON HOUSE, PICCADILLY.


[Illustration: CLARENDON HOUSE, PICCADILLY.]


The virtuous and uncompromising chancellor, the Earl of Clarendon, had
a splendid mansion facing the upper end of St. James's-street, on the
site of the present Grafton-street. Of this princely pile, the above
is an accurate engraving. It was built by Clarendon with the stone
intended for the rebuilding of St. Paul's. "He purchased the
materials," says Pennant, "but a nation soured with an unsuccessful
war, with fire, and with pestilence, imputed everything as a crime to
this great and envied character; his enemies called it Dunkirk House,
calumniating him with having built it with the money arising from the
sale of that town, which had just before been given up to the French,
for a large sum, by his Master."

It is true that Clarendon built this mansion in a season of
discontent; but so sensible was he of his vanity and imprudence in
building so large a house, and of the envy it drew upon him, that he
afterwards apologized for the act; which he declares, so far exceeded
the proposed expense, as to add greatly to the embarrassment of his
affairs.

This mansion cost Â£50,000. and 300 men were employed in the building.
It was purchased from his lordship by George Monk, Duke of Albemarle,
and afterwards by another nobleman, inferior indeed in abilities, but
not inferior in virtues. In 1670, James, Duke of Ormond, resided at
Clarendon House; and on his way thither, he was one day dragged out of
his coach by the infamous Blood and his associates, who intended to
hang his Grace at Tyburn, in revenge for justice done, under his
administration in Ireland, on some of their companions. "This
refinement in revenge," says Pennant, "saved the duke's life; he had
leisure to disengage himself from the villain on horseback, to whom he
was tied; by which time he was discovered by his servants, and rescued
from death."

The original of our Engraving was copied from a rare print, which, in
the year 1790, was in the collection of Thomas Allen, Esq. Appended to
the former is a section, showing the relative situation of Clarendon
House, which was taken from a map of London (supposed to be unique) in
an illustrated _Clarendon's History_, in the possession of John
Charles Crowle, Esq. By the section, the entrance-gate to the
court-yard of the house appears to have been in Piccadilly, in a
direct line with St. James's Street, and the grounds to have extended
to Bruton Street at the back, where there was likewise a
communication. The site of the front gate is now, therefore, the
commencement of _Albemarle Street_, named after one of the
distinguished occupants of Clarendon House.

Notwithstanding the revolutions of time and fashion in this quarter,
the illustrious name of the founder of Clarendon House is still
preserved in the "_Clarendon Hotel_," which occupies a portion of the
original ground already described. One of the changes is, that instead
of the Chancellor meditating upon his dismissal from office, which his
very virtues and stately dignity, and a weak king, and a more wicked
and envious faction had brought about,--we have well-living twos and
fours hob-nobbing over Chateau-Margaux, or yielding to the delightful
inspirations of Ay Champagne. Not a few more of the good things of
this great town are assembled near the same spot. Albemarle Street has
many first-rate hotels, and two handsome club-houses; while on the
Bond Street side of the quadrangle are two or three extensive
libraries, an immense porcelain repository, and a score of fashionable
_artistes_. What idle delights are all these compared with the wisdom
and virtue which once dwelt on the same spot. But had Clarendon lived
to see Crockford's splendid subscription-house rise after a golden
shower, in St. James's Street, (and this he might have done from the
front-windows of Clarendon House) he would, perhaps, have given us an
extra volume of _Essays_. We would that he _had_ so lived, if only
that his sublime truths might thus nave been multiplied for the good
of mankind, if not for the weak heads of St. James's Street.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GLANCIN' E'E.


  Oh lassie tell me can'st thou lo'e,
    I hae gaz'd upon thy glancin' e'e;
  It soars aboon, it rolls below,
    But, ah, it never rests on me.

  Oh lassie I hae socht the hour
    When pity wak'nin' lo'e might be,
  Tell my sair heart a gauldin' flower
    Has droopit in thy glancin' e'e.

  Oh lassie, turn not sae awa'
    Disdainfu', gie na death to me;
  Does pity mark the tears that fa'?
    Exhale them wi' thy glancin' e'e.

C.C.

       *       *       *       *       *


WESTMINSTER ABBEY.

(_For the Mirror_.)

"There is a voice from the grave sweeter than song."--_Washington
Irving_.


  Illustrious dead! one tributary sigh,
  In that great temple where the mighty lie,
  I breath'd for you--a magic charm was there
  Where rest the great and good, the wise and fair;
  Their glittering day of fame has had its close
  And beauty, genius, grandeur, there repose.
  Immortal names! kings, queens, and statesmen rise
  In marble forms before the gazer's eyes.
  Cold, pale, and silent, down each lessening aisle
  They clustering stand, and mimic life awhile.
  The warrior chief, in sculptur'd beauty dies,
  And in Fame's clasping arms for ever lies.
  "Each in his place of state," the rivals stand,
  The senators, who saved a sinking land;
  Majestic, graceful,--each with "lips apart"
  Whose eloquence subdued and won the heart.
  Pitt! round thy name how bright a halo burns,
  When memory to thy day of glory turns;
  And views thee in life's bright meridian lie,
  And victim to thy patriot spirit die!
  Round Fox's tomb, what forms angelic weep,
  And ever watch that chill and marble sleep!
  Silence, how eloquent! how deep--profound--
  She holds her reign above the hallow'd ground.
  Here sceptred monarchs in death's slumbers lie,
  Tudors, Plantagenets--they too could die!
  Beneath a 'scutcheon'd arch, with banners spread,
  Unhappy, murdered, Richard rests his head.
  While Pomfret's walls in "ruin greenly tell,"
  How fought the brave and how the noble fell!
  Pale rose of York! thy sanguine rival rears
  Full many a tomb, and many a trophy bears.
  But who lies here? in marble lovely still,
  Here let me pause, and fancy take her fill.
  Poor ill-starr'd Mary; Melancholy gloom
  And fond regrets are waking o'er thy tomb.
  Bright was thy morn of promise, dark the day,
  That clos'd thy fate in murderous Fotheringay!
  How near thee lies that "bright star of the west,"
  Elizabeth, of queens the wisest, best;
  Her "lion port," and her imperial brow,
  The dark grey stone essays in vain to show.
  Ye royal rivals of a former day,
  How has your love and hatred pass'd away!
  To future times how faint the voice of fame,
  For greatness here but "stalks an empty name."
  Around, above, how sorrow builds her throne,
  To snatch from death's embrace each treasure gone.
  See, how the horrid phantom bends his bow,
  And points his dart to lay that victim low![1]
  She sinks, she falls, and her fond husband's breast
  Is the cold pillow to that marble rest!
  But softly tread upon the sacred ground,
  Where Britain's bards lie sepulchred round.
  Sons of the muse, who woke the magic spell,
  From the deep windings of "Apollo's shell!"
  Mute is each lyre, their silent strings are bound
  With willow, yew, and cypress wreath'd around.
  Their hopes, joys, sorrows, rest within the grave
  Admiring nations to their relics gave.
  Hail, mighty shades! bright spirits of the past;
  Here may your ashes sleep while time shall last.
  Let kindred genius shed the pensive tear,
  And grace with votive elegy each bier.
  While far beyond this melancholy vale,
  When faded sorrow tells her mournful tale,
  "O'er this dim spot of earth," in regions fair
  Your spirits dwell, and joys eternal share.

    [1] The tomb of Mrs. Nightingale.

_Kirton Lindsey_.

ANNIE R.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE COSMOPOLITE.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE TIMES NEWSPAPER.


We are not about to write an advertisement for this advertised of all
advertisers--nor to talk of its square feet--its crowded broadside--or
the myriads of letters that make it resemble a sea of animalculae. We
are content to leave all the pride of its machinery to Messrs.
Applegath and Cowper, and the clang of its engine to the peaceful
purlieus of Printing-house Square. Yet these are interesting items in
the advancement of science, and in the history of mankind; for whether
taken mechanically or morally, the _Times_ is, without exception, the
newspaper of all newspapers, "the observed of all _observers_" and
altogether, the most extraordinary production of this or any other
age.

But we are more anxious to reach what may be called the philosophy of
a newspaper--that broad volume of human life, in which "the follies,
vices, and consequent miseries of multitudes are displayed." To prove
this, only let the reader glance over the twenty-four columns of a
Times newspaper, and attempt a calculation of the many thousand events
that spring from and are connected with their contents. Yet this sheet
is but as it were a day in the life of man--a mere thread of the
mingled yarn of his existence--and 313 such sheets, or 1,252 such
folios make but a year of his history. The subject is too vast and
comprehensive for continued contemplation, for it is like all other
wheels of vicissitude; we become giddy by looking too steadfastly on
its twinings.

Let us take one side of any recent _Times _newspaper--say that of
_Thursday last_--and attempt something like an abstract of its
_memorabilia_. This may appear for us a toilsome task, but if the
reader be not fatigued also, our time will not be misspent. Begin "at
the beginning" with the old English title, broken by the royal
arms--like a blocking-course; and the No. and date in a sort of
typographical entablature. The first side is filled by 188
advertisements, for the most part, classed according to their objects.

Thus, we start, and not unappropriately, with notices of vessels _to
sail_ for India and the new settlement on _Swan River_. What
temptations for adventure and avarice--what associations of industry
and indolence--luxury and squalid misery--do these announcements
create in the reflective mind. The nabob in his chintz--the speculator
with his last hundred--and the half-starved agriculturist--are but
sorry portraits beside the class to whom the next notice is
addressed.--Packets to Calais, Dieppe, and Margate--necessity on her
last leg, and luxury on the fantastic toe--the wasted mind and
famished visage beside hoyden mirth and bloated luxury. Then the South
American Mining Association Deed "lies for signature:"--what a relief
in this sheet of _chiaro-scuro_--a kind of tinsel to set off its grave
parts, with gold dust enough to blind half its readers. To this little
flash of golden light succeeds shade--Chancery and creditors'
notices--proving debts and consciences--followed by civil contracts
for Bridewell and building a Lunatic Asylum in Kent. The association
is too obvious, and verily, the maker-up of the Times newspaper is a
Hogarth in his way; for what Hogarth did with pencil and brush, he
does with metallic types. Next is a Saw Mill to be sold cheap,
constructed for the express purpose of being sent to the Swan River
settlement--how fortunate--for surely any idle wight would make his
way with such assistance, especially as the machine is "on improved
principles." _Luxury_ again--paper-hangings, French lamps, and French
roses--_necessity_ again--Money on mortgage, and bills discounted: how
obvious the connexion--the very cause and effect--the lamps will not
burn without oil, and the roses will not bloom without money--at least
they will only waste their fragrance in the desert air of the
nursery-ground.

The _second column_ begins with a solicitor's inquiry for a person
long unheard of, who, if alive, "may hear of somewhat very
considerably to his advantage"--any person proving his death, shall be
rewarded. Next is a notice from the City Chamber Court of Stralsund,
of a man who has been missing twenty years, and unless he informs the
court of his existence on or before Lady-day, 1830, he will be
declared dead--poor fellow--yet how many would rejoice at such an
opportunity of escaping from their worldly cares. Next comes a little
string of Anniversaries of Charities--followed by Exhibitions of the
Fine Arts--had their position been reversed, the effect would have
been better; for fine painting prepares the heart for acts of
benevolence, and kindleth all its best feelings. Portraits of the Rev.
Matthew Wilks and Pope Pius VII. (the latter a splendid mezzotinto
from Sir T. Lawrence's picture) are followed by a "_Speaking_ French
Grammar," a very good companion for any Englishman about to visit the
continent; for with many, their stock of French does not last out
their cash. Next is fourteen years of the Morning Post to be sold--a
bargain for a fashionable novelist, and in fact, a complete
stock-in-trade for any court or town Adonis; a perfect vocabulary of
fashion, detailing the rise and progress of all the fashionable arts
since the peace--the gazette appointments and disappointments--and
elopements and _faux pas_, sufficient for all the comedy-writers of
the present century--the respective claims of Spanish Refugees and
Spitalfields Weavers--charitable concerts and opera benefits--and all
the lumber and light artillery of the _grand monde_.

The _third column_ is almost entirely occupied by "Wanted"
advertisements and we had resolved to pass over all their "Wants;" had
not some of them occurred to us as rather singular, even in these
times of general distress. The first of these is for a respectable
middle-aged woman, as lady's maid--"to understand dress-making,
millinery, hair-dressing, getting-up fine linen, and to be useful and
obliging." All this is reasonable enough; but mark the inducement: "a
clever person fond of the country, and who can bear confinement, will
find this a comfortable situation!" "This is too much." Another is for
a butler and a valet, to "undertake the care and responsibility of a
numerous family:" another is a young man for "a situation in any shop
or warehouse, not particular what:" another of "a nurse, who can cut
and make children's dresses, and instruct them in reading and
spelling;" a school-assistant "to fill the second desk," &c. Next come
a few characteristics of a scientific age--as patent trouser-straps,
to "prevent the dirt getting between the strap and the boot, &c.;" and
patent springs for waistcoat backs--to cause the clothes to fit well
to the shape, &c.--and, above all, a legitimate, scientific _Diaphane_
parasol.

The "Wants" are resumed in the _fourth column_. One is a young man to
be able to walk well; "it is immaterial what he has been accustomed
to."

In the fourth column we find "a family grave to be sold, unused for
nearly 50 years at that period, but partly occupied. _To save
trouble_, price 25_l_." Another advertisement--"to small capitalists"
is a perfect puzzle; for the advertiser will not describe the
"ready-money concern" to be disposed of, but says, "the principal
article of sale is what is consumed, either in a greater or less
degree, by almost every individual." Next is a tallowchandler's
business in a situation which "will command an extensive trade
immediately the new Fleet Market is erected"--rather anticipatory, to
be sure. Another, "worthy of notice," offers for 260 guineas, seven
houses, which cost 800 in building--a tolerable speculation.

The _last column_ commences with a fine brown gelding, (like most
friends) parted with for no fault, free from vice, although, "a
_trial_ will be granted." Another announces for sale, several "_bays_,
greys, roans, _creams_, and _duns_:" a chaise "parted with for no
other fault than the present owner having purchased a four-wheeled
one;" and "a house near the church, commanding extensive and pleasing
prospects."

The fourth folio, or side of the paper, is nearly filled with
advertisements of _sales by auction_, a single glance at which would
convince us of the instability of human affairs, even if we did not
read in one corner, of a theatrical wardrobe, containing five splendid
new court dresses, trimmed with gold and silver (except the pockets,)
and 52 very fine wigs.

The inner, or second and third folios of the paper, present still
finer studies for our reflection. The eye almost instinctively lights
on the "Foreign Papers," detailing the progress of war and the balance
of power--Francfort Fair, and English manufactures. Below is the
well-known graphic relief--a clock, and two opened and one closed
book, with "The Times"--past and future, decorated with oak and
laurel. Then come the theatrical announcements teeming with novelty
and attraction, which stand like the sauces, savoury dishes, and
sweetmeats of the day's repast.

(_To be concluded in our next_.)

       *       *       *       *       *




OLD POETS.

       *       *       *       *       *

(_To the Editor of the Mirror_.)

The following song is said to be the most ancient in the English
language, and to have been written so early as the year 1250, almost a
century before Geoffrey Chaucer, (who is styled the father of English
poetry,) produced his _Court of Love_, which was written at the early
age of eighteen.

CHAS. COLE.


THE CUCCU.

  Summer is icumen in;
    Lhude sing cuccu:
  Groweth sed and bloweth med,
    And springeth the wde nu
      Sing cuccu.

  Awe bleteth after lomb;
    Lhouth after calve cu:
  Bulluc sterteth,
  Buck verteth,
    Murie sing cuccu,
      Cuccu, cuccu,
  Wel singes this cuccu;
    Ne swik thu naver.


_Glossary_--Sumer, summer--icumen, a coming--lhude, loud--sed,
seed--med, mead--wde, wood--nu, new--awe, ewe--lomb, lamb--lhouth,
loweth--cu, cow--murie, merry--singes, sing'st--thu, thou--Ne swik thu
naver, May'st thou never cease.

       *       *       *       *       *




MANNERS & CUSTOMS OF ALL NATIONS.

       *       *       *       *       *


MAY DAY.


It would seem that among our Pagan ancestors, before the introduction
of Christianity, the _first day of May_ was the great festival in
honour of the sun, and that fires were then kindled and rejoicings
made, in honour of that great luminary. The first day of May is still
called _Beltan_, or _Baal-tein_, "the fire of Baal." In some parts of
the country the shepherds still make festivals of milk and eggs on
that day, but the custom is rapidly declining. In the Highlands the
festival is still continued with singular ceremonies. On Beltan day
all the boys in a township or hamlet meet in the moors; they cut a
table in the green sod, of a round figure, by casting a trench in the
ground of such circumference as to hold the whole company; they kindle
a fire, and dress a meal of eggs and milk of the consistence of a
custard; and then knead a cake of oatmeal, which is toasted at the
embers against a stone. After the custard is eaten up, they divide the
cake into as many portions, similar in size and shape, as there are
persons in the company. They then daub over one of these portions with
charcoal until it is perfectly black; they put all the bits of the
cake into a bonnet; when each of the company, blindfolded, draws out a
portion. He who holds the bonnet is entitled to the last bit. Whoever
draws the black piece is the devoted person to be sacrificed to Baal,
whose favour they mean to implore in rendering the season productive.
There is little doubt but that such inhuman sacrifices were once
offered in this country as well as in the east; although the act of
sacrifice is now dispensed with, the devoted person being only
compelled to leap three times through the flames, with which the
ceremony of the festival is closed.

That the Caledonians paid a superstitious respect to the sun, as was
the practice among many other nations, is evident, not only from the
sacrifice of Beltan, but from many other circumstances. When a
Highlander goes to bathe, or to drink water out of a consecrated
fountain, he must always approach by going round the place from east
to west on the south side, in imitation of the apparent diurnal motion
of the sun. When the dead are laid in the earth, the grave is
approached by going round in the same manner. The bride is conducted
to her future spouse in the presence of the minister; and the glass
goes round in company in the course of the sun. This is called in
Gaelic, going round in the right or lucky way; the opposite course is
the wrong or unlucky way.

FHAOLAIN.

       *       *       *       *       *


ABORIGINES OF VAN DIEMAN'S LAND.


So little is known of these children of nature, and still less has
been done to gain any knowledge of them, that not much can be offered
as to their present numbers or condition. From what I have seen and
read, the natives of Van Dieman's Land are unlike any other Indians,
either in features, their mode of living, hunting, &c. There are many
hundreds of people who have lived for years in the colony, and yet
have never seen a native. ... The features of these people are any
thing but pleasing: a large flat nose, with immense nostrils; lips
particularly thick; a wide mouth, with a tolerably good set of teeth;
the hair long and woolly, which, as if to confer additional beauty, is
besmeared with red clay (similar to our red ochre) and grease. Their
limbs are badly proportioned; the women appear to be generally better
formed than the men. Their only covering is a few kangaroo skins,
rudely stitched, and thrown over the shoulders; but more frequently
they appear in a state of nudity; indeed, so little knowledge have
they of decency or comfort, that they never avail themselves of the
purposes for which apparel is given to them. Lieut. Collins, in his
account of the natives of New South Wales, describes their marriage
ceremonies as being most barbarous and brutal; and I have also heard
from individuals who have visited New South Wales, that it is not
uncommon to see a poor woman almost beaten to death by her lover,
previous to his marrying her. From the shyness of the natives of Van
Dieman's Land, and the constant warfare that has been carried on
between them and the remote stock-keepers, (which is not likely to
render them more familiar,) I have never been able to ascertain
whether there is any trace of religion among them, or if they have
the slightest idea of a Supreme Being. I believe, and it is generally
supposed, they have not. It is but fair to remark, however, that
nothing has been done for them; the few that can speak a little
English, only curse and swear, and this they catch up very readily
from the different convicts they meet with.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are but few instances of any native having entirely forsaken his
tribe, however young he may have been taken away; they appear to
dislike any thing in the shape of labour, although, if they take to
cattle, they are, beyond any thing, quick in tracing and finding those
lost. So acute is their power of discrimination, that they have been
known to trace the footsteps of bush-rangers over mountains and rocks;
and, although the individual they have been in pursuit of has walked
into the sides of the river as if to cross it, to elude the vigilance
of his pursuers, and has swam some distance down and crossed when
convenient, yet nothing can deceive them. Indeed, so remarkable is
their discernment, that if but the slightest piece of moss on a rock
has been disturbed by footsteps, they will instantly detect it. The
aborigines of this island have no appointed place or situation to live
in; they roam about at will, followed by a pack of dogs, of different
sorts and sizes, but which are used principally for hunting the
kangaroo, oppossum, bandicoot, &c. They are passionately fond of their
dogs; so much so, that the females are frequently known to suckle a
favourite puppy instead of the child. They rarely ever move at night,
but encircle themselves round a large fire, and sleep in a sitting
posture, with their heads between their knees. So careless are they of
their children, that it is not uncommon to see boys grown up with feet
exhibiting the loss of a toe or two, having, when infants, been
dropped into the fire by the mother. The children are generally
carried (by the women) astride across the shoulders, in a careless
manner. They live entirely by hunting, and do not fish so much, or use
the canoe, as in New South Wales, although the women are tolerably
expert divers; the craw-fish and oyster, if immediately on the coast,
are their principal food. Oppossums and kangaroos may be said to be
their chief support; the latter is as delicious a treat to an epicure,
as the former is the reverse. The manner of cooking their victuals is
by throwing it on the fire, merely to singe off the hair; they eat
voraciously, and are very little removed from the brute creation as to
choice of food; entrails, &c. sharing the same chance as the choicest
parts. They are extremely expert in climbing, and can reach the top of
the largest forest-trees without the aid of branches; they effect this
by means of a small sharp flint, which they clasp tightly in the ball
of their four fingers, and having cut a notch out of the bark, they
easily ascend, with the large toe of each foot in one notch, and their
curiously manufactured hatchet in the other. Their weapons of defence
are the spear and waddie; the former is about twelve feet long, and as
thick as the little finger of a man; the tea-tree supplies them with
this matchless weapon; they harden one end, which is very sharply
pointed, by burning and filing it with a flint prepared for the
purpose. In throwing the spear they are very expert; indeed, of late,
their audacious atrocities have been lamentably great, although, at
the same time, I have little hesitation in saying, they have arisen
from the cruel treatment experienced by some of their women from the
hands of the distant stock-keepers. Indeed, these poor mortals, I
know, have been shot at merely to gratify a most barbarous cruelty....

After killing a white man, the natives have a sort of dance and
rejoicing, jumping, and singing, and sending forth the strangest
noises ever heard. They do not molest the body when dead, nor have I
ever heard of their stripping or robbing the deceased. Among
themselves they have no funeral rites; and those who are aged or
diseased are left in hollow trees, or under the ledges of rocks, to
pine and die. These people are subject to a disease, which causes the
most loathsome ulcerated sores; two or three whom I saw were
wretched-looking objects. I remember a very old man, who was thus
affected, being tried and hung, for spearing one of Mr. Hart's men;
the culprit was so ill and infirm as to be obliged to be carried to
the place of execution. I think the colonial surgeons call the disease
the "bush scab;" and that it is occasioned by a filthy mode of life.
The population of natives is very small in proportion to the extent of
the island: several causes may be alleged for their smallness of
numbers; the principal one is their having been driven about from
place to place, by settlers taking new locations; another cause is the
great destruction of the kangaroo, which obliges the natives to labour
hard to procure food sufficient for their sustenance: this, and their
having no means of procuring vegetables, besides being constantly
exposed to the weather, together with their offensive habits of
living, produce the disease above mentioned, with its fatal
consequences. _Widdowson's Van Dieman's Land_.


Retrospective Gleanings.


OLD ROSE.


Walton, in his "Angler," makes the hunter, in the second chapter,
propose that they shall sing "Old Rose," which is presumed to refer to
the ballad, "Sing, old Rose, and burn the bellows," of which every one
has heard, but much trouble has been taken, in vain, to find a copy of
it.

       *       *       *       *       *


AUCTIONS.


Elihu Yale was remarkable for his auctions. The first of these was
about the year 1700. He had brought such quantities of goods from
India, that, finding no one house large enough to stow them in, he had
a public sale of the over-plus; and that was the first auction of the
kind in England.

       *       *       *       *       *


LILLY, THE ASTROLOGER.


While this impudent cheat is ridiculed for his absurdities, let him
have credit for as lucky a guess as ever blessed the pages even of
"Francis Moore, physician." In his "Astrologicall Predictions for
1648," there occurs the following passage, in which we must needs
allow that he attained to "something like prophetic strain," when we
call to mind that the great Plague of London occurred in 1665, and the
great Fire in the year following:

"In the year 1656 the aphelium of Mars, who is the generall
significator of England, will be in Virgo, which is assuredly the
ascendant of the English Monarchy, but Aries of the kingdom. When this
absis, therefore, of Mars shall appear in Virgo, who shall expect less
than a strange _catastrophe_ of human affairs in the commonwealth,
monarchy, and kingdom of England? There will then, either in or about
these times, or neer that year, _or within ten years, more or less, of
that time_, appear in this kingdom so strange a revolution of fate,
_so grand a catastrophe_, and great mutation unto this monarchy and
government, as never yet appeared; of which, as the times now stand, I
have no liberty or encouragement to deliver any opinion. _Only, it
will be ominous to London, unto her merchants at sea, to her traffique
at land, to her poor, to her rich, to all sorts of people inhabiting
in her or her liberties, BY REASON OF SUNDRY FIRES AND A CONSUMING
PLAGUE."

This is the prediction which, in 1666, led to his being examined by a
Committee of the House of Commons; not, as has been supposed, that he
might "discover by the stars who were the authors of the Fire of
London," but because the precision with which he was thought to have
foretold the event, gave birth to a suspicion that he was already
acquainted with them, and privy to the (supposed) machinations which
had brought about the catastrophe. Curran says, there are two kind of
prophets, those who are really inspired, and those who prophesy events
which they intend themselves to bring about. Upon this occasion, poor
Lilly had the ill-luck to be deemed one of the latter class.

       *       *       *       *       *


WHIGS AND TORIES.


Whenever these terms were first introduced, and whatever might be
their original meaning, it is certain that in the reign of Charles the
Second they carried the political signification which they still
retain. Take, as a proof, the following nervous passage from Dryden's
Epilogue to "The Duke of Guise," 1683:


  "Damn'd neuters, in their middle way of steering,
  Are neither fish, nor flesh, nor good red herring:
  Nor whigs, nor Tories they; nor this nor that;
  Not birds, not beasts, but just a kind of bat:
  A twilight animal, true to neither cause,
  With _Tory_ wings, but _Whiggish_ teeth and claws."

       *       *       *       *       *


OTWAY'S "CAIUS MARIUS."


When poor Otway's "unpardonable piracy," in taking part of this play
from "Romeo and Juliet," was reprobated so severely, the critic might
have done him the justice to mention, that, instead of attempting to
pass off the borrowed beauties as his own, he, in the prologue, fully
avowed his obligations. It contains an animated eulogy on Shakspeare,
which thus concludes:--


  "Though much the most unworthy of the throng,
  Our this day's poet fears he's done him wrong.
  Like greedy beggars, that steal sheaves away,
  _You'll find he's rifled him of half a play;_
  Among his baser dross you'll see it shine,
  Most beautiful, amazing, and divine."

       *       *       *       *       *


NANCY DAWSON


Was a dancer at Covent Garden Theatre, previous to the accession of
his late majesty; and in 1760 transferred her services to the other
house. On the 23rd of September, in that year, the "Beggar's Opera"
was performed at Drury Lane, when the play-bill thus announced her:
"In Act III, a hornpipe by Miss Dawson, her first appearance
here."--It seems she was engaged to oppose Mrs. Vernon in the same
exhibition at the rival house. That her performance of it was somewhat
celebrated, may be inferred from the circumstance of there being a
full-length print of her in it.--_Gentleman's Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

RELIC OF JOHN BUNYAN.


[Illustration: Relic of John Bunyan.]


The cut represents the vessel from which John Bunyan, the author of
that popular allegory, "the Pilgrim's Progress," was accustomed to
drink syllabub, during his incarceration in Bedford County Gaol. The
original is in the possession of the correspondent who has furnished
us with the sketch for the engraver. It is of common earthen-ware,
7-1/2 inches in height, and will contain 3-1/2 pints; one of the
handles is partly broken off; the glaze is of a light flesh tint; and
the vessel is a fair specimen of pottery in the early part of the
seventeenth century.

Bunyan, it will be recollected, was born in 1628, at Elstow, near
Bedford, where the cottage stood in its original state till within
these few years. It has latterly been new fronted, but the interior
remains nearly as in Bunyan's time. He was the son of a tinker, and
followed his father's trade; and at Elstow are the remains of a closet
in which, in early life, he carried on business. During the civil war
he served as a soldier in the parliament army; and subsequently joined
a society of Anabaptists at Bedford, and became their public teacher.
Soon after the Restoration, he was indicted for "abstaining from
coming to church," and holding "unlawful meetings and conventicles,"
for which he was sentenced to transportation, which was not executed,
as he was detained in prison upwards of twelve years, and at last
liberated through the charitable interposition of Dr. Barlow, Bishop
of Lincoln.

Sir Richard Phillips, in his recent "Personal Tour," says, "on
inquiring for relics of honest Bunyan, I was introduced to Mr.
Hilyard, the present amiable and exemplary pastor of the large
Independent Congregation, which 150 years since was under the
spiritual care of Bunyan. Mr. H. at his meeting-house, showed me the
vestry-chair of Bunyan; and the present pulpit is that in which Bunyan
used to preach. At his own house he preserves the records of the
establishment, many pages of which are in a neat and very scholastic
hand by Bunyan, and contain many of his signatures."

Bunyan's imprisonment gave rise to "The Pilgrim's Progress," a work,
which like "Robinson Crusoe," has remained unrivalled amidst a host of
imitators. He was too, a wit as well as a preacher. Towards the close
of his imprisonment a Quaker called on him, probably to make a convert
of the author of the Pilgrim. He thus addressed him:--"Friend John, I
am come to thee with a message from the Lord; and after having
searched for thee in half the prisons in England, I am glad that I
have found thee at last." "If the Lord had sent you," sarcastically
replied Bunyan, "you need not have taken so much pains, for the Lord
knows that I have been a prisoner in Bedford Gaol for these twelve
years past."

       *       *       *       *       *


SKELETON OF AN ELEPHANT.


The bones of poor Chunee, the stupendous elephant shot at Exeter
'Change, in 1826, have, at a considerable expense, been accurately
articulated, and the entire skeleton is now exhibiting in one of the
chambers at "the Egyptian Hall," in Piccadilly. We remember the
interest, the "sensation," which the death of Chunee occasioned: it
was a fertile incident--for we gave an engraving of the enormous
deceased in his den at Exeter 'Change. It is little more than three
years since, and probably in three years more, Chunee will figure in
books of Natural History, and Exeter 'Change in the antiquarian's
portfolio.

We recommend the Naturalist and all such as delight in contemplating
sublime objects of nature, to see this skeleton; and there can
scarcely be an exhibition better calculated to impress the youthful
mind with the vastness of creation. It stands nearly 13 feet high, and
the clear space beneath the ribs is 6 feet.

It would, we think, suit the Zoological Society, and make a fine
_nucleus_ for their Museum.

       *       *       *       *       *


ROYAL VISITS TO THE THEATRES.


When the King visited the Opera in 1821, the preparations cost upwards
of Â£300. The ante-room and the box were hung with satin, and festoons
of gold lace.

When his Majesty visited Covent Garden Theatre in 1823, there were 4,255
persons present, and the receipts were Â£971. 18_s_. 6_d_.--_Companion to
the Theatres_.

       *       *       *       *       *


SPIRIT OF DISCOVERY.


EMIGRATION.

_NEW COLONY ON SWAN RIVER_.


We have abridged the following very important and interesting
information respecting the New Settlement on the Western Coast of
Australia, from the last Number of the _Quarterly Review_. The writer
appears to have profited by access to official sources, and thus
enhanced the value of his paper; but, disposed as we are, generally,
to coincide with his views on the subject of _Emigration_, we do not
think it necessary to detail them in this place. We have, however,
retained the "Regulations," as issued from the Colonial Office, and
made occasional quotations from Captain Stirling's Report; besides
availing ourselves of a pamphlet lately published, entitled "Hints on
Emigration to the New Settlement on the Swan and Canning Rivers."[2]
The Report of Mr. Fraser, the government botanical surveyor, from
Sydney, who accompanied Captain Stirling, is not so easy of access.
The _Quarterly_ writer, by some coincident opinions and references,
appears to be acquainted with the above pamphlet, although it is not
mentioned in the review. The official Regulations are as follow:--

1. His majesty's government do not intend to incur any _expense_ in
conveying settlers to the New Colony on the Swan River; and will not
feel bound to defray the expense of supplying them with provisions or
other necessaries, after their arrival there, nor to assist their
removal to England, or elsewhere, should they be desirous of quitting
the Colony.

2. Such persons who may arrive in that settlement before the end of
the year 1830, will receive, in the order of their arrival, grants of
land, free of quit rent, proportioned to the capital which they may be
prepared to invest in the improvement of the land, and of which
capital they maybe able to produce satisfactory proofs to the
Lieutenant Governor (or other officer administering the Colonial
Government,) or to any two officers of the Local Government appointed
by the Lieutenant Governor for that purpose, at the rate of forty
acres for every sum of three pounds which they may be prepared so to
invest.

3. Under the head of investment of capital will be considered stock of
every description, all implements of husbandry, and other articles
which may be applicable to the purposes of productive industry, or
which may be necessary for the establishment of the settler on the
land where he is to be located. The amount of any half-pay or pension
which the applicant may receive from Government, will also be
considered as so much capital.

4. Those who may incur the expense of taking out labouring persons,
will be entitled to an allowance of land at the rate of fifteen
pounds, that is, of two hundred acres of land, for the passage of
every such labouring person, over and above any other investment
of capital. In the class of "labouring persons," are included
women, and children above ten years old. Provision will be made by
law, at the earliest opportunity for rendering those capitalists, who
may be engaged in taking out labouring persons to this settlement,
liable for the future maintenance of those persons, should they, from
infirmity, of any other cause, become unable to maintain themselves
there.

5. The license of occupation of land will be granted to the settler,
on satisfactory proof being exhibited to the Lieutenant Governor (or
other officer administering the Local Government,) of the amount of
property brought into the colony. The proofs required of such property
will be such satisfactory vouchers of expenses as would be received in
auditing public accounts. But the full title to the land will not be
granted in fee simple, until the settler has proved, (to the
satisfaction of the Lieutenant Governor for other officer
administering the Local Government,) that the sum required by Article
2 of these regulations (viz. one shilling and sixpence per acre) has
been expended in the cultivation of the land, or in solid
improvements, such as buildings, roads, or other works of the kind.

6. Any grant of land thus allotted, of which a fair proportion, of at
least one fourth, shall not have been brought into cultivation,
otherwise improved or reclaimed from its wild state, to the extent of
one shilling and sixpence per acre, to the satisfaction of the Local
Government, within three years from the date of the license of
occupation, shall, at the end of three years, be liable to a payment
of sixpence per acre, into the public chest of the settlement; and, at
the expiration of seven years more, should the land still remain in an
uncultivated or unimproved state, it will revert absolutely to the
crown.

7. After the year 1830, land will be disposed of to those settlers who
may resort to the colony, on such conditions as his Majesty's
Government shall see occasion to adopt.

8. It is not intended that any convicts, or other description of
prisoners, be transported to this new settlement.

9. The government will be administered by Captain Stirling, of the
Royal Navy, as Lieut. Governor of the settlement; and it is proposed
that a bill should be submitted to parliament, in the course of the
next session, to make provision for the civil government of the New
Settlement.

_Downing Street, 13th January, 1829_.

The intended settlement is designated, in the "Regulations," as the
"New Colony on the Swan River;"[3] but this is a name, we think, not
sufficiently comprehensive for the extent of territory meant to be
occupied. What its future designation is meant to be, we pretend not
to know, but if its soil should prove as fruitful as its climate is
fine, the position and aspect of this part of the coast might justify
the name of Southern, or Australian, _Hesperia_; under which might be
included all that line of coast from Cape Leuwin, the southernmost
point of New Holland, in lat. 34 deg. 30 min., long. 115 deg. 12 min.
east, to the lat. 31 deg. (or a degree or two more northerly) long.
115 deg. 15 min. east; and from the former point easterly to King
George's Sound, where an English colony has already been established.
This extent of territory, between the sea-coast and a range of
mountains parallel to it, hereafter to be described, may be estimated
to contain from five to six millions of acres, the greater part of
which, from the general appearance of the two extreme portions (the
only ones examined) may be considered as land fit for the plough, and,
therefore, fully capable of giving support to a million of souls. The
description we are about to give of this territory is mainly derived
from Captain Stirling, the intelligent officer who explored the
country, and of which he has been appointed the Lieutenant Governor,
and from Mr. Fraser, an excellent botanist, who accompanied him, and
who was well acquainted with the soil and products of New South Wales,
on the opposite side of Australia.

Captain Stirling, when commanding the Success frigate, was sent to New
South Wales on a particular service, which the state of the monsoon
prevented him from carrying into immediate execution. He determined,
therefore, on the recommendation of General Darling, the governor, to
explore, in the meantime, this western part of Australia, which was
omitted to be surveyed by Captain King, on the ground that it had been
_visited_ by the French in the expedition of Captain Baudin: the
result of that visit, however, is so unsatisfactory, and so very
inaccurate, that we are rather surprised that Captain King should have
passed over so interesting a portion, geographically considered, as
the south-western angle of this great country. Captain Stirling
arrived at Cape Leuwin on the 2nd of March, 1827, stood along the
coast, and anchored in Gage's Roads, opposite Swan River, which he
afterwards ascended to its source in boats, and sent out exploring
parties to ascertain the nature of the surrounding territory.

"We found," he says, "the country in general rich and romantic, gained
the summit of the first range of mountains, and had a bird's-eye view
of an immense plain, which extended as far as the eye could reach to
the northward, southward, and westward. After ten days' absence, we
returned to the ship; we encountered no difficulty that was not easily
removable; we were furnished with abundance of fresh provisions by our
guns, and met with no obstruction from the natives."

Captain Stirling describes the weather as very different from that
which the French experienced; but the latter were on the coast at the
commencement of the winter season. They were apparently so alarmed at
the gales of wind, the rocks, and the reefs, and the banks, that they
hastened to leave behind them this part of the coast unexamined, with
all convenient speed. The strong westerly winds that prevail
throughout the year in the southern ocean to the southward of the
tropic, appear to assume a northern direction near this part of the
Coast of Australia. These winds are here found to be cool and
pleasant, and were generally accompanied by clear and serene weather.
The summer winds from the N.W. are not infrequent; and, coming charged
with moisture from a warm region into a colder one, they are
invariably accompanied by rain; but, in the immediate vicinity of the
shore, land and sea breezes are constant and regular. The climate
appears to be delightful. While the Success was on the coast--that is,
in the autumn--the average height of the thermometer was 72 deg., the
extremes being 84 deg. and 59 deg., the first occurring before the
sea-breeze set in, the latter at midnight. The French found the
temperature when at anchor, in June, from 14 deg. to 17 deg. of
Reaumur, or 63 deg. to 70 deg. of Fahrenheit. On the mountains,
Captain Stirling says, the temperature appeared to be about 15 deg.
below that of the plain. The alternate land and sea breezes create a
moisture in the atmosphere which renders the climate cool and
agreeable; the mornings and evenings are particularly so; and the
nights are almost invariably brilliant and clear. Such a climate, it
is almost unnecessary to say must be highly favourable to vegetation,
which was accordingly observed to be most luxuriant. "The verdant
appearance," says Captain Stirling, "and almost innumerable variety of
grasses, herbaceous plants, shrubs, and trees, show that there is no
deficiency in the three great sources of their sustenance, soil, heat,
and moisture."

The general structure and aspect of the country may be thus
described:--from Cape Leuwin to Cape Naturaliste (the southern head of
Baie GÃ©ographe,) which is not quite a degree of latitude, the coast is
formed of a range of hills, of uniform and moderate elevation. From
Geographer's Bay to the northward of Swan River, the whole coast line
is a limestone ridge, varying in height from twenty to six hundred
feet, and extending inward to the distance of from one to five miles.
Behind this ridge (whose occasional naked and barren appearance
Captain Stirling also thinks may have caused the early and continued
prejudice against the fertility of this western coast) commences a
great plain, which occupies a space, from south to north, of
undetermined length, (reaching, perhaps, to King George's Sound,) and
varying, in breadth, from twenty to fifty miles. The eastern boundary
of this plain skirts the base of an almost continuous and abrupt chain
of mountains, to which Captain Stirling gave the name of "General
Darling's Range." One of the points, the highest seen and measured by
him, was about three thousand feet high, The average height is stated
to be from twelve hundred to fifteen hundred feet. The base is
granite; the sides, in many parts, naked; and the soil supports but
little vegetation, except the Stringy-bark and some hardy plants.

Captain Stirling observes, that coal was not found, because it was not
particularly sought for; but he is of opinion that the general
character of the country is such as to warrant the belief that it
might be found; "for," he observes, "all the concomitant strata or
members of the coal formation are exposed on different parts of the
surface, below which I had no opportunity to explore. Indeed, the
carboniferous order of locks is that which is most frequently
exhibited throughout this territory; and I have no doubt important
results would arise from a proper examination into its mineralogical
resources."

With reference to a supply of fresh water, so indispensably necessary
in every settled country, the researches made by Captain Stirling and
Mr. Fraser were attended with the most satisfactory results. The
former observes, that the clouds which are impelled against the
western side of the range of mountains are condensed into rain, the
water of which is conducted across the plain to the sea, in numerous
streams, but chiefly by three principal rivers, terminating in
estuaries, or salt-water lakes. These are--the Swan River, opposite
the Island Rottenest; the RiviÃ¨re Vasse, and Port Leschenault, in
Geographer's Bay. "We found," says Captain Stirling, "a great number
of creeks, or rivulets, falling into Swan River, more particularly on
the eastern side; and I am inclined to think, that the country
generally is much divided by such water-courses. Its supply of fresh
water, from springs and lagoons, is abundant; for we found such
wherever we thought it necessary to ascertain their existence. At
Point Heathcote," he adds, "we met with a remarkable instance; for
there the beach of a narrow rocky promontory is a bed of springs, and
by tracing the finger along any part within four inches of the edge of
the salt water, pure and fresh water instantly occupied the trace."

Mr. Fraser's testimony leaves no doubt of the abundance of fresh
water. "I was astonished," he says, "at the vivid green of the
Eucalyptus, and other trees and shrubs, so distinct from those of New
South Wales; but, on digging the soil to the depth of two feet, I
found the cause to arise apparently from the immense number of springs
with which this country abounds; for, at the depth above mentioned, I
found the soil quite moist, although evidently at the latter end of an
exceedingly dry season; and from the same cause must arise the great
luxuriance of the herbaceous plants on the banks, which exceeds any
thing I ever saw on the east coast. They consist principally of the
_senecia_ and the _sonchus_, which here attain the height of nine
feet."

He further observes, that numerous active springs issue from the rocks
of the limestone ridge, and particularly in Geographer's Bay, the
whole coast of which, he says, "is a perfect source of active springs,
discharging themselves on the beach in rapid rills of considerable
extent, every six or seven yards."

Between the two heads which form the entrance into Swan River, there
is, unfortunately, a bar, made by the continuity of the limestone
ridge. Over this bar, the depth, at low water, is but six feet, and is
therefore practicable only for boats or rafts. About a mile inside the
heads, the water deepens; and then commences a succession of cliffs,
or natural wharfs, with four, five, and six fathoms at their bases.
The same depths are extended over a magnificent expanse of salt water,
to which Captain Stirling has given the name of "Melville Water;" and
which, in his opinion, wants only a good entrance to make it one of
the finest harbours in the world, being seven or eight miles in
length, by three or four in width, and having a depth of water from
four to seven fathoms. This narrow entrance of the river, he thinks,
might be made navigable by ships of burthen, without difficulty or
great expense.

When the town begins to rise, and substantial buildings are required,
the blocks of stone procured by quarrying this entrance will go far
towards paying the expense of excavation.

Into this expansive sheet of water fall two rivers; one from the
north-east, which is properly the Swan River; the other from the
south-east, called Canning's River. Captain Stirling examined them both:
the former to its source, the latter beyond the point where the water
ceased to be brackish. They are both sufficiently convenient for boat
navigation, even at the end of the dry season; and any obstruction might
easily be removed to make them more so, by which the productions of an
immense extent of country might be transported by water-carriage.

Mr. Fraser remarks that nothing of the mangrove appears along the banks
of the Swan River, the usual situation of this plant being here occupied
by the genus Metrosideros. The first plain, or flat, as it is called,
contiguous to the river, commencing at Point Fraser, is formed of a rich
soil, and appears, by a deposit of wreck, to be occasionally flooded to
a certain extent. Here are several extensive salt marshes, which Mr.
Fraser thinks are admirably adapted for the growth of cotton. The hills,
though scanty of soil, are covered with an immense variety of plants;
among others, a magnificent species of Angophera occupied the usual
place of the Eucalyptus, which, however, here as on the eastern side,
generally forms the principal feature in the botany of the country,
accompanied by Mimosa, Correa, Melaleuca, Casuarina, Banksia, and
Xanthorea. The brome, or kangaroo glass, was most abundant. On a more
elevated flat, a little further up the river, the botanist observes that
the "magnificence of the Banksia and arborescent Zamia, which was here
seen thirty feet in height, added to the immense size of the Xanthorea
near this spot, impart to the forest a character truly tropical." He
says that about five miles to the eastward of the river, there is an
evident change in the character of the country: extensive plains of the
richest description, consisting of an alluvial deposit, equalling in
fertility those of the banks of the River Hawkesbury in New South Wales,
and covered with the most luxuriant brome grass. The Casuarina, so
common near the limestone ridge of the coast, here disappears, and is
succeeded by a pendulous species of Metrosideros, which continues to the
source of the river.

"From this point," says Mr. Fraser, "the country resembles, in every
essential character, that of the banks of those rivers which fall to
the westward of the Blue Mountains in New South Wales, varying
alternately on each bank from hilly promontories of the finest red
loam, and covered with stupendous Angopheras, to extensive flats of
the finest description, studded with magnificent blue and water gums,
and occasional stripes of Accacias and papilionaceous shrubs,
resembling the green wattle of New South Wales."

The higher the river is ascended, the more extended the flats become,
and the better is the quality of the soil. Here the country is said to
resemble in character that on the banks of the Macquarrie River, west
of Wellington valley; and though marks of occasional floods appeared
on the lower plains, the upper flats had evidently never been flooded.
The sides of the mountains were bare of underwood, and their summits
covered with large masses of iron stone, among which were growing
enormous trees of Angophera, and some straggling plants of Hakea. On a
careful examination of this part of the country bordering the two
rivers from the sea-coast to the mountains, Mr. Fraser says, "In
giving my opinion of the land seen on the banks of the Swan River, I
hesitate not in pronouncing it superior to any I ever saw in New South
Wales, east of the Blue Mountains, not only in its local character,
but in the many existing advantages which it holds out to settlers.
These advantages I consider to be,

"First, the evident superiority of the soil.

"Secondly, the facility with which a settler can bring his farm into a
state of immediate culture, in consequence of the open state of the
country, which allows not a greater average than two trees to an acre.

"Thirdly, the general abundance of springs, producing water of the
best quality, and the consequent permanent humidity of the soil; two
advantages not existing on the eastern coast. And,

"Fourthly, the advantages of water carriage to his door, and the
non-existence of impediments to land carriage."

    [2] Published by J. Cross, 18, Holborn, opposite Furnival's Inn.

    [3] The _RiviÃ¨re de Cygnes_ of the French is a translation of the
        _Zwanen RiviÃ¨re_ of Vlaming.

(_To be concluded in our next_.)

       *       *       *       *       *


ST. PAULS' CATHEDRAL.


Our readers are aware that the interior of the cupola of this
magnificent cathedral, represents the life of St. Paul, painted by Sir
James Thornhill; but the neglect and decay of this grand specimen of
pictorial decoration may not be so well known. The great expense of
erecting a scaffold sufficient for its restoration, appears to have
been the principal difficulty, added to the want of artists
experienced in this department of art. These obstacles, however, we
trust have been surmounted by Mr. E.T. Parris, of whose talents we
spoke in our account of the Colosseum, and who has just completed a
model of an apparatus for getting at large domes. The model has
already been approved by an experienced architect, and submitted to
the dean and chapter of St. Paul's; so that the restoration of Sir
James Thornhill's labours presents an excellent opportunity for the
immediate application of Mr. Parris's machinery; whilst its
accomplishment would be the means of rewarding individual ingenuity,
and rescuing from decay a valuable triumph of British genius.


_Instantaneous Lights_.

Oxymuriate matches must "hide their diminished heads" before the
recent invention of a method of obtaining light, by merely compressing
a match, which inflames instantaneously. These matches are called
_Prometheans_, and comparing small things with great, we know not a
better name to imply the scientific age to which the invention
belongs.



_Fossil Fish_.

Mr. Mantell, of Lewes, has lately added to his museum a fine specimen
of a fossil fish, discovered in a bed of clay belonging to the Hasting
sand formation. Similar remains are abundant in the strata of Tilgate
Forest, in the white rock at Hastings, and in the sandstone quarries
near Tunbridge Wells; but they consist, for the most part, of detached
scales only.



_Wonders of Art_.

Among the last we notice the model of a boat for aÃ«rial navigation,
lately sent to the French Academy from Rome; and the patent taken out
at Paris for a coach with one wheel only, to accommodate 30 or 40
passengers. The perfection of the latter scheme in England would
render indispensable a complete revision of our Turnpike Acts.

       *       *       *       *       *




NOTES OF A READER.

       *       *       *       *       *


SCOTTISH INNS.

_By Sir Walter Scott_.


The courtesy of an invitation to partake a traveller's meal, or at least
that of being invited to share whatever liquor the guest called for, was
expected by certain old landlords in Scotland, even in the youth of
the author. In requital, mine host was always furnished with the news
of the country, and was probably a little of a humourist to boot. The
devolution of the whole actual business and drudgery of the inn upon the
poor gudewife was very common among the Scottish bonifaces. There was
in ancient times, in the city of Edinburgh, a gentleman of good family,
who condescended, in order to gain a livelihood, to become the nominal
keeper of a coffee-house, one of the first places of the kind which
had been opened in the Scottish metropolis. As usual, it was entirely
managed by the careful and industrious Mrs. B----; while her husband
amused himself with field-sports, without troubling his head about the
matter. Once upon a time the premises having taken fire, the husband was
met walking up the High Street, loaded with his guns and fishing-rods,
and replied calmly to some one that inquired after his wife, "that the
poor woman was trying to save a parcel of crockery, and some trumpery
books;" the last being those which served her to conduct the business
of the house. There were many elderly gentlemen in the author's younger
days, who still held it part of the amusement of a journey "to parley
with mine host," who often resembled, in his quaint humour, mine Host of
the Garter, in the Merry Wives of Windsor; or Blague of the George, in
the Merry Devil of Edmonton. Sometimes the landlady took her share of
entertaining the company. In either case, the omitting to pay them due
attention gave displeasure, and perhaps brought down a smart jest, as on
the following occasion:--A jolly dame who, not "sixty years since," kept
the principal caravansary at Greenlaw, in Berwickshire, had the honour
to receive under her roof a very worthy clergyman, with three sons of
the same profession, each having a cure of souls; be it said in passing,
none of the reverend party were reckoned powerful in the pulpit. After
dinner was over, the worthy senior, in the pride of his heart, asked
Mrs. Buchan whether she ever had had such a party in her house before.
"Here sit I," he said, "a placed minister of the kirk of Scotland,
and here sit my three sons, each a placed minister of the same
kirk.--Confess, Luckie Buchan, you never had such a party in your house
before." The question was not premised by any invitation to sit down and
take a glass of wine or the like, so Mrs. B. answered drily, "Indeed,
sir, I cannot just say that ever I had such a party in my house before,
except once in the forty-five, when I had a Highland piper here, with
his three sons, all Highland pipers; _and deil a spring they could play
amang them!"--Notes to the New Edition of the Waverley Novels_.

       *       *       *       *       *


CATCHING TIGERS.


In some parts of South America, a great many tigers are caught with
the lasso by the Indian and Creole inhabitants for the sake of their
skins. They are also sometimes entrapped in the following manner: a
large chest, or wooden frame, is made, supported upon four wheels, and
is dragged by oxen to a place where the traces of tigers have been
discovered. In the furthest corner of the chest is put a putrid piece
of flesh, by way of bait, which is no sooner laid hold of by the tiger
than the door of the trap falls; he is killed by a musket ball, or a
spear thrust through the crevices of the planks.--_Memoirs of General
Miller_.

       *       *       *       *       *

ODE.

(_From the Persian_.)


  The joys of love and youth be mine,
  The cheerful glass, the ruby wine,
  The social feast, the merry friend,
  And brimming goblets without end.

  The maid whose lips all sweets contain,
  The minstrel with bewitching strain,
  And, by my side, the merry soul
  Who briskly circulates the bowl!

  A maiden full of life and light,
  Like Eden's fountains pure and bright;
  Whose sweetness steals the heart away,
  Mild, beauteous, as the moon of May.

  A banquet-hall, the social room,
  Cool, spacious, breathing rich perfume,
  Like that fair hall where, midst the roses,
  Each saint in heaven above reposes!

  Servants in briskness who excel,
  Friends who can keep a secret well,
  And merry men who love their lass,
  And drink your health in many a glass.

  Wine, sparkling like the ruby bright,
  Neither too sweet, nor yet too light;
  One draught from purple wine we'll sip,
  And one from beauty's rosy lip!

  A maid, whose joyous glances roll
  To cheer the heart and charm the soul;
  Whose graceful locks, that flow behind,
  Engage and captivate mankind!

  A noble friend, whose rank is grac'd
  By learning and poetic taste;
  Who, like my Patron, loves the bard,
  Well skill'd true merit to reward!

  Breathes there a man too cold to prove
  The joys of friendship or of love?
  Oh, let him die! when these are fled
  Scarce do we differ from the dead!

_Gentleman's Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *


LITERARY GAZETTES.


As one of the signs of the times we notice the almost simultaneous
appearance of three new Literary Gazettes, at Edinburgh, Oxford, and
Manchester. One of the latter contains a wood-cut of the Manchester
Royal Institution, and eight quarto pages for three-pence. Among the
original articles is a sketch of Mr. Kean, in which the writer says,
"Mr. Kean's countenance was some years since, one of the finest ever
beheld, and his eye the brightest and most penetrating. Without ever
having seen Lord Byron, we should say there must have been a great
similarity of features and expression between them."

       *       *       *       *       *


DUELLING CODE.


People talk about the voluminous nature of our statute-books,
forsooth. Nonsense! they are not half large or numerous enough. There
is room and necessity for hundreds and thousands of new laws; and if
duelling cannot be prevented, it might at least be regulated, and a
shooting license regularly taken out every year; and the licenses only
granted to persons of a certain rank, and property, and age. Say, for
instance, that none under fifteen years shall be allowed a license;
that livery servants, apprentices, clerks in counting-houses, coach
and wagon offices, hair-dressers, and tailors who use the thimble in
person, should be considered as unqualified persons. This would render
duelling more select and respectable.--_Rank and Talent_.

       *       *       *       *       *


SOUTH AMERICAN BANDITTI.


The vicinity of Lima is occasionally infested by banditti, carrying on
their operations in open day with so much system, that all who chance
to travel at that time are sure to be relieved of their valuables.
These robbers are composed chiefly of free mulattoes and others of a
mixed race. The evil has existed from time immemorial, and is of
purely Spanish origin; for Indian honesty, in retired villages, is so
great, that when a family for a time leaves its cage-like hut, the
latchless wicket is left ajar; a brush is placed on the sill, and it
would be worse than sacrilege for any one to cross the threshold under
any pretence. It has happened that the brigands, well armed and well
mounted, have assembled at distant and uncertain periods within a mile
of Callao. They direct their course towards Lima, stop all whom they
meet, and having very civilly lightened them of their purses, oblige
the plundered persons to accompany the robbers, till all arrive near
to the city gate, when the banditti disperse. Some ride boldly into
the town; many conceal themselves in the thickets of canes; whilst
others cut across the country, and return quietly to their homes, to
enjoy the spoil, or follow their usual occupations. The banditti, on
such extraordinary occasions, amount to twenty or thirty in number;
and it has happened that they have had about twenty carriages, besides
persons dismounted and made to lead their own horses, in the train,
which was regularly brought up by a rear-guard, while the advanced
scouts pushed on to secure fresh booty. They seldom commit murder; and
whenever it is possible, they avoid robbing officers of the army, or
civilians in the employment of government. Neither do they, when
acting in small parties, attack persons of note. Foreigners and
strangers are in general their usual victims.--_Memoir of General
Miller_.

       *       *       *       *       *


STEALING A SHEET.


A bet was laid by a gentleman that he would procure an Indian thief
who should steal the sheet from under a person without waking him. The
thing was effected in the following manner:--the Bheel approaching the
person, who lay on his side, from behind, carefully folded up the
sheet in small compact plaits till it reached his back; then, taking a
feather, he tickled the nose of the sleeper, who immediately scratched
his face and rolled over on the other side, when with a slight effort
he completely released the sheet, and bore it off in triumph.--_Twelve
Years' Military Adventures_.

       *       *       *       *       *


EDUCATION AND AMUSEMENTS OF THE LOWER CLASSES.


A correspondent of the _Gardener's Magazine_ observes that "next to
the existing school societies, there is nothing I am more anxious to
see, or would more gladly contribute to, than a _Society for promoting
the Rational Amusements of the Lower Classes_, the first aim of which
should be to instruct itinerant teachers of music, singing, and
dancing, in improved modes of imparting their arts, and thus fairly
set the plan agoing, when it would soon work its own way, and might
then be extended to higher objects. The taste for flowers among the
Paisley weavers, for gooseberry-growing at Manchester, and for music
among the west of Yorkshire clothiers, originally sprang up from
imitation of one or two amateurs of each pursuit; and there only needs
a similar _first impulse_, which a society with a few thousands a year
might give, to spread a general taste for music, singing, and dancing,
and ultimately for other branches of the fine arts, as drawing and
painting, as well as for natural history, and the cultivation of
flowers and fruits, &c.

"The lower classes in England, thus improved in morals and manners by a
better education and more humanising amusements, might be safely left
to choose their time of contracting marriage, and would then no more
make beasts of themselves by drinking fermented liquors, than do the
lower classes in the city from which I write, (Brussels) where
probably more beer (and that by no means weak) is drank than in any
town of similar size in England, every street being crowded with
_cabarets_ (public-houses,) and these in the evening almost always
filled. But how filled? Not with rioters and noisy drunkards, but with
parties at separate tables, often consisting of a man, his wife and
children, all sipping their pot of beer poured into very small glasses
to prolong the pleasure, and the gratification of drinking seeming
less than that of the cheerful chit-chat, which is the main object of
the whole assemblage. Deep-rooted national bad habits can be
eradicated only by the spread of knowledge, which will ultimately
teach our lower classes, as it has already done the bulk of the
higher, that _moderation_ is the condition of real enjoyments, and
must be the motto even of the sensualist who aims at long-continued
indulgence."

       *       *       *       *       *




THE GATHERER.

  "A snapper-up of unconsidered trifles."

SHAKSPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *


TOAST.


The Parting toast at one of the old gaming-houses in _Marybone_ was
"_May as many of us as remain unhanged next spring, meet here again_."

       *       *       *       *       *


EPIGRAM

_Translated from the French of Mr. Patris, who composed it a few days
before his death. By J.C._


  Last night I dreamt that worn away
    With sickness, I was dead,
  And that my carcass, cheek by jowl,
    Was by a poor man's laid.

  My stomach rose, methought, to see
    The wretch so near me lie,
  And straight his sauciness I chid,
    Like corpse of quality.

  Scoundrel, cried I, move farther off,
    And give your betters room,
  Avaunt, you scrub, and rot elsewhere,
    Foh! how you stink and fume.

  Scrub! quoth the saucy dog, that's well,
    Pray who's more scrub than you?
  Bethink you, Mr., where you are,
    And do not rant it so.

  Hither on equal terms all come,
    Here's neither rich nor poor,
  My muck's my own, and be assur'd,
    That your's can be no more.

       *       *       *       *       *


SONG.


  Oh, yes! I always dream of her,
    But never breathe her name;
  Her spirit always dwells with me,
    By night, by day the same!
  The cheerful smile no more is mine;
    I sorrow and regret;
  I strive in vain to banish love,
    But still I can't forget.

  My friends may try to rally me,
    And chase my grief away;
  I smile in sadness while they laugh,
    But heed not what they say.
  They must not know how deep I love,
    Nor win my secret yet;
  And when I smile amid the scene,
    'Tis not that I forget.

  My lips can never break the spell;
    Her name is buried here!
  And yet perchance she may bedew
    My coffin with a tear!
  But if in climes away from her
    The sun of life should set,
  Her name will quiver on my lip,
    When I the world forget.

Z.

       *       *       *       *       *


EPITAPH IN AWLISCOMBE CHURCHYARD, DEVONSHIRE.


  Here lie the remains of James Pady,
  _brickmaker_, late of this parish, in hopes
  that his _clay_ will be _remoulded_ in a workmanlike
  manner, far superior to his former
  perishable materials.

  Keep death and judgment always in your _eye_,
  Or else the devil off with you will fly,
  And in his _kiln_ with brimstone ever fry.
  If you neglect the narrow _road_ to seek,
  Christ will reject you like a _half-burnt brick_.

_Awliscombe_.

J.S.

       *       *       *       *       *


In the sea-fight off Minorca, in 1756, a gunner had his right hand
shot off, just as he was going to fire off a gun. The brave fellow
took up the match, saying, quite unconcernedly, "So then you thought
that I had but one arm."

       *       *       *       *       *


FLOWERS.


  With each expanding flower we find
  Some pleasing sentiment combin'd;
  Love in the myrtle bloom is seen,
    Remembrance to the violet clings,
  Peace brightens in the olive green,
    Hope from the half-closed iris springs,
  Victory from the laurel grows,
  And woman blushes in the rose.

       *       *       *       *       *


GOOD MORROW, A SONG.


    Fly, night, away!
    And welcome day!
  With night we banish sorrow;
    Sweet air, blow soft,
    Sunshine aloft,
  To give my love good morrow!

    Wings from the wind
    To please her mind,
  Notes from the lark I'll borrow;
    Lark, stretch thy wing,
    And tow'ring sing,
  To give my love good morrow!

    Ye violets blue,
    Sweet drops of dew,
  That shine in every furrow,
    Fresh odours fling
    On zephyr's wing,
  To give my love good morrow!

    Bright Venus, spare
    Awhile thy car,
  Thy Cupid, dove, and sparrow,
    To waft my fair,
    Like my own star,
  To give the world good morrow!

G.R.

       *       *       *       *       *


The great Duke of Marlborough, who was, perhaps, the most accomplished
gentleman of his age, would never suffer any approaches to obscenity
in his presence; and it was said, by Lord Cobham, that he did not
reprove it as an immorality in the speaker, but resented it as an
indignity to himself; and it is evident, that to speak evil of the
absent, to utter lewdness, blasphemy, or treason, must degrade not
only him who speaks, but those who hear; for surely that dignity of
character, which a man ought always to sustain, is in danger, when he
is made the confidant of treachery, detraction, impiety, or lust; for
he who in conversation displays his own vices, imputes them; as he who
boasts of a robbery to another, presupposes that he is a
thief.--_Hawkesworth_.

       *       *       *       *       *


  Silence in love bewrays more woe
    Than words, tho' ne'er so witty;
  A beggar that is dumb, you know,
    May challenge double pity.

_Sir W. Raleigh_.


       *       *       *       *       *


TO SUBSCRIBERS.

For the convenience of such of our Country Subscribers as may
experience any difficulty in procuring the Numbers, we beg to apprize
them, that the Monthly Part is ready for delivery with the Magazines,
and may be procured by giving an order to any Provincial Bookseller.

       *       *       *       *       *


_LIMBIRD'S EDITIONS_.

CHEAP and POPULAR WORKS published at the MIRROR OFFICE in the Strand,
near Somerset House.

The ARABIAN NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS. Embellished with nearly 150
Engravings. Price 6s. 6d. boards.

The TALES of the GENII. Price 2s.

The MICROCOSM. By the Right Hon. G. CANNING. &c. Price 2s.

PLUTARCH'S LIVES, with Fifty Portraits, 2 vols. price 13s. boards.

COWPER'S POEMS, with 12 Engravings, price 3s. 6d. boards.

COOK'S VOYAGES, 2 vols. price 8s. boards.

The CABINET of CURIOSITIES: or, WONDERS of the WORLD DISPLAYED. Price
5s. boards.

BEAUTIES of SCOTT. 2 vols. price 7s.

The ARCANA of SCIENCE for 1828. Price 4s. 6d.


Any of the above Works can be purchased in Parts.

GOLDSMITH'S ESSAYS. Price 8d.

DR. FRANKLIN'S ESSAYS. Price 1s. 2d.

BACON'S ESSAYS. Price 8d.

SALMAGUNDI. Price 1s. 8d.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Printed and Published by J. LIMBIRD 143, Strand, (near Somerset
House,) London; sold by ERNEST FLEISCHER, 626, New Market, Leipsic;
and by all Newsmen and Booksellers_.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT,
AND INSTRUCTION, VOL. 13, ISSUE 368, MAY 2, 1829***


******* This file should be named 11348-8.txt or 11348-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/3/4/11348


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
