The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gold Hunters, by James Oliver Curwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Gold Hunters
       A Story of Life and Adventure in the Hudson Bay Wilds

Author: James Oliver Curwood

Posting Date: February 10, 2020 [EBook #11668]
Release Date: March 22, 2004

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLD HUNTERS ***




Produced by Roger Frank and Sue Clark, Suzanne Shell, Bj√∂rn Lijnema 
and PG Distributed Proofreaders




[Illustration: The canoe sped out into the gloom.]


THE GOLD HUNTERS

A Story of Life and Adventure in the Hudson Bay Wilds

BY
JAMES OLIVER CURWOOD

1909


To the sweet-voiced, dark-eyed little half-Cree maiden
at Lac-Bain, who is the Minnetaki of this story; and to "Teddy" Brown,
guide and trapper, and loyal comrade of the author in many of his
adventures, this book is affectionately dedicated.




CHAPTER I


THE PURSUIT OF THE HUDSON BAY MAIL

The deep hush of noon hovered over the vast solitude of Canadian
forest. The moose and caribou had fed since early dawn, and were
resting quietly in the warmth of the February sun; the lynx was curled
away in his niche between the great rocks, waiting for the sun to
sink farther into the north and west before resuming his marauding
adventures; the fox was taking his midday slumber and the restless
moose-birds were fluffing themselves lazily in the warm glow that was
beginning to melt the snows of late winter.

It was that hour when the old hunter on the trail takes off his pack,
silently gathers wood for a fire, eats his dinner and smokes his pipe,
eyes and ears alert;--that hour when, if you speak above a whisper, he
will say to you,

"Sh-h-h-h! Be quiet! You can't tell how near we are to game.
Everything has had its morning feed and is lying low. The game won't
be moving again for an hour or two, and there may be moose or caribou
a gunshot ahead. We couldn't hear them--now!"

And yet, after a time one thing detached itself from this lifeless
solitude. At first it was nothing more than a spot on the sunny side
of a snow-covered ridge. Then it moved, stretched itself like a dog,
with its forefeet extended far to the front and its shoulders hunched
low--and was a wolf.

A wolf is a heavy sleeper after a feast. A hunter would have said that
this wolf had gorged itself the night before. Still, something had
alarmed it. Faintly there came to this wilderness outlaw that most
thrilling of all things to the denizens of the forest--the scent of
man. He came down the ridge with the slow indifference of a full-fed
animal, and with only a half of his old cunning; trotted across the
softening snow of an opening and stopped where the man-scent was so
strong that he lifted his head straight up to the sky and sent out to
his comrades in forest and plain the warning signal that he had struck
a human trail. A wolf will do this, and no more, in broad day. At
night he might follow, and others would join him in the chase; but
with daylight about him he gives the warning and after a little slinks
away from the trail.

But something held this wolf. There was a mystery in the air which
puzzled him. Straight ahead there ran the broad, smooth trail of a
sled and the footprints of many dogs. Sometime within the last hour
the "dog mail" from Wabinosh House had passed that way on its long
trip to civilization. But it was not the swift passage of man and
dog that held the wolf rigidly alert, ready for flight--and yet
hesitating. It was something from the opposite direction, from the
North, out of which the wind was coming. First it was sound; then it
was scent--then both, and the wolf sped in swift flight up the sunlit
ridge.

In the direction from which the alarm came there stretched a small
lake, and on its farther edge, a quarter of a mile away, there
suddenly darted out from the dense rim of balsam forest a jumble of
dogs and sledge and man. For a few moments the mass of animals seemed
entangled in some kind of wreck or engaged in one of those fierce
battles in which the half-wild sledge-dogs of the North frequently
engage, even on the trail. Then there came the sharp, commanding cries
of a human voice, the cracking of a whip, the yelping of the
huskies, and the disordered team straightened itself and came like a
yellowish-gray streak across the smooth surface of the lake. Close
beside the sledge ran the man. He was tall, and thin, and even at that
distance one would have recognized him as an Indian. Hardly had the
team and its wild-looking driver progressed a quarter of the distance
across the lake when there came a shout farther back, and a second
sledge burst into view from out of the thick forest. Beside this
sledge, too, a driver was running with desperate speed.

The leader now leaped upon his sledge, his voice rising in sharp cries
of exhortation, his whip whirling and cracking over the backs of his
dogs. The second driver still ran, and thus gained upon the team
ahead, so that when they came to the opposite side of the lake, where
the wolf had sent out the warning cry to his people, the twelve dogs
of the two teams were almost abreast.

Quickly there came a slackening in the pace set by the leading dog of
each team, and half a minute later the sledges stopped. The dogs flung
themselves down in their harness, panting, with gaping jaws, the snow
reddening under their bleeding feet. The men, too, showed signs of
terrible strain. The elder of these, as we have said, was an Indian,
pure breed of the great Northern wilderness. His companion was a youth
who had not yet reached his twenties, slender, but with the strength
and agility of an animal in his limbs, his handsome face bronzed by
the free life of the forest, and in his veins a plentiful strain of
that blood which made his comrade kin.

In those two we have again met our old friends Mukoki and Wabigoon:
Mukoki, the faithful old warrior and pathfinder, and Wabigoon, the
adventurous half-Indian son of the factor of Wabinosh House. Both
were at the height of some great excitement. For a few moments, while
gaining breath, they gazed silently into each other's face.

"I'm afraid--we can't--catch them, Muky," panted the younger. "What do
you think--"

He stopped, for Mukoki had thrown himself on his knees in the snow a
dozen feet in front of the teams. From that point there ran straight
ahead of them the trail of the dog mail. For perhaps a full minute he
examined the imprints of the dogs' feet and the smooth path made
by the sledge. Then he looked up, and with one of those inimitable
chuckles which meant so much when coming from him, he said:

"We catch heem--sure! See--sledge heem go _deep_. Both ride. Big load
for dogs. We catch heem--sure!"

"But our dogs!" persisted Wabigoon, his face still filled with doubt.
"They're completely bushed, and my leader has gone lame. See how
they're bleeding!"

The huskies, as the big wolfish sledge-dogs of the far North are
called, were indeed in a pitiable condition. The warm sun had weakened
the hard crust of the snow until at every leap the feet of the animals
had broken through, tearing and wounding themselves on its ragged,
knife-like edges. Mukoki's face became more serious as he carefully
examined the teams.

"Bad--ver' bad," he grunted. "We fool--fool!"

"For not bringing dog shoes?" said Wabigoon. "I've got a dozen shoes
on my sledge--enough for three dogs. By George--" He leaped quickly to
his toboggan, caught up the dog moccasins, and turned again to the old
Indian, alive with new excitement. "We've got just one chance, Muky!"
he half shouted.

"Pick out the strongest dogs. One of us must go on alone!"

The sharp commands of the two adventurers and the cracking of Mukoki's
whip brought the tired and bleeding animals to their feet. Over the
pads of three of the largest and strongest were drawn the buckskin
moccasins, and to these three, hitched to Wabigoon's sledge, were
added six others that appeared to have a little endurance still left
in them. A few moments later the long line of dogs was speeding
swiftly over the trail of the Hudson Bay mail, and beside the sled ran
Wabigoon.

Thus this thrilling pursuit of the dog mail had continued since early
dawn. For never more than a minute or two at a time had there been a
rest. Over mountain and lake, through dense forest and across barren
plain man and dog had sped without food or drink, snatching up
mouthfuls of snow here and there--always their eyes upon the fresh
trail of the flying mail. Even the fierce huskies seemed to understand
that the chase had become a matter of life and death, and that they
were to follow the trail ahead of them, ceaselessly and without
deviation, until the end of their masters was accomplished. The human
scent was becoming stronger and stronger in their wolf-like nostrils.
Somewhere on that trail there were men, and other dogs, and they were
to overtake them!

Even now, bleeding and stumbling as they ran, the blood of battle, the
excitement of the chase, was hot within them. Half-wolf, half-dog,
their white fangs snarling as stronger whiffs of the man-smell came to
them, they were filled with the savage desperation of the youth who
urged them on. The keen instinct of the wild pointed out their road to
them, and they needed no guiding hand. Faithful until the last they
dragged on their burden, their tongues lolling farther from their
jaws, their hearts growing weaker, their eyes bloodshot until they
glowed like red balls. Now and then, when he had run until his
endurance was gone, Wabigoon would fling himself upon the sledge to
regain breath and rest his limbs, and the dogs would tug harder,
scarce slackening their speed under the increased weight. Once a huge
moose crashed through the forest a hundred paces away, but the huskies
paid no attention to it; a little farther on a lynx, aroused from
his sun bath on a rock, rolled like a great gray ball across the
trail,--the dogs cringed but for an instant at the sight of this
mortal enemy of theirs, and then went on.

Slower and slower grew the pace. The rearmost dog was now no more than
a drag, and reaching a keen-edged knife far out over the end of the
sledge Wabi severed his breast strap and the exhausted animal rolled
out free beside the trail. Two others of the team were pulling scarce
a pound, another was running lame, and the trail behind was spotted
with pads of blood. Each minute added to the despair that was growing
in the youth's face. His eyes, like those of his faithful dogs, were
red from the terrible strain of the race, his lips were parted, his
legs, as tireless as those of a red deer, were weakening under him.
More and more frequently he flung himself upon the sledge, panting
for breath, and shorter and shorter became his intervals of running
between these periods of rest. The end of the chase was almost at
hand. They could not overtake the Hudson Bay mail!

With a final cry of encouragement Wabi sprang from the sledge and
plunged along at the head of the dogs, urging them on in one last
supreme effort. Ahead of them was a break in the forest trail and
beyond that, mile upon mile, stretched the vast white surface of Lake
Nipigon. And far out in the glare of sun and snow there moved an
object, something that was no more than a thin black streak to
Wabi's blinded eyes but which he knew was the dog mail on its way to
civilization. He tried to shout, but the sound that fell from his lips
could not have been heard a hundred paces away; his limbs tottered
beneath him; his feet seemed suddenly to turn into lead, and he sank
helpless into the snow. The faithful pack crowded about him licking
his face and hands, their hot breath escaping between their gaping
jaws like hissing steam For a few moments it seemed to the Indian
youth that day had suddenly turned into night. His eyes closed, the
panting of the dogs came to him more and more faintly, as if they were
moving away; he felt himself sinking, sinking slowly down into utter
blackness.

Desperately he fought to bring himself back into life. There was one
more chance--just one! He heard the dogs again, he felt their tongues
upon his hands and face, and he dragged himself to his knees, groping
out with his hands like one who had gone blind. A few feet away was
the sledge, and out there, far beyond his vision now, was the Hudson
Bay mail!

Foot by foot he drew himself out from among the tangle of dogs. He
reached the sledge, and his fingers gripped convulsively at the cold
steel of his rifle. One more chance! One more chance! The words--the
thought--filled his brain, and he raised the rifle to his shoulder,
pointing its muzzle up to the sky so that he would not harm the dogs.
And then, once, twice, five times he fired into the air, and at the
end of the fifth shot he drew fresh cartridges from his belt,
and fired again and again, until the black streak far out in the
wilderness of ice and snow stopped in its progress--and turned back.
And still the sharp signals rang out again and again, until the barrel
of Wabi's rifle grew hot, and his cartridge belt was empty.

Slowly the gloom cleared away before his eyes. He heard a shout, and
staggered to his feet, stretching out his arms and calling a name as
the dog mail stopped half a hundred yards from his own team.

With something between a yell of joy and a cry of astonishment a youth
of about Wabi's age sprang from the second sleigh and ran to the
Indian boy, catching him in his arms as for a second time, he sank
fainting upon the snow.

"Wabi--what's the matter?" he cried. "Are you hurt? Are you--"

For a moment Wabigoon struggled to overcome his weakness.

"Rod--" he whispered, "Rod--Minnetaki--"

His lips ceased to move and he sank heavily in his companion's arms.

"What is it, Wabi? Quick! Speak!" urged the other. His face had grown
strangely white, his voice trembled. "What about--Minnetaki?"

Again the Indian youth fought to bring himself back to life. His words
came faintly,

"Minnetaki--has been captured--by--the--Woongas!"

Then even his breath seemed to stop, and he lay like one dead.




CHAPTER II


MINNETAKI IN THE HANDS OF THE OUTLAWS

For a brief time Roderick believed that life had indeed passed from
the body of his young friend. So still did Wabi lie and so terrifying
was the strange pallor in his face that the white boy found himself
calling on his comrade in a voice filled with choking sobs. The driver
of the dog mail dropped on his knees beside the two young hunters.
Running his hand under Wabi's thick shirt he held it there for an
instant, and said,

"He's alive!"

Quickly drawing a small metal flask from one of his pockets he
unscrewed the top, and placing the mouthpiece to the Indian youth's
lips forced a bit of its contents down his throat. The liquor had
almost immediate effect, and Wabigoon opened his eyes, gazed into the
rough visage of the courier, then closed them again. There was relief
in the courier's face as he pointed to the dogs from Wabinosh House.
The exhausted animals were lying stretched upon the snow, their heads
drooping between their forefeet. Even the presence of a rival team
failed to arouse them from their lethargy. One might have thought that
death had overtaken them upon the trail were it not for their panting
sides and lolling tongues.

"He's not hurt!" exclaimed the driver, "see the dogs! He's been
running--running until he dropped in his tracks!"

The assurance brought but little comfort to Rod. He could feel the
tremble of returning life in Wabi's body now, but the sight of the
exhausted and bleeding dogs and the memory of his comrade's last words
had filled him with a new and terrible fear. What had happened to
Minnetaki? Why had the factor's son come all this distance for him?
Why had he pursued the mail until his dogs were nearly dead, and he
himself had fallen unconscious in his tracks? Was Minnetaki dead? Had
the Woongas killed Wabi's beautiful little sister?

Again and again he implored his friend to speak to him, until the
courier pushed him back and carried Wabi to the mail sled.

"Hustle up there to that bunch of spruce and build a fire," he
commanded. "We've got to get something hot into him, and rub him down,
and roll him in furs. This is bad enough, bad enough!"

Rod waited to hear no more, but ran to the clump of spruce to which
the courier had directed him. Among them he found a number of birch
trees, and stripping off an armful of bark he had a fire blazing upon
the snow by the time the dog mail drew up with its unconscious burden.
While the driver was loosening Wabi's clothes and bundling him in
heavy bearskins Rod added dry limbs to the fire until it threw a warm
glow for a dozen paces around. Within a few minutes a pot of ice and
snow was melting over the flames and the courier was opening a can of
condensed soup.

The deathly pallor had gone from Wabi's face, and Rod, kneeling close
beside him, was rejoiced to see the breath coming more and more
regularly from between his lips. But even as he rejoiced the other
fear grew heavier at his heart. What had happened to Minnetaki? He
found himself repeating the question again and again as he watched
Wabi slowly returning to life, and, so quickly that it had passed in a
minute or two, there flashed through his mind a vision of all that had
happened the last few months. For a few moments, as his mind traveled
back, he was again in Detroit with his widowed mother; he thought of
the day he had first met Wabigoon, the son of an English factor and a
beautiful Indian princess, who had come far down into civilization to
be educated; of the friendship that had followed, of their weeks and
months together in school, and then of those joyous days and nights in
which they had planned a winter of thrilling adventure at Wabi's home
in the far North.

And what adventures there had been, when, as the Wolf Hunters, he and
Wabi and Mukoki had braved the perils of the frozen solitudes! As
Wabigoon's breath came more and more regularly he thought of that
wonderful canoe trip from the last bit of civilization up into the
wilds; of his first sight of moose, the first bear he had killed, and
of his meeting with Minnetaki.

His eyes became blurred and his heart grew cold as he thought of what
might have happened to her. A vision of the girl swept between him and
Wabi's face, in which the glow of life was growing warmer and warmer,
a vision of the little half-Indian maiden as he had first seen her,
when she came out to meet them in her canoe from Wabinosh House, the
sun shining on her dark hair, her cheeks flushed with excitement, her
eyes and teeth sparkling in glad welcome to her beloved brother
and the white youth of whom she had heard so much--the boy from
civilization--Roderick Drew. He remembered how his cap had blown off
into the water, how she had rescued it for him. In a flash all that
passed after that came before him like a picture; the days that he and
Minnetaki had rambled together in the forest, the furious battle
in which, single-handed, he had saved her from those fierce outlaw
Indians of the North, the Woongas; and after that he thought of
the weeks of thrilling adventure they three--Mukoki, Wabigoon and
himself--had spent in the wilderness far from the Hudson Bay Post, of
their months of trapping, their desperate war with the Woongas, the
discovery of the century-old cabin and its ancient skeletons, and
their finding of the birch-bark map between the bones of one of the
skeleton's fingers, on which, dimmed by age, was drawn the trail to a
land of gold.

Instinctively, as for an instant this map came into his mental
picture, he thrust a hand into one of his inside pockets to feel that
his own copy of that map was there, the map which was to have brought
him back into this wilderness a few weeks hence, when they three would
set out on the romantic quest for the gold to which the skeletons in
the old cabin had given them the key.

The vision left him as he saw a convulsive shudder pass through
Wabigoon. In another moment the Indian youth had opened his eyes, and
as he looked up into Rod's eager face he smiled feebly. He tried to
speak, but words failed him, and his eyes closed again. There was a
look of terror in Roderick's face as he turned to the courier, who
came to his side. Less than twenty-four hours before he had left
Wabigoon in the full strength of his splendid youth at Wabinosh House,
a lithe young giant, hardened by their months of adventure, quivering
with buoyant life, anxious for the spring that they might meet again
to take up another trail into the unexplored North.

And now what a change! The glimpse he had caught of Wabi's bloodshot
eyes, the terrible thinness of the Indian youth's face, the chilling
lifelessness of his hands, made him shiver with dread. Was it
possible that a few short hours could bring about that remarkable
transformation? And where was Mukoki, the faithful old warrior from
whose guardianship Wabigoon and Minnetaki were seldom allowed to
escape?

It seemed an hour before Wabi opened his eyes again, and yet it was
only a few minutes. This time Rod lifted him gently in his arms and
the courier placed a cup of the hot soup to his lips. The warmth of
the liquid put new life into the famished Indian youth. He drank
slowly of it at first, then eagerly, and when he had finished the cup
he made an effort to sit up.

"I'll take another," he said faintly. "It's mighty good!"

He drank the second cup with even greater relish. Then he sat bolt
upright, stretched out his arms, and with his companion's assistance
staggered to his feet. His bloodshot eyes burned with a strange
excitement as he looked at Rod.

"I was afraid--I wouldn't--catch you!"

"What is it, Wabi? What has happened? You say--Minnetaki--"

"Has been captured by the Woongas. Chief Woonga himself is her captor,
and they are taking her into the North. Rod, only you can save her!"

"Only--I--can--save--her?" gasped Rod slowly. "What do you mean?"

"Listen!" cried the Indian boy, clutching him by the arm. "You
remember that after our fight with the Woongas and our escape from the
chasm we fled to the south, and that the next day, while you were away
from camp hunting for some animal that would give us fat for Mukoki's
wound, you discovered a trail. You told us that you followed the
sledge tracks, and that after a time the party had been met by others
on snow-shoes, and that among the imprints in the snow was one that
made you think of Minnetaki. When we reached the Post we learned that
Minnetaki and two sledges had gone to Kenegami House and at once
concluded that those snow-shoe trails were made by Kenegami people
sent out to meet her. But they were not! They were made by Woongas!

"One of the guides, who escaped with a severe wound, brought the news
to us last night, and the doctor at the Post says that his hurt is
fatal and that he will not live another day. Everything depends on
you. You and the dying guide are the only two who know where to find
the place where the attack was made. It has been thawing for two days
and the trail may be obliterated. But you saw Minnetaki's footprints.
You saw the snow-shoe trails. You--and you alone--know which way they
went!"

Wabi spoke rapidly, excitedly, and then sank down on the sledge,
weakened by his exertion.

"We have been chasing you with two teams since dawn," he added, "and
pretty nearly killed the dogs. As a last chance we doubled up the
teams and I came on alone. I left Mukoki a dozen miles back on the
trail."

Rod's blood had turned cold with horror at the knowledge that
Minnetaki was in the clutches of Woonga himself. The terrible change
in Wabi was no longer a mystery. Both Minnetaki and her brother had
told him more than once of the relentless feud waged against Wabinosh
House by this bloodthirsty savage and during the last winter he had
come into personal contact with it. He had fought, had seen people
die, and had almost fallen a victim to Woonga's vengeance.

But it was not of these things that he thought just now. It was of the
reason for the feud, and something rose in his throat and choked him
until he made no effort to speak. Many years before, George Newsome, a
young Englishman, had come to Wabinosh House, and there he had met
and fallen in love with a beautiful Indian princess, who loved him in
turn, and became his wife. Woonga, chief of a warlike tribe, had been
his rival, and when the white man won in the battle for love his
fierce heart blazed with the fire of hatred and revenge. From that day
the relentless strife against the people of Wabinosh House began. The
followers of Woonga turned from trappers and hunters to murderers and
outlaws, and became known all over that wilderness country as the
Woongas. For years the feud had continued. Like a hawk Woonga watched
his opportunities, killing here, robbing there, and always waiting a
chance to rob the factor of his wife or children. Only a few weeks
before Rod had saved Minnetaki in that terrible struggle in the
forest. And now, more hopelessly than before, she had fallen into the
clutches of her enemies, and alone with Woonga was being carried into
the far North country, into those vast unexplored regions from which
she would probably never return!

Rod turned to Wabi, his hands clenched, his eyes blazing.

"I can find the trail, Wabi! I can find the trail--and we'll follow
it to the North Pole if we have to! We beat the Woongas in the
chasm--we'll beat them now! We'll find Minnetaki if it takes us until
doomsday!"

From far back in the forest there came the faint pistol-like cracks of
a whip, the distant hallooing of a voice.

For a few moments the three stood listening.

The voice came again.

"It's Mukoki," said Wabigoon, "Mukoki and the other dogs!"




CHAPTER III


ON THE TRAIL OF THE WOONGAS

The cries came nearer, interspersed with the cracking of Mukoki's whip
as he urged on the few lagging dogs that Wabi had left with him upon
the trail. In another moment the old warrior and his team burst into
view and both of the young hunters hurried to meet him. A glance
showed Rod that a little longer and Mukoki would have dropped in his
tracks, as Wabi had done. The two led their faithful comrade to the
heap of bearskins on the mail sled and made him sit there while fresh
soup was being made.

"You catch heem," grinned Mukoki joyously. "You catch heem--queek!"

"And pretty nearly killed himself doing it, Muky," added Rod. "Now--"
he glanced from one to the other of his companions, "what is the first
thing to be done?"

"We must strike for the Woonga trail without a moment of unnecessary
delay," declared Wabi. "Minutes are priceless, an hour lost or gained
may mean everything!"

"But the dogs--"

"You can take mine," interrupted the courier. "There are six of them,
all good heavy fellows and not overly bushed. You can add a few of
your own and I'll take what's left to drive on the mail. I would
advise you to rest for an hour or so and give them and yourselves a
good feed. It'll count in the long run."

Mukoki grunted his approval of the driver's words and Rod at once
began gathering more fuel for the fire. The temporary camp was soon
a scene of the liveliest activity. While the courier unpacked his
provisions, Mukoki and Wabigoon assembled the teams and proceeded to
select three of the best of their own animals to put in harness with
those of the Hudson Bay mail. The dogs from Wabinosh House were wildly
famished and at the sight and odor of the great piece of meat which
the courier began cutting up for them they set up a snarling and
snapping of jaws, and began fighting indiscriminately among themselves
until the voices of their human companions were almost drowned in the
tumult. A full pound of the meat was given to each dog, and other
pieces of it were suspended over beds of coals drawn out from the big
fire. Meanwhile Rod was chopping through the thick ice of the lake in
search of water.

After a little Wabi came down to join him.

"Our sledge is ready," he said, as Rod stopped to rest for a moment.
"We're a little short on grub for nine dogs and three people, but
we've got plenty of ammunition. We ought to find something on the
trail."

"Rabbits, anyway," suggested Rod, resuming his chopping. A few more
strokes, and water gushed through. Filling two pails the boys returned
to camp.

The shadows from the sharp pointed cedars of the forest were falling
far out upon the frozen lake when the meal was finished, and the sun,
sinking early to its rest beyond the homeless solitudes, infused but
little warmth as the three hunters prepared to leave. It was only
three o'clock, but a penetrating chill was growing in the air. Half
an hour more and only a reddish glow would be where the northern sun
still shone feebly. In the far North winter night falls with the
swiftness of wings; it enshrouds one like a palpable, moving thing, a
curtain of gloom that can almost be touched and felt, and so it came
now, as the dogs were hitched to their sledge and Rod, Mukoki and
Wabigoon bade good-by to the driver of the Hudson Bay mail.

"You'll make the other side in four hours," he called, as Mukoki's
cries sent the dogs trotting out upon the lake. "And then--I'd camp!"

Running on ahead Mukoki set the pace and marked the trail. Wabi took
the first turn on the sledge, and Rod, who was fresher than either of
his comrades, followed close behind. After a little he drew up beside
the young Indian and placed a hand on his shoulder as he ran.

"We will reach our old camp--in the plain--to-morrow?" he questioned,
between breaths.

"To-morrow," affirmed Wabi. "Mukoki will show us the shortest cut to
it. After that, after we reach the camp, everything will depend upon
you."

Rod fell behind in the path made by the sledge, and saved his breath.
His mind was working as never before in his life. When they reached
the camp in which the wounded Mukoki had lain after their escape from
the Woongas, could he find the old trail where he had seen Minnetaki's
footprints? He was quite sure of himself, and yet he was conscious of
an indefinable something growing in him as he noticed more and more
what the sun had done that day. Was it nervousness, or fear? Surely he
could find the trail, even though it was almost obliterated! But he
wished that it had been Mukoki or Wabigoon who had discovered it,
either of whom, with the woodcraft instinct born in them, would have
gone to it as easily as a fox to the end of a strong trail hidden in
autumn leaves. If he did fail--

He shuddered, even as he ran, as he thought of the fate that awaited
Minnetaki. A few hours before he had been one of the happiest youths in
the world. Wabi's lovely little sister, he had believed, was safe at
Kenegami House; he had bade adieu to his friends at the Post; every
minute after that had taken him nearer to that far city in the South, to
his mother, and home. And now so suddenly that he had hardly come to
realize the situation he was plunged into what gave promise of being the
most thrilling and tragic adventure of his life. A few weeks more, when
spring had come, he would have returned to his friends accompanied by
his mother, and they three--Mukoki, Wabigoon and he--would have set out
on their romantic quest for the lost gold-mine that had been revealed to
them by the ancient skeletons in the old cabin. Even as these visions
were glowing in his brain there had come the interruption, the signal
shots on the lake, the return of the dog mail, and now this race to save
the life of Minnetaki!

In his eagerness he ran ahead of the sledge and urged Mukoki into a
faster pace. Every ten minutes the one who rode exchanged place with
one of the runners, so that there were intervals of rest for each two
times an hour. Quickly the red glow over the southwestern forests
faded away; the gloom grew thicker; far ahead, like an endless sheet
losing itself in a distant smother of blackness, stretched the ice and
snow of Lake Nipigon. There was no tree, no rock for guidance over
the trackless waste, yet never for an instant did Mukoki or Wabigoon
falter. The stars began burning brilliantly in the sky; far away the
red edge of the moon rose over this world of ice and snow and forest,
throbbing and palpitating like a bursting ball of fire, as one sees it
now and then in the glory of the great northern night.

Tirelessly, mile after mile, hour after hour, broken only by the
short intervals of rest on the sledge, continued the race across Lake
Nipigon. The moon rose higher; the blood in it paled to the crimson
glow of the moose flower, and silvered as it climbed into the sky,
until the orb hung like a great golden-white disk. In the splendor of
it the solitude of ice and snow glistened without end. There was no
sound but the slipping of the sledge, the pattering of the dogs'
moccasined feet, and now and then a few breathless words spoken by Rod
or his companions. It was a little after eight o'clock by Rod's watch
when there came a change in the appearance of the lake ahead of them.
Wabi, who was on the sledge, was the first to notice it, and he
shouted back his discovery to the white youth.

"The forest! We're across!"

The tired dogs seemed to leap into new life at his words, and the
leader replied with a whining joyous cry as the odors of balsam and
fir came to him. The sharp pinnacles of the forest, reaching up into
the night's white glow, grew more and more distinct as the sledge sped
on, and five minutes later the team drew up in a huddled, panting
bunch on the shore. That day the men and dogs from Wabinosh House had
traveled sixty miles.

"We'll camp here!" declared Wabi, as he dropped on the sledge. "We'll
camp here--unless you leave me behind!"

Mukoki, tireless to the last, had already found an ax.

"No rest now," he warned, "Too tired! You rest now--build no camp.
Build camp--then rest!"

"You're right, Muky," cried Wabi, jumping to his feet with forced
enthusiasm. "If I sit down for five minutes I'll fall asleep. Rod, you
build a fire. Muky and I will make the shelter."

In less than half an hour the balsam bough shelter was complete, and
in front of it roared a fire that sent its light and heat for twenty
paces round. From farther back in the forest the three dragged several
small logs, and no sooner had they been added to the flames than both
Mukoki and Wabigoon wrapped themselves in their furs and burrowed deep
into the sweet-scented balsam under the shelter. Rod's experience that
day had not been filled with the terrible hardships of his companions,
and for some time after they had fallen asleep he sat close to the
fire, thinking again of the strangeness with which his fortunes had
changed, and watching the flickering firelight as it played in a
thousand fanciful figures in the deeper and denser gloom of the
forest. The dogs had crept in close to the blazing logs and lay as
still as though life no longer animated their tawny bodies. From far
away there came the lonely howl of a wolf; a great white man-owl
fluttered close to the camp and chortled his crazy, half-human "hello,
hello, hello;" the trees cracked with the tightening frost, but
neither wolf howl nor frost nor the ghostly visitant's insane voice
aroused those who were sleeping.

An hour passed and still Rod sat by the fire; his rifle lying across
his knees. His imagination had painted a thousand pictures in that
time. Never for an instant had his mind ceased to work. Somewhere in
that great wilderness there was another camp-fire that night, and in
that camp Minnetaki was a captive. Some indefinable sensation seemed
to creep into him, telling him that she was awake, and that she was
thinking of her friends. Was it a touch of sleep, or that wonderful
thing called mental telepathy, that wrought the next picture in his
brain? It came with startling vividness. He saw the girl beside a
fire. Her beautiful hair, glistening black in the firelight, hung in a
heavy braid over her shoulder; her eyes were staring wildly into the
flames, as if she were about to leap into them, and back of her so
close that he might have touched her, was a figure that sent a chill
of horror through him. It was Woonga, the outlaw chief! He was
talking, his red face was fiendish, he stretched out a hand!

With a cry that startled the dogs Rod sprang to his feet. He was
shivering as if in a chill. Had he dreamed? Or was it something more
than a dream? He thought of the vision that had come to him weeks
before in the mysterious chasm, the vision of the dancing skeletons,
and which had revealed the secret of the old cabin and the lost gold.
In vain he tried to shake off his nervousness and his fear. Why had
Woonga reached out his hands for Minnetaki? He worked to free himself
of the weight that had fallen on him, stirred the fire until clouds of
sparks shot high up into the gloom of the trees, and added new fuel.

Then he sat down again, and for the twentieth time since leaving
Wabinosh House drew from his pocket the map that was to have led them
on their search for gold when he returned with his mother. It was a
vision that had guided him to the discovery of this precious map, and
the knowledge of it made him more uneasy now. A few moments before he
had seen Minnetaki as plainly as though she had been with him there
beside the fire; he fancied that he might almost have sent a bullet
through the Indian's chief face as he reached out his long arms toward
the girl.

He stirred the fire again, awakened one of the dogs to keep him
company, and then went in to lie down between Mukoki and Wabigoon in
an attempt at slumber. During the hours that followed he secured only
short snatches of sleep. He dreamed, dreamed constantly of Minnetaki
whenever he lost consciousness. Now he saw her before the fire, as he
had seen her in his vision; again, she was struggling in the Woonga's
powerful grasp. At one time the strife between the two--the young girl
and the powerful savage--became terrible for him to behold, and at
last he saw the Indian catch her in his arms and disappear into the
blackness of the forest.

This time when he wakened Rod made no further effort to sleep. It was
only a little past midnight. His companions had obtained four hours of
rest. In another hour he would arouse them. Quietly he began making
preparations for breakfast, and fed the dogs. At half-past one o'clock
he shook Wabigoon by the shoulder.

"Get up!" he cried, as the Indian youth sat erect. "It's time to go!"

He tried to suppress his nervousness when Mukoki and Wabi joined him
beside the fire. He determined not to let them know of his visions,
for there was gloom enough among them as it was. But he would hurry.
He was the first to get through with breakfast, the first to set to
work among the dogs, and when Mukoki started out at the head of the
team through the forest he was close beside him, urging him to greater
speed by his own endeavors.

"How far are we from the camp, Mukoki?" he asked.

"Four hour--twent' mile," replied the old pathfinder.

"Twenty miles. We ought to make it by dawn."

Mukoki made no answer, but quickened his pace as the cedar and balsam
forest gave place to an open plain which stretched for a mile or two
ahead of them. For an hour longer the moon continued to light up the
wilderness; then, with its descent lower and lower into the west, the
gloom began to thicken, until only the stars were left to guide the
pursuers. Even these were beginning to fade when Mukoki halted the
panting team on the summit of a mountainous ridge, and pointed into
the north.

"The plains!"

For several minutes the three stood silent, gazing out into the gloom
of the vast solitudes that swept unbroken to Hudson Bay. Again Rod's
blood was thrilled with the romance of what lay at his feet and far
beyond, thrilled with the romance and mystery of that land of the wild
which reached for hundreds of miles into the North, and into which the
foot of the white man had as yet scarce left its imprint.

Before him, enveloped now in the deep gloom of the northern night,
slept a vast unexplored world, a land whose story the passing of
ages had left unrevealed. What tragedies of nature had its silent
fastnesses beheld? What treasure did they hold? Half a century or more
ago the men whose skeletons they had found in the old cabin had braved
the perils of those trackless solitudes, and somewhere hundreds of
miles out in that black gloom they had found gold, the gold that
had fallen as an inheritance to them in the discovery of the old
birch-bark map. And somewhere, somewhere out there was Minnetaki!

Across the plain at their feet the three adventurers had raced for
their lives from the bloodthirsty Woongas only a week or so before;
now they crossed it a second time and at even greater speed, for then
they had possessed no dogs. At the end of another hour Mukoki no
longer traveled faster than a walk. His eyes were constantly on the
alert. Occasionally he would stop the dogs and strike off to the right
or the left of the trail alone. He spoke no word to his companions,
and neither Rod nor Wabigoon offered a suggestion. They knew, without
questioning, that they were approaching their old camp, and just as
the experienced hunter makes no sign or sound while his dog is nosing
out a half-lost trail so they held back while Mukoki, the most famous
pathfinder in all those regions, led them slowly on. The last of the
stars went out. For a time the blackness of the night grew deeper;
then, in the southeast, came the first faint streak of dawn. Day is
born as suddenly as it dies in these regions, and it was soon light
enough for Mukoki to resume his trail at a trot. A few minutes more
and a clump of balsam and spruce loomed up out of the plain ahead of
them. Neither Rod nor Wabigoon recognized it until the old warrior
halted the dogs close in its shadows and they saw the look of triumph
in his face.

"The camp!" breathed Wabi.

"The camp!"

Trembling, his voice quivering with suppressed excitement, the Indian
youth turned to Roderick Drew.

"Rod--it's all up to you!"

Mukoki, too, had come close to his side.

"There--camp!" he whispered. "Now--where Minnetaki's trail?"

The old warrior's eyes were blazing.

"Where?"

A dozen paces away was the balsam shelter they had built. But that was
all. Not a track was left in the snow. The warm sun had obliterated
every sign of their presence of a short time before!

If their own trail was gone what could he hope to find of Minnetaki's
dainty foot-prints?

Deep down in his heart Rod prayed for guidance in this moment of
terrible doubt.




CHAPTER IV


ROD FOLLOWS THE MAN-FOOTED BEAR

"I must wait until it is lighter," he said. He tried to control
himself, to fortify himself with the assurance which he no longer
felt.

"We will have breakfast," suggested Wabi. "We have cold meat and there
will be no need of a fire."

Finishing before the others, Rod grasped his rifle and walked out from
among the trees. Wabi made a movement as if to follow, but Mukoki held
him back. There was a shrewd light in his eyes.

"He do better--alone," he warned.

The red glow of the sun was rising above the forest and Rod could now
see far about him. He had come out from the cedars, like this, on the
afternoon that he had gone to hunt and had found Minnetaki's trail. A
mile away he saw the snow-covered ridge where he had hunted for moose.
That ridge was his first guide, and he hurried toward it while Mukoki
and Wabigoon followed far behind him with the dogs and the sledge.
He was breathless when he reached the top. Eagerly he gazed into the
North. It was in that direction he had gone on the afternoon of his
discovery of the strange trail. But nothing that he recognized met his
eyes now, no familiar landmark or tree to guide him again over his
wandering footsteps of that day. Vainly he sought along the ridge for
some slight sign of his former presence there. But everything was
gone. The sun had destroyed his last hope.

He was glad that Mukoki and Wabigoon were at the foot of the ridge,
for he knew that his despair almost brought tears to his eyes,
Minnetaki's fate was in his hands--and he had failed. He dreaded to
tell his companions, to let them see his face. For once in his life,
though he was as courageous a youth as ever lived, Roderick Drew
almost wished that he was dead.

Suddenly, as in their hopeless search for some familiar object Rod's
eyes traveled again over the endless waste of snow, he saw, far away,
something that glittered in the morning sun like a pane of glass, and
from his lips there fell a low exultant cry. He remembered now that he
had seen that strange gleam before, that he had gone straight to it
from the ridge and had found it to be a sheet of crystal ice frozen
to the side of a rock from above which the water of a spring gushed
forth. Without waiting for his companions he hurried down the
ridge and sped like a deer across the narrow plain at its foot. A
five-minute run brought him to the rock, and for a moment he paused,
his heart almost choking him in its excitement. Just beyond this he
had first encountered the strange trail. There were no signs of it
left in the snow, but he saw other things which led him on: a huge
rock thrusting itself out of the chaos of white, a dead poplar which
stood in his path, and at last, half a mile ahead, the edge of a dense
forest.

He turned and waved his arms wildly to Mukoki and Wabigoon, who were
far behind. Then he ran on, and when he reached the forest he waved
his arms again, and his joy was flung back in a thrilling shout to his
comrades. There was the log on which Minnetaki had been forced to sit
while awaiting the pleasure of her savage captors; he found the very
spot where her footprint had been in the snow, close to a protruding
stub! The outlaw Indians and their captives had rested here for a
brief spell, and had built a fire, and so many feet had beaten the
snow about it that their traces still remained.

He pointed to these signs as Mukoki and Wabigoon joined him.

For several minutes no one of the three spoke a word. Crouched over
until his eyes were within a foot of the snow the old pathfinder
examined every inch of the little clearing in which the Woongas had
built their fire, and when at last he drew himself erect his face
betrayed the utmost astonishment.

The boys saw that in those faint marks in the snow he had discovered
something of unusual if not startling significance.

"What is it, Muky?" asked the young Indian.

Mukoki made no reply, but returning to the charred remains of the
fire he again fell upon his hands and knees and repeated his strange
scrutiny of the snow even more closely than before. When he arose a
second time the astonishment had grown deeper in his face.

"Only six!" he exclaimed. "Two guides from Post--four Woongas!"

"But the wounded driver told us that there were at least a dozen
Woongas in the attacking party," said Wabi.

The old warrior chuckled, and for a moment his face twisted itself
into a ludicrous grimace.

"Driver lie!" he declared. "He run when fight begin. Shot in back
while heem run!"

He pointed into the cold depths of the forest.

"No sun there! Follow trail easy!"

There was no uneasiness in Mukoki's manner now. His eyes gleamed, but
it was with the fire of battle and resolution, not with excitement.
Once before Rod had seen that look in the old warrior's face, when
they two had fought to save Wabigoon's life as they were now about to
fight to save Minnetaki. And he knew what it meant. Cautiously they
penetrated the forest, their eyes and ears alert, and, as Mukoki had
predicted, the trail of the retreating savages was quite distinct.
They had taken both of the captured sledges, and Rod knew that on one
of these Minnetaki was being carried. Hardly had the three progressed
a hundred paces when Mukoki, who was in the lead, stopped short with
a huge grunt. Squarely across the trail lay the body of a dead man. A
glance at the upturned face showed that it was one of the two drivers
from Wabinosh House.

"Head split," said Mukoki, as he led the team around the body. "Shot,
mebby--then killed with ax."

The dogs sniffed and cringed as they passed the slain man, and Rod
shuddered. Involuntarily he thought of what might have happened to
Minnetaki, and he noticed that after passing this spectacle of death
Mukoki doubled his speed. For an hour the pursuit continued without
interruption. The Woongas were traveling in a narrow trail, single
file, with the two sledges between their number. At the end of that
hour the three came upon the remains of another camp-fire near which
were built two cedar-bough shelters. Here the tracks in the snow were
much fresher; in places they seemed to have been but lately made.
Still there were no evidences of the captured girl. The boys could see
that Mukoki himself had found no explanation for the sudden freshness
of the trail and for the absence of Minnetaki's footprints among the
tracks. Again and again the shrewd old pathfinder went over the camp.
Not a sign escaped his eyes, not a mark or a broken stick but that was
examined by him. Rod knew that Minnetaki's capture must have occurred
at least three days before, and yet the tracks about this camp were
not more than a day old, if they were that. What did it mean?

The very mystery of the thing filled him with a nameless fear. Why had
not the outlaw Woongas continued their flight? Why this delay so near
the scene of their crime? He glanced at Wabi, but the Indian youth was
as bewildered as himself. In his eyes, too, there was the gleam of a
fear which he could not have named.

Mukoki was beside the charred remains of the fire. He had buried his
hand deep among them, and when he rose he made a sign toward Rod's
watch.

"Eight o'clock, Mukoki."

"Woonga here las' night," declared the old Indian slowly. "Leave camp
four hour ago!"

What did it mean?

Had Minnetaki been hurt, so dangerously hurt that her captors had not
dared to move her?

Rod asked himself no more questions. But he was trembling. And Mukoki
and Wabigoon went on with strange, unnatural faces and breathed not
the whisper of a word between them. The mystery was beyond them all.
But one thing they realized, whatever had happened they were close
upon the heels of the savages. And each step brought them nearer,
for with every mile the freshness of the trail increased. Then came
another great surprise.

The trail divided!

At the edge of a small opening the Indians had separated themselves
into two parties. The trail of one sledge led into the northeast, that
of the other into the northwest!

With which sledge was Minnetaki? They looked at one another in
bewilderment.

Mukoki pointed to the trail into the northeast.

"We must fin' sign--sign of Minnetaki. You take that--I take this!"

Rod started off at a dog trot over the easternmost trail. At the
farther side of the opening, where the sledge had plunged into a clump
of hazel, he suddenly stopped, and for a second time that morning
a thrilling cry escaped his lips. On a projecting thorny twig,
glistening full in the sun, there fluttered a long, silken strand of
hair. He reached out for it, but Wabi caught his hand, and in another
moment Mukoki had joined them. Gently he took the raven tress between
his fingers, his deep-set eyes glaring like red coals of fire. It was
a strand of Minnetaki's beautiful hair, not for a moment did one of
them doubt that; but what held them most, what increased the horror in
their eyes, was the quantity of it! Suddenly Mukoki gave it a gentle
pull and the tress slipped free of the twig.

In the next breath he uttered the only expression of supreme disgust
in his vocabulary a long-drawn, hissing sound which he used only in
those moments when his command of English was entirely inadequate to
the situation.

"Minnetaki on other sledge!"

He showed the end of the strand to his young companions.

"See--hair been cut! No pulled out by twig. Woonga hang heem
there--make us think wrong."

He waited for no reply, but darted back to the other trail, with Wabi
and Rod close behind him. A quarter of a mile farther on the old
pathfinder paused and pointed in exultant silence at a tiny footprint
close beside the path of the sledge. At almost regular intervals now
there appeared this sign of Minnetaki's moccasin. Her two guards were
running ahead of the sledge, and it was apparent to the pursuers that
Wabi's sister was taking advantage of her opportunities to leave these
signs behind for those whom she knew would make an attempt at her
rescue. And yet, as they left farther and farther behind them the
trail which ran into the northeast, an inexplicable feeling of
uneasiness began to steal over Rod. What if Mukoki had made a mistake?
His confidence in the old warrior's judgment and sagacity was usually
absolute, but it occurred to him, like an ugly humor to stir up his
fears, that if the Woongas could cut off a bit of the girl's hair they
could also take off one of her shoes! Several times he was on the
point of giving audible voice to his suspicions but refrained from
doing so when he saw the assurance with which both Wabi and Mukoki
followed the trail.

Finally he could hold himself no longer.

"Wabi, I'm going back," he cried softly, forging alongside his
companion. "I'm going back and follow the other trail. If I don't find
anything in a mile or so I'll return on the double-quick and overtake
you!"

Wabi's efforts to dissuade him were futile, and a few minutes later
Rod was again at the clearing. What presentiment was it that caused
his heart to beat faster and his breath to come in tense excitement as
he stole through the bushes where they had found the silken tress of
hair? What something was it, away down in his soul, that kept urging
him on and on, even after he had gone a mile, and then two miles, in
fruitless search? Rod could not have answered these questions had he
stopped to ask them of himself. He was not superstitious. He did not
believe in dreams. And yet each moment, without apparent reason added
to his conviction that Mukoki had made a mistake, and that Minnetaki
was on the sledge ahead of him.

The country into which he was penetrating grew wilder. Rocky ridges
rose before him, split by rifts and gullies through which the water
must have rushed in torrents in the spring. He listened, and proceeded
more cautiously; and through his mind there flashed a memory of his
thrilling exploration of the mysterious chasm of a few weeks before,
when, in his lonely night camp, he had dreamed of the skeletons. He
was thinking of this when he came around the end of a huge rock which
lay as big as a house in his path. Upon the snow, almost at his feet,
was a sight that froze the blood in his veins. For the second time
that day he gazed upon the distorted features of a dead man. Squarely
across the trail, as the other had lain, was the body of an Indian,
his arms outstretched, his twisted face turned straight up to the
clear sky, the snow about his head glistening a sickening red in the
sun. For a full minute Rod gazed in silent horror on the scene. There
was no sign of a struggle, there were no footprints in the snow. The
man had been killed while upon the sledge, and the only mark he had
made was when he had fallen off.

Who had killed him?

Had Minnetaki saved herself by taking her captor's life?

For a moment Rod was almost convinced that this was so. He examined
the stains in the snow and found that they were still damp and
unfrozen. He was sure that the tragedy had occurred less than an hour
before. More cautiously, and yet swifter than before, he followed the
trail of the sledge, his rifle held in readiness for a shot at
any moment. The path became wilder and in places it seemed almost
inaccessible. But between the tumbled mass of rock the sledge had
found its way, its savage driver not once erring in his choice of the
openings ahead. Gradually the trail ascended until it came to the
summit of a huge ridge. Hardly had Rod reached the top when another
trail cut across that of the sledge.

Deeply impressed in the softening snow were the footprints of a big
bear!

The first warm sunshine, thought Rod, had aroused the beast from his
winter sleep, and he was making a short excursion from his den. From
where the bear had crossed the trail the sledge turned abruptly in the
direction from which the bear had come.

Without giving a thought to his action, Rod began his descent of the
ridge in the trail made by the bear, at the same time keeping his eyes
fixed upon the sledge track and the distant forest. At the foot of the
ridge the great trunk of a fallen tree lay in his path, and as he went
to climb over it he stopped, a cry of amazement stifling itself in his
throat. Over that tree the bear had scrambled, and upon it, close to
the spot where the animal had brushed off the snow in his passage, was
the imprint of a human hand!

For a full minute Rod stood as motionless as if he had been paralyzed,
scarcely breathing in his excitement. The four fingers and thumb of
the hand had left their impressions with startling clearness. The
fingers were long and delicately slender, the palm narrow. The imprint
had assuredly not been made by the hand of a man!

Recovering himself, Rod looked about him. There were no marks in the
snow except those of the bear. Was it possible that he was mistaken?
He scrutinized the mysterious handprint again. As he gazed an uncanny
chill crept through him, and when he raised his head he knew that he
was trembling in spite of his efforts to control himself. Turning
about he swiftly followed the trail to the top of the ridge, recrossed
the sledge track, and descended again into the wildness of the gorge
on the other side. He had not progressed twenty rods when without a
sound he dropped behind a rock. He had seen no movement ahead of him.
He had heard nothing. Yet in that moment he was thrilled as never
before in his life.

For the bear trail had ceased.

And ahead of him, instead of the tracks of a beast, there continued
_the footprints of a man_!




CHAPTER V


ROD'S FIGHT FOR LIFE

It was some time before Roderick moved from his concealment behind the
rock. It was not fear that held him there, but a knowledge within
him that he needed to think, to collect his senses as he would have
expressed it if Wabi had been with him. For a brief spell he was
stunned by the succession of surprises which he had encountered, and
he felt that now, if ever in his life, he needed control of himself.
He did not attempt to solve the mystery of the trail beyond the fact
that it was not made by a bear and that the handprint on the log
was not made by a man. But he was certain of one thing. In some way
Minnetaki was associated with both.

When he continued his pursuit he made his way with extreme caution. At
each new turn in the trail he fell behind some rock or clump of bushes
and scanned the gorge as far as he could see ahead of him. But each
moment these distances of observation became shorter. The ridge on his
left became almost a sheer wall; on his right a second ridge closed
in until the gorge had narrowed to a hundred feet in width, choked by
huge masses of rock thrown there in some mighty upheaval of past ages.
It was very soon apparent to Rod that the mysterious person whom he
was pursuing was perfectly at home in the lonely chasm. As straight as
a drawn whip-lash his trail led from one break in the rocky chaos to
another. Never did he err. Once the tracks seemed to end squarely
against a broad face of rock, but there the young hunter found a cleft
in the granite wall scarcely wider than his body, through which he
cautiously wormed his way. Where this cleft opened into the chasm
again the fugitive had rested for a few moments, and had placed some
burden upon the snow at his feet. A single glance disclosed what
this burden had been, for in the snow was that same clearly-defined
impression of a human hand!

There was no longer a doubt in Roderick's mind. He was on the trail
of Minnetaki's captor, and the outlaw was carrying his victim in his
arms! Minnetaki was injured! Perhaps she was dead. The fear gripped at
his heart until he looked again at the imprint in the snow--the widely
spread fingers, the flat, firm palm. Only a living hand would have
left its mark in that manner.

As on that autumn day in the forest, when he had fought for
Minnetaki's life, so now all hesitation and fear left him. His blood
leaped with anticipation rather than excitement, and he was eager for
the moment when he would once more throw his life in the balance in
behalf of Wabi's sister. He was determined to take advantage of the
Woonga fighting code and fire upon his enemy from ambush if the
opportunity offered, but at the same time he had no dread at the
thought of engaging in a closer struggle if this should be necessary.
He looked well to his rifle, loosened his big army revolver in its
holster, and saw that his hunting-knife did not stick in its scabbard.
A short distance from the cleft in the wall of rock the outlaw had
rested again; and this time, when he continued his flight, Minnetaki
had walked beside him.

A peculiarity in the new trail struck Rod, and for some moments he was
at a loss to account for it. One of the girl's dainty feet left its
moccasin imprint very distinctly; the mark of the other was no more
than a formless blotch in the snow. Then the youth thought of the
footprints that were leading on Mukoki and Wabigoon, and despite his
desperate situation he could not repress a smile. He had been right.
The Woongas had taken off one of Minnetaki's moccasins and were using
it to make a false trail into the northwest. Those formless tracks
ahead of him meant that one of the Indian maiden's feet was wrapped
with a bit of cloth or fur to protect it from the cold.

Rod soon perceived that the flight of the outlaw and his captive was
now much more rapid, and he quickened his own pace. The chasm grew
wilder. At times it appeared impassable, but always the trail of the
fugitives led straight to some hidden cleft through which the boy
followed, holding his breath in tense expectancy of what might happen
at any instant.

Suddenly Rod stopped. From ahead of him he was sure that he had heard
a sound. He scarcely breathed while he listened. But there came no
repetition of the noise. Had some animal, a fox or a wolf, perhaps,
set a stone rolling down one of the precipitous walls of the chasm? He
went on slowly, listening, watching. A few paces more and he stopped
again. There was a faint, suspicious odor in the air; a turn around
the end of a huge mass of rock and his nostrils were filled with it,
the pungent odor of smoke mingled with the sweet scent of burning
cedar!

There was a fire ahead of him. More than that, it was not a gunshot
away!

For a space of sixty seconds he stood still, nerving himself for the
final step. His resolution was made. He would creep upon the outlaw
and shoot him down. There would be no warning, no quarter, no parley.
Foot by foot he advanced, as stealthily as a fox. The odor of smoke
came to him more plainly; over his head he saw thin films of it
floating lazily up the chasm. It came from beyond another of those
walls of rock which seemed to bar his way, creeping up over it as
though the fire were just on the other side. With his rifle half to
his shoulder Rod stole through the break in this wall. At its farther
end he peered out cautiously, exposing his face an inch at a time.
Wider and wider became his vision. There was no trail ahead. The
outlaw and his captive were behind the rock!

With his rifle now full to his shoulder Rod stepped boldly forth and
whirled to the left. Twenty feet away, almost entirely concealed among
the tumbled masses of boulders, was a small cabin. About it there were
no signs of life with the exception of a thin wreath of smoke rising
like a ghostly spiral up the side of the chasm wall; from it there
came no sound. Rod's index finger quivered on the trigger of his
rifle. Should he wait--until the outlaw came forth? Half a minute he
stood there, a minute, two minutes, and still he heard nothing, saw
nothing. He advanced a step, then another, and still another, until
he saw the open door of the cabin. And as he stood there, his rifle
leveled, there came to him a faint, sobbing cry, a cry that reached
out and caught him like a strong hand and brought him in a single
desperate leap to the door itself.

Inside the cabin was Minnetaki, alone! She was crouched upon the
floor, her beautiful hair tumbling in disheveled masses over her
shoulders and into her lap, her face, as white as death, staring
wildly at the youth who had appeared like an apparition before her.

In an instant Rod was at her side, upon his knees. For that brief
moment he had lost his caution, and only a terrible cry from the girl
turned him back again, half upon his feet, to the door. Standing
there, about to spring upon him, was one of the most terrifying
figures he had ever seen. In a flash he saw the huge form of an
Indian, a terrible face, the gleam of an uplifted knife. In such a
crisis one's actions are involuntary, machine-like, as if life itself,
hovering by a thread, protects itself in its own manner without
thought or reasoning on the part of the human creature it animates.
Rod neither thought nor reasoned; without any motive on his own part,
he flung himself face downward upon the cabin floor. And the move
saved him. With a guttural cry the savage leaped toward him, struck
out with his knife and missed, stumbled over the boy's prostrate form
and fell beside him.

Months of hardship and adventure in the wilderness had made Rod as
lithe as a forest cat, his muscles like steel. Without rising he flung
himself upon his enemy, his own knife raised in gleaming death above
the savage's breast. But the Woonga was as quick. Like a flash he
struck up with one of his powerful arms and the force of the blow that
was descending upon him fell to the earth floor. In another instant
his free arm had encircled Rod's neck, and for a few brief moments the
two were locked in a crushing embrace, neither being able to use the
weapon in his hand without offering an advantage to the other.

In that respite, which only death could follow, Rod's brain worked
with the swiftness of fire. He was lying face downward upon his enemy;
the Woonga was flat upon his back, the latter's knife hand stretched
out behind his head with Rod's knife hand locking it. For either to
strike a blow both of their fighting hands must be freed. In the first
instant of that freedom, the savage, with his arm already extended,
could deliver a blow sooner than his antagonist, who would have to
raise his arm as well as strike. In other words, by the time Rod's
knife was poised his enemy's would be buried in his breast. With a
curious thrill the white youth saw the fearful odds against him in
their position. If he remained clutched in the Indian's embrace there
would be only one end. He would die, and Minnetaki would be more than
ever in the power of her captor.

There was only one chance now, and that was to break away, at least
to free himself enough to get hold of his revolver. He was nerving
himself for the strain when, turning his head a trifle sidewise, he
saw Minnetaki. The girl had risen to her feet, and Rod saw that her
hands were bound behind her. She, too, realized the disadvantage of
Rod's position in the contest, and now with a thrilling cry she sprang
to the outlaw's head and stepped with all her weight upon his extended
arm.

"Quick, Rod--quick!" she cried. "Strike! Strike!"

With a terrible yell the powerful savage wrenched his arm free; in a
last superhuman effort he swung his knife upward as Rod's blade sank
to the hilt in his breast, and the blow fell with a sickening thud
under Rod's arm. With a sharp cry the young hunter staggered to his
feet, and the Indian's knife fell from him, red with blood. Making
an effort to control himself he picked up the knife and loosed the
captive girl's arms.

There came over him then a strange dizziness, a weakness in his limbs.
He was conscious that his head was sinking, and he knew, too, that a
pair of arms was about him, and that from what seemed to be a great,
great distance a voice was calling to him, calling his name. And then
he seemed to be sinking into a deep and painless sleep.

When he regained consciousness his eyes were first turned to the door,
which was still open, and through which he caught the white gleam of
the snow. A hand was pressed gently upon his face.

"Rod--"

Minnetaki spoke in a whisper, a whisper that trembled with gladness,
with relief. Rod smiled. Weakly he lifted a hand and touched the
sweet, white face above him.

"I'm glad to see you--Minnetaki--" he breathed.

The girl quickly put a cup of cold water to his lips.

"You mustn't try to move," she said softly, her eyes glowing. "It
isn't a very bad wound, and I've dressed it nicely. But you mustn't
move--or talk--or it may begin bleeding again."

"But I'm so glad to see you, Minnetaki," persisted the youth. "You
don't know how disappointed I was to find you gone when we returned to
Wabinosh House from our hunting trip. Wabi and Mukoki--"

"Sh-h-h-h!"

Minnetaki placed her hand upon his lips.

"You must keep quiet, Roderick. Don't you know how curious I am to
know how you are here? But you must not tell me--now. Let me do the
talking. Will you? Please!"

Involuntarily the young girl's eyes left his face, and Rod, weakly
following her gaze, saw that a blanket had been spread over a huddled
heap in the middle of the floor. He shuddered, and feeling the sudden
tremor in his hand Minnetaki turned to him quickly, her cheeks whiter
than before, but her eyes shining like stars.

"It is Woonga," she whispered. In her voice was a thrilling tremble.
"It is Woonga, and he is dead!"

Rod understood the look in her face now. Woonga, the Nemesis of her
people, the outlaw chief who had sworn vengeance on the house of
Wabinosh, and whose murderous hand had hovered for years like a
threatening cloud over the heads of the factor and his wife and
children, was dead! And he, Roderick Drew, who once before had saved
Minnetaki's life, had killed him. In his weakness and pain he smiled,
and said,

"I am glad, Minne--"

He did not finish. There had come a stealthy, crumbling step to the
door, and in another moment Mukoki and Wabigoon were in the little
cabin.




CHAPTER VI


THE SHADOW OF DEATH

Rod was hardly conscious of what passed during the next half-hour. The
excitement of the sudden entrance of Minnetaki's brother and the old
Indian set his head reeling, and he sank back upon the blankets, from
which he had partly raised himself, fainting and weak. The last that
he heard was Minnetaki's warning voice, and then he felt something
cool upon his face. It seemed a long time before he heard sound again,
and when he stirred himself, struggling toward consciousness, there
came a whisper in his ear urging him to be quiet. It was Minnetaki,
and he obeyed.

After a little he heard low voices, and then movement, and opened his
eyes. He could feel Minnetaki's gentle hand stroking his face and
hair, as if weaning him to sleep, and at his feet he saw Mukoki, the
old warrior, crouching like a lynx, his beady eyes glaring at him. The
glare fascinated Roderick. He had seen it in Mukoki's eyes before,
when the Indian believed that injury had come to those he loved; and
when the white boy saw it now, bent upon himself, he knew that he,
too, had become more than a friend to this savage pathfinder of the
wilderness. Minnetaki's caressing hand and the fearful anxiety in the
crouching posture of the old hunter thrilled him, and two words fell
from his lips before they knew that he had come back into life.

"Hello, Muky!"

Instantly the old Indian was at his side, kneeling there silent,
trembling, his face twitching with joy, his eyes gleaming, and where
he had crouched a moment before there came Wabigoon, smiling down upon
Rod in his own bursting happiness, which was only held in check by
Minnetaki's hand and the almost inaudible "Sh-h-h-h!" that fell from
her lips.

"You right--me wrong," the white boy heard Mukoki saying. "You save
Minnetaki--kill Woonga. Very much dam'--dam'--dam'--brave man!"

Mukoki was pressed back by Wabi's sister before he could say more, and
a cool drink of spring water was placed to Roderick's lips. He felt
feverish and the water gave him new strength. He turned his face to
Minnetaki, and she smiled at him. Then he saw that the dead outlaw had
been removed from the cabin. When he made an effort to raise himself a
little the girl helped him, and rolled a blanket under his shoulders.

"You're not so badly hurt as I thought you were, Rod," she said. "That
is, you're not dangerously hurt. Mukoki has dressed your wound, and
you will be better soon." Wabigoon, coming nearer, put both arms
around his lovely little sister and kissed her again and again.

"Rod, you're a hero!" he cried softly, gripping his comrade's hand.
"God bless you!"

Rod blushed, and to restrain further effusions closed his eyes. During
the next quarter of an hour Minnetaki prepared some coffee and meat,
while both Mukoki and Wabi cared for the sledge-dogs outside.

"To-morrow, if you are stronger, we're going to take you on to
Kenegami House," the girl said to him. "Then you can tell me all about
your adventures during the winter. Wabi has told me just enough about
your battles with the Indians and about the old skeletons and the lost
gold-mine to set me wild. Oh, I wish you would take me with you on
your hunt for gold!"

"By George, I wish we could!" exclaimed Rod with enthusiasm. "Coax
Wabi, Minnetaki--coax him hard."

"You'll coax him, too, won't you, Rod? But then, I don't suppose it
will do any good. And father and mother wouldn't listen to it for a
moment. All of them are so afraid that some harm is going to befall
me. That's why they sent me from Wabinosh House just before you boys
returned. You see the Indians were more hostile than ever, and they
thought I would be safer at Kenegami House. How I do wish they'd let
me go! I'd love to hunt bears, and wolves, and moose, and help you
find the gold. Please coax him hard, Roderick!"

And that very day, when he was strong enough to sit up, Rod did plead
with his half-Indian comrade that Minnetaki might be allowed to
accompany them. But Wabi stanchly refused even to consider the
proposition, and Mukoki, when he learned of the girl's desire, grinned
and chuckled in his astonishment for the next half-hour.

"Minnetaki ver' brave--ver' brave girl," he confided to Rod, "but she
die up there, I guess so! You want Minnetaki die?"

Rod assured him that he did not, and the subject was dropped.

That day and night in the old cabin was one of the pleasantest within
Rod's memory, despite the youth's wound. A cheerful fire of dry pine
and poplar burned in the stone fireplace, and when Minnetaki announced
that the evening meal was ready Rod was for the first time allowed to
leave his bunk. For the greater part of the day Wabi and Mukoki had
searched in the chasm and along the mountains for signs of the outlaw
Indian's band, but their search had revealed nothing to arouse their
fears. As mysterious and unaccountable as the fact seemed, there
was no doubt that the old cabin was a retreat known only to Woonga
himself, and as the four sat in the warm glow of the fire, eating and
drinking, the whole adventure was gone over again and again until
there seemed no part of it left in doubt. Minnetaki described her
capture and explained the slowness of their flight after the massacre.
Woonga was ill and had refused to move far from the scene of the
slaughter until he had fully regained his strength.

"But why did Woonga kill the Indian back on the trail?" asked Rod.

Minnetaki shuddered as she thought of the terrible scene that had been
enacted before her eyes.

"I heard them quarreling," she said, "but I couldn't understand. I
know that it was about me. We had gone but a short distance after the
sledges separated when Woonga, who was ahead of me, turned about and
shot the other in the breast. It was terrible! And then he drove on as
coolly as though nothing had happened."

"I'm curious to know how he used the bear's feet," exclaimed Rod.

"They were huge pads into which he slipped his feet, moccasins and
all," explained Minnetaki. "He told me that the dogs would go on to
Kenegami House, and that if pursuers followed us they would follow the
sledge trail and never give a thought to the bear tracks."

Mukoki chuckled deep down in his throat.

"He no fool Rod," he said. "Nobody fool Rod!"

"Especially when he's on Minnetaki's trail," laughed Wabi happily.

"Wasn't it Rod who discovered the secret of the lost gold, after you
had given up all hope?" retorted Minnetaki.

The lost gold!

How those three words, falling clearly from the girl's lips, thrilled
the hearts of Mukoki and the young adventurers. Night had closed in,
and only the fitful flashes of the fire illumined the interior of the
old cabin. The four had finished eating, and as they drew themselves
close about the fire there fell a strange silence among them. The lost
gold. Rod gazed across at Wabigoon, whose bronzed face was half hid in
the dancing shadows, and then at Mukoki, whose wrinkled visage shone
like dull copper as he stared like some watchful animal into the flame
glow. But it was Minnetaki who sent the blood in a swift rush of joy
and pride through his veins. He caught her eyes upon him, shining like
stars from out of the gloom, and he knew that she was looking at him
in that way because he was her hero.

For many minutes no one broke the stillness. The fire burned down, and
with its slow dying away the gloom in the corners of the old cabin
thickened, and the faces became more and more like ghostly shadows,
until they reminded Rod of his first vision of the ancient skeletons
in that other old cabin many miles away. Then came Wabigoon's voice,
as he stirred the coals and added fresh fuel.

"Yes, it was Rod. This is the map he found, Minnetaki."

He kneeled close beside his sister and drew forth his copy of the
precious secret which the skeletons had guarded. With a little cry
of excitement the girl took the map in her hands, and step by step,
adventure by adventure, was gone over the thrilling story of the Wolf
Hunters, until the late hours of night had changed into the first of
morning. Twice did Minnetaki insist on having repeated to her the
story of Rod's wild adventure in the mysterious chasm, and when he
came to the terrors of that black night and its strange sounds Rod
felt a timid little hand come close to him, and as Wabigoon continued
the narration, and told of the map in the skeleton hand, and of the
tale of murder and tragedy it revealed, Minnetaki's breath came in
quick, tense eagerness.

"And you are going back in the spring?" she asked.

"In the spring," replied Rod.

Again Wabigoon urged Rod, as he had done at the Post, to send down to
civilization for his mother instead of going for her himself. Time
would be saved, he argued. They could set out on their search for the
gold within a few weeks. But Rod was firm.

"It would not be fair to mother," he declared. "I must go home first,
even if I have to arrange for a special sledge at Kenegami House to
take me down to civilization."

But even while he was stoutly declaring what it was his intention to
do, fate was stealthily at work weaving another of her webs of destiny
for Roderick Drew, and his friends' anxious eyes saw the first signs
of it when they bade him good night. For fever had laid its hand on
the white youth, the fever that foreshadows death unless a surgeon
is near, the fever of a wound going bad. Even Mukoki, graduated by
Nature, taught by half a century's battle with life in this great
desolation of the North, knew that his own powers were now of no
avail.

So Roderick was bundled in blankets, and the race for life to Kenegami
House was begun. It was a race of which Rod could only guess the
import, for he did not know that Death was running a fierce pursuit
behind. Many days and nights of delirium followed. One morning he
seemed to awaken from a terrible dream, in which he was constantly
burning and roasting, and when he opened his eyes he knew for the
first time that it was Minnetaki who sat close beside him, and that it
was her hand that was gently stroking his forehead. From that day on
he gained strength rapidly, but it was a month before he could sit up,
and another two weeks before he could stand. And so it happened that
it was full two months after he had made his assertion in the old
cabin before Rod was in good health again.

One day Minnetaki had a tremendous surprise in store for him. Rod had
never seen her look quite so pretty, or quite so timid, as she did on
this particular morning.

"Will you forgive me for--for--keeping something from you, Rod?" she
asked. She did not wait for the boy's reply, but went on. "When you
were so sick, and we thought you might die, I wrote to your mother and
we sent the letter down by a special sledge. And--and--oh, Rod, I just
can't keep it in any longer, no matter if you do scold me! Your mother
has come--and she is at Wabinosh House now!"

For a moment Rod stood like one struck dumb. Then he found his voice
in a series of war-whoops which quickly brought Wabi in, only to see
his friend dancing around Minnetaki like one gone crazy.

"Forgive you!" he shouted again and again. "Minnetaki, you're a
brick--you certainly are a brick!"

As soon as Wabi was made acquainted with the cause of Roderick's
excitement he also joined in the other's wild rejoicing, and their
antics startled half the house of Kenegami. Mukoki shared their joy,
and Wabi hugged and kissed his sister until her pretty face was like a
wild rose.

"Hurrah!" shouted Wabi for the twentieth time. "That means we start on
our hunt for the lost gold-mine within a fortnight!"

"It means--" began Roderick.

"It means--" interrupted Minnetaki, "it means that you're all happy
but me--and I'm glad for Rod's sake, and I want to know his mother.
But you're all going--and I'm to be left behind!"

There was no laughter in her voice, and Rod and Wabigoon became
suddenly quiet as she turned away.

"I'm sorry," said Wabi. "But--we can't help it."

Mukoki broke the tension.

"How bright the sun shine!" he exclaimed. "Snow an' ice go.
Spring--heem here!"




CHAPTER VII


ON THE TRAIL OF GOLD

And each day thereafter the sun rose earlier, and the day was longer,
and the air was warmer; and with the warmth there now came the sweet
scents of the budding earth and the myriad sounds of the deep, unseen
life of the forests, awakening from its long slumber in its bed of
snow. The moose-birds chirped their mating songs and flirted from
morning till night in bough and air, and the jays and ravens fluffed
themselves in the sun, and the snowbirds, little black and white
beauties that were wont to whisk about like so many flashing gems,
became fewer and fewer, until they were gone altogether. The poplar
buds swelled more and more in their joy, until they split like
over-fat peas, and the partridges feasted upon them.

And Mother Bear came out of her winter den, accompanied by her little
ones born two months before, and taught them how to pull down the
slender saplings for these same buds; and the moose came down from the
blizzardy tops of the great ridges, which are called mountains in the
North, and where for good reasons they had passed the winter, followed
by the wolves, who fed upon their weak and sick. Everywhere there were
the rushing torrents of melting snows, the crackle of crumbling ice,
the dying frost-cries of rock and earth and tree, and each night the
cold, pale glow of the Aurora Borealis crept farther and farther
toward the Pole in fading glory.

It was spring, and at Wabinosh House it brought more joy than
elsewhere, for there Roderick Drew joined his mother. We have not time
here to dwell on the things that happened at the old Hudson Bay Post
during the ten days after their first happy reunion--of the love that
sprang up between Rod's mother and Minnetaki, and the princess wife
of George Newsome, the factor; of the departure of the soldiers whose
task of running down Woonga ended with Rod's desperate fight in the
cabin, or of the preparations of the gold hunters themselves.

On a certain evening in April, Wabi, Mukoki and Rod had assembled in
the latter's room. The next morning they were to start on their long
and thrilling adventure into the far North, and on this last night
they went carefully over their equipment and plans to see that nothing
had been forgotten. That night Rod slept little. For the second time
in his life the fever of adventure was running wild in his blood.
After the others had gone he studied the precious old map until his
eyes grew dim; in the half slumber that came to him afterward his
brain worked ceaselessly, and he saw visions of the romantic old cabin
again, and the rotting buckskin bag filled with nuggets of gold on the
table.

He was up before the stars began fading in the dawn, and in the big
dining-room of the Post, in which had gathered the factors and their
families for two hundred years, the boys ate their last breakfast with
those whom they were about to leave for many weeks, perhaps months.
The factor himself was boisterously cheerful in his efforts to keep
up the good cheer of Mrs. Drew and the princess mother, and even
Minnetaki forced herself to smile and laugh, though her eyes were
red, and all knew that she had been crying. Rod was glad when the meal
was over and they went out into the chill air of the morning, and down
to the edge of the lake, where their big birch-bark canoe was loaded
and waiting for their departure, and he was still more relieved when
they had bade a last good-by to the two mothers. But Minnetaki came
down to the canoe with them, and when Wabi kissed her she burst into
tears, and Rod felt a queer thickening in his throat as he took her
firm little hand and held it for a moment between both his own.

"Good-by, Minnetaki," he whispered.

He turned and took his position in the middle of the canoe, and with a
last shout Wabi shoved off and the canoe sped out into the gloom.

For a long time there was silence, except for the rhythmic dip of the
three paddles. Once Minnetaki's voice came to them faintly, and they
answered it with a shout. But that was all. After a time Rod said,

"By George, this saying good-by is the toughest part of the whole
business!"

His words cleared away the feeling of oppression that seemed to have
fallen on them.

"It's always hard for me to leave Minnetaki," replied Wabigoon. "Some
day I'm going to take her on a trip with me."

"She'd be a bully fellow!" cried Rod with enthusiasm.

From the stern of the canoe came a delighted chuckle from Mukoki.

"She brave--she shoot, she hunt, she be dam' fine!" he added, and
both Rod and Wabi burst out laughing. The young Indian looked at his
compass by the light of a match.

"We'll strike straight across Lake Nipigon instead of following the
shore. What do you say, Muky?" he called back.

The old pathfinder was silent. In surprise Wabi ceased paddling, and
repeated his question.

"Don't you think it is safe?"

Mukoki wet his hand over the side and held it above his head.

"Wind in south," he said. "Maybe no get stronger, but--"

"If she did," added Rod dubiously, noting how heavily laden the canoe
was, "we'd be in a fix, as sure as you live!"

"It will take us all of to-day and half of to-morrow to follow the
shore," urged Wabi, "while by cutting straight across the lake we can
make the other side early this afternoon. Let's risk it!"

Mukoki grunted something that was a little less than approval, and Rod
felt a peculiar sensation shoot through him as the frail birch headed
out into the big lake. Their steady strokes sent the canoe through the
water at fully four miles an hour, and by the time broad day had come
the forest-clad shore at Wabinosh House was only a hazy outline in the
distance. The white youth's unspoken fears were dispelled when the sun
rose, warm and glorious, over the shimmering lake, driving the chill
from the air, and seeming to bring with it the sweet scents of
the forests far away. Joyfully he labored at his paddle, the mere
exhilaration of the morning filling his arms with the strength of a
young giant. Wabi whistled and sang wild snatches of Indian song by
turns, Rod joined him with _Yankee Doodle_ and _The Star Spangled
Banner_, and even the silent Mukoki gave a whoop now and then to show
that he was as happy as they.

One thought filled the minds of all. They were fairly started on that
most thrilling of all trails, the trail of gold. In their possession
was the secret of a great fortune. Romance, adventure, discovery,
awaited them. The big, silent North, mysterious in its age-old
desolation, where even the winds seemed to whisper of strange things
that had happened countless years before, was just ahead of them. They
were about to bury themselves in its secrets, to wrest from it the
yellow treasure it guarded, and their blood tingled and leaped
excitedly at the thought. What would be revealed to them? What might
they not discover? What strange adventures were they destined to
encounter in that Unknown World, peopled only by the things of the
wild, that stretched trackless and unexplored before them? A hundred
thoughts like these fired the brains of the three adventurers, and
made their work a play, and every breath they drew one of joy.

The lake was alive with ducks. Huge flocks of big black ducks,
mallards, blue bills and whistlers rose about them, and now and then,
when an unusually large flock was seen floating upon the water ahead
of them, one of the three would take a pot-shot with his rifle. Rod
and Mukoki had each killed two, and Wabi three, when the old warrior
stopped the fun.

"No waste too much shooting on ducks," he advised. "Need shells--big
game."

Several times during the morning the three rested from their
exertions, and at noon they ceased paddling for more than an hour
while they ate the generous dinner that had been put up for them at
Wabinosh House. The farther side of the lake was now plainly visible,
and when the journey was resumed all eyes eagerly sought for signs
of the mouth of the Ombabika, where their stirring adventures of the
winter before had begun. For some time Wabi's gaze had been fixed
upon a long, white rim along the shore, to which he now called his
companions' attention.

"It seems to be moving," he said, turning to Mukoki. "Is it
possible--" He paused doubtfully.

"What?" questioned Rod.

"That it's swans!" he completed.

"Swans!" cried the young hunter. "Great Scott, do you mean to say
there could be enough swans--"

"They sometimes cover the lake in thousands," said Wabi. "I have seen
them whitening the water as far as one could see."

"More swan as you count in twent' t'ous'nd year!" affirmed Mukoki.
After a few moments he added, "Them no swan. Ice!"

There was an unpleasant ring in his voice as he spoke the last
word, and though Rod did not fully understand what significance the
discovery held for them he could not but observe that it occasioned
both of his comrades considerable anxiety. The cause was not long in
doubt. Another half hour of brisk paddling brought them to the edge of
a frozen field of ice that extended for a quarter of a mile from the
shore. In both directions it stretched beyond their vision. Wabi's
face was filled with dismay. Mukoki sat with his paddle across his
knees, uttering not a sound.

"What's the matter?" asked Rod. "Can't we make it?"

"Make it!" exclaimed Wabigoon. "Yes--perhaps to-morrow, or the next
day!"

"Do you mean to say we can't get over that ice?"

"That's just exactly the predicament we are in. The edge of that ice
is rotten."

The canoe had drifted alongside the ice, and Rod began pounding it
with his paddle. For a distance of two feet it broke off in chunks,
then became more firm.

"I believe that if we cut our way in for a canoe length or so it would
hold us," he declared.

Wabi reached for an ax.

"We'll try it!"

Mukoki shook his head.

But for a second time that day Wabigoon persisted in acting against
the old pathfinder's judgment, something that Rod had never known him
to be guilty of before. Foot by foot he broke the ice ahead of the
canoe, until the frail craft had thrust its length into the rotten
field. Then, steadying himself on the bow, he stepped out cautiously
upon the ice.

"There!" he cried triumphantly. "You next, Rod! Steady!"

In a moment Rod had joined him. What happened after that seemed to
pass like a terrible nightmare. First there came a light cracking in
the ice under their feet, but it was over in an instant. Wabi was
laughing at him for the fear that had come into his face, and calling
his name, when with a thunderous crash the whole mass gave way under
them, and they plunged down into the black depths of the lake. The
last that Rod saw was his friend's horror-stricken face sinking in the
crumbling ice; he heard a sharp, terrible cry from Mukoki, and then he
knew that the cold waters had engulfed him, and that he was battling
for his life under the surface.

Fiercely he struck out with arms and legs in an effort to rise, and in
that moment of terror he thought of the great sheet of ice. What if he
should come up under it? In which direction should he strike out?
He opened his eyes but all was a black chaos about him. The seconds
seemed like ages. There came a splitting, rending sensation in his
head, an almost overpowering desire to open his mouth, to gasp, gasp
for air where there was nothing but death! Then his head struck
something. It was the ice! He had come up under the ice, and there was
but one end to that!

He began to sink again, slowly, as if an invisible hand were pulling
him down, and in his despair he made a last frantic effort, striking
out blindly, knowing that in another second he must open his mouth.
Even under the water he still had consciousness enough left to know
that he tried to cry out, and he felt the first gurgling rush of water
into his lungs. But he did not see the long arm that reached down
where the bubbles were coming up, he did not feel the grip that
dragged him out upon the ice. His first sense of life was that
something very heavy was upon his stomach, and that he was being
rubbed, and pummeled, and rolled about as if he had become the
plaything of a great bear. Then he saw Mukoki, and then Wabigoon.

"You go build fire," he heard Mukoki say, and he could hear Wabi
running swiftly shoreward. For he knew that they were still upon the
ice. The canoe was drawn safely up a dozen feet away, and the old
Indian was dragging blankets from it. When Mukoki turned he found Rod
resting upon his elbow, looking at him.

"That--w'at you call heem--close shave!" he grinned, placing a
supporting arm under Rod's shoulder.

With Mukoki's assistance the youth rose to his feet, and a thick
blanket was wrapped about him. Slowly they made their way shoreward,
and soon Wabi came running out to meet them, dripping wet.

"Rod, when we get thawed out, I want you to kick me," he pleaded. "I
want you to kick me good and hard, and then I'll take great pleasure
in kicking you. And ever after this, when we do a thing that Mukoki
tells us not to do, we'll kick some more!"

"Who pulled us out?" asked Rod.

"Mukoki, of course. Will you kick me?"

"Shake!"

And the two dripping, half-frozen young adventurers shook hands,
while Mukoki chuckled and grunted and gurgled until he set the others
bursting into laughter.




CHAPTER VIII


THE YELLOW BULLET

Before a rousing fire of logs Rod and Wabigoon began to see the
cheerful side of life again, and as soon as Mukoki had built them a
balsam shelter they stripped off their clothes and wrapped themselves
in blankets, while the old Indian dried their outfits. It was two
hours before they were dressed. No sooner were they out than Wabi
went into the bush and returned a few minutes later brandishing a
good-sized birch in his hand. There was no sign of humor in his face
as he eyed Rod.

"Do you see that log?" he said, pointing to the big trunk of a fallen
tree near the fire "That will just fit your stomach, Rod. It will be
better than kicking. Double yourself over that, face down, pantaloons
up. I'm going to lick you first because I want you to know just how
much to give me. I want it twice as hard, for I was more to blame than
you."

In some astonishment Rod doubled himself over the log.

"Great Scott!" he ejaculated, peering up in dismay. "Not too hard,
Wabi!"

Swish! fell the birch, and a yell of pain burst from the white youth's
lips.

Swish!--Swish!--Swish!

"Ouch! Great Caesar--Let up!"

"Don't move!" shouted Wabi. "Take it like a man--you deserve it!"

Again and again the birch fell. Rod groaned as he rose to his feet
after Wabi had stopped. "Oh, please--please give me that whip!"

"Not too hard, you know," warned Wabi, as he fitted himself over the
log.

"You chose your own poison," reminded Rod, rolling up his sleeve.
"Just twice as hard, no more!"

And the birch began to fall.

When it was over Rod's arm ached, and Wabi, despite his Indian
stoicism, let out a long howl at the last blow.

During the entire scene of chastisement Mukoki stood like one struck
dumb.

"We'll never be bad any more, Muky," promised Wabigoon, rubbing
himself gently. "That is, if we are, we'll whip ourselves again, eh,
Rod?"

"Not so long as I can run!" assured Rod with emphasis. "I'm willing
to lend a helping hand at any time you think you deserve another, but
beyond that please count me out!"

For an hour after the self-punishment of the young gold hunters the
three gathered fuel for the night and balsam boughs for their beds. It
was dark by the time they sat down to their supper, which they ate in
the light of a huge fire of dry poplar.

"This is better than paddling all night, even if we did have a close
shave," said Rod, after they had finished and settled themselves
comfortably.

Wabi gave a grimace and shrugged his shoulders.

"Do you know how close your call was?" he asked. "It was so close that
just by one chance in ten thousand you were saved. I had pulled myself
upon the ice by catching hold of the bow of the canoe and when Muky
saw that I was safe he watched for you. But you didn't show up. We
had given you up for dead when a few bubbles came to the surface, and
quicker than a wink Mukoki thrust down his arm. He got you by the hair
as you were sinking for the last time. Think of that, Rod, and dream
of it to-night. It'll do you good."

"Ugh!" shuddered the white youth. "Let's talk of something more
cheerful. What a glorious fire that poplar makes!"

"Mak' light more as twent' t'ous'nd candles!" agreed Mukoki. "Heem
bright!"

"Once upon a time, many ages ago, there was a great chief in this
country," began Wabigoon, "and he had seven beautiful daughters. So
beautiful were they that the Great Spirit himself fell in love with
them, and for the first time in countless moons he appeared upon
earth, and told the chief that if he would give him his seven
daughters he, in turn, would grant the father seven great desires. And
the chief, surrendering his daughters, asked that he might be given a
day without night, and a night without day, and his wish was granted;
and his third and fourth and fifth desires were that the land might
always be filled with fish and game, the forests remain for ever
green, and fire be given to his people. His sixth desire was that a
fuel be given to him which would burn even in water, and the Great
Spirit gave him birch; and his seventh desire was that he might
possess another fuel, which would throw off no smoke, and might bring
comfort and joy to his wigwams--and the poplar sprang up in the
forests. And because of that chief, and his seven beautiful daughters,
all of these things are true even to this day. Isn't it so, Mukoki?"

The old warrior nodded.

"And what became of the Great Spirit and the seven beautiful
daughters?" questioned Rod.

Mukoki rose and left the fire.

"He believes in that as he believes in the sun and the moon," spoke
Wabi softly. "But he knows that you do not, and that all white people
laugh at it. He could tell you many wonderful stories of the creation
of these forests and mountains and the things in them if he would.
But he knows that you would not believe, and would laugh at him
afterward."

In an instant Rod was upon his feet.

"Mukoki!" he called. "Mukoki!"

The old Indian turned and came back slowly. The white youth met him
half-way, his face flushed, his eyes shining.

"Mukoki," he said gently, gripping the warrior's hand, "Mukoki--I love
your Great Spirit! I love the one who made these glorious forests, and
that glorious moon up there, and the mountains and lakes and rivers!
I want to know more about him. You must tell me, so that I will know
when he talks about me, in the winds, in the stars, in the forests!
Will you?"

Mukoki was looking at him, his thin lips parted, his grim visage
relaxed, as if he were weighing the truthfulness of the white youth's
words.

"And I will tell you about our Great Spirit, the white man's Great
Spirit," urged Rod. "For we have a Great Spirit, too, Mukoki, and He
did for the white man's world what yours did for you. He created the
earth, the sky and the sea and all the things in them in six days, and
on the seventh He rested. And that seventh day we call Sunday, Mukoki.
And He made our forests for us, as your Great Spirit made them for
you, only instead of giving them for the love of seven beautiful women
He gave them for the love of man. I'll tell you wonderful things about
Him, Mukoki, if you will tell me about yours. Is it a bargain?"

"Mebby--yes," replied the old pathfinder slowly. His face had
softened, and for the second time Rod knew that he had touched the
heartstrings of his red comrade. They returned to the fire, and Wabi
made room for them upon the log beside him. In his hand he held a copy
of the old birch-bark map.

"I've been thinking about this all day," he said, spreading it out so
that the others could see. "Somehow I haven't been able to get the
idea out of my head that--"

"What?" asked Rod.

"Oh, nothing," hastily added Wabi, as if he regretted what he had
said. "It's a mighty curious map, isn't it? I wonder if we'll ever
know its whole story."

"I believe we know it now," declared Rod. "In the first place, we
found it clutched by one of the skeletons, and we know from the knife
wounds in those skeletons, and the weapons near them, that the two
men fought and killed themselves. They fought for this map, for the
precious secret which each wished to possess alone. Now--"

He took the map from Wabi's fingers and held it up between them and
the fire.

"Isn't the rest of it clear?"

For a few moments the three looked at it in silence.

From the faded outlines of the original it had been drawn with
painstaking accuracy.

With a splinter Rod pointed to the top of the map, where were written
the words, "Cabin and head of chasm."

"Could anything be clearer?" he repeated. "Here is the cabin in which
the men killed themselves, and where we found their skeletons, and
here they have marked the chasm in which I shot the silver fox, and
down which we must go to find the gold. According to this we must go
until we come to the third waterfall, and there we will find another
cabin--and the gold."

"It all seems very simple--by the map," agreed Wabi.

Under the crude diagram were a number of lines in writing. They were:

"We, John Ball, Henri Langlois, and Peter Plante, having discovered
gold at this fall, do hereby agree to joint partnership in the same,
and do pledge ourselves to forget our past differences and work in
mutual good will and honesty, so help us God. Signed,

"JOHN BALL, HENRI LANGLOIS, PETER PLANTE."

Through the name of John Ball had been drawn a broad black line which
had almost destroyed the letters, and at the end of this line, in
brackets, was printed a word in French, which for the hundredth time
Wabi translated aloud:

"Dead!"

"From the handwriting of the original we know that Ball was a man of
some education," continued Rod. "And there is no doubt but that the
birch-bark sketch was made by him. All of the writing was in one hand,
with the exception of the signatures of Langlois and Plante, and you
could hardly decipher the letters in those signatures if you did not
already know their names. From these lines it is quite certain that
we were right at the cabin when we concluded that the two Frenchmen
killed the Englishman to get him out of the partnership. Isn't that
story clear enough?"

"Yes, as far as you have gone," replied Wabi. "These three men
discovered gold, quarreled, signed this agreement, and then Ball was
murdered. The two Frenchmen, as Mukoki suggested at the cabin, came
out a little later for supplies, and brought the buckskin bag full of
gold with them. They had come as far as the cabin at the head of the
chasm when they quarreled over possession of the map and agreement,
fought, and died. From the old guns and other evidences we found near
them we know that all this happened at least fifty years ago, and
perhaps more. But--"

He paused, whistling softly.

"Where is the third waterfall?"

"I thought we settled that last winter," replied Rod, a little
irritated by his companion's doubt. "If writing goes for anything,
Ball was a man of education, and he drew the map according to some
sort of scale. The second fall is only half as far from the first fall
as the third fall is from the second, which is conclusive evidence of
this. Now Mukoki discovered the first waterfall fifty miles down the
chasm!"

"And we figured from the distances between John Ball's marks on the
birch, that the third fall was about two hundred and fifty miles from
our old camp at the head of the chasm," rejoined Wabigoon. "It looks
reasonable."

"It is reasonable," declared Rod, his face flushed with excitement.
"From the head of the chasm our trail is as plain as day. We can't
miss it!"

Mukoki had been listening in silence, and now joined in the
conversation for the first time.

"Must get to chasm first," he grunted, giving his shoulders a hunch
that suggested a great deal.

Wabi returned the map to his pocket.

"You're right, Muky," he laughed. "We're climbing mountains before we
come to them. It will be tough work getting to the chasm."

"Much water--ver' swift. River run lak twent' t'ous'nd cari-boo!"

"I'll bet the Ombabika is a raging torrent," said Rod.

"And we've got forty miles of it, all upstream," replied Wabi. "Then
we come to the Height of Land. After that the streams run northward,
to Hudson Bay, and when we reach them we'll hold our breath and pray
instead of paddling. Oh, it will be exciting fun rushing down-stream
on the floods!"

"But there is work before us to-morrow--hard work," said Rod. "And I'm
going to bed. Good night!"

Mukoki and Wabigoon soon followed their companion's example, and half
an hour later nothing but the crackling of the fire disturbed the
stillness of the camp. Mukoki was as regular as clockwork in his
rising, and an hour before dawn he was up and preparing breakfast.
When his young comrades aroused themselves they found the ducks they
had shot the preceding day roasting on spits over the fire, and coffee
nearly ready. Rod also noticed that a part of the contents of the
canoe were missing.

"Took load up to river," explained Mukoki in response to the youth's
questioning.

"Working while we sleep, as usual," exclaimed the disgusted Wabigoon.
"If it keeps on we'll deserve another whipping, Rod!"

Mukoki examined a fat bluebill, roasted to a rich brown, and gave it
to Rod. Another he handed to Wabigoon, and with a third in his own
hands he found a seat for himself upon the ground close to the coffee
and bread.

"Ah, if this isn't fit for a king!" cried Rod, poising his savory
bluebill on the end of a fork.

Half an hour later the three went to their canoe. Mukoki had already
packed a half of its contents to the river, a quarter of a mile away,
and he now loaded himself with the remainder while the two boys
hoisted the light birch upon their shoulders. As Roderick caught his
first glimpse of the Ombabika in the growing light of day he gave a
cry of astonishment. When he had gone up the stream the preceding
winter it was scarce more than a dozen gun lengths in width. Now it
was a veritable Amazon, its black, ugly waters rolling and twisting
like the slow boiling of a thick liquid over a fire. There was little
rush about it, no frenzied haste, no mountain-like madness in the
advance of the torrent. Rod had expected to see this, and he would not
have been startled by it.

But there was something vastly more appalling in the flood that rolled
slowly before his eyes, with its lazily twisting whirlpools, its
thousand unseen currents, rolling the water here and there--always in
different places--like the gurgling eruptions he had often observed
in a pot of simmering oatmeal. There was something uncanny about
it, something terribly suggestive of giant hands under the surface,
waiting to pull them down. He knew, without questioning, that
there was more deadly power in that creeping flood than in a dozen
boisterous torrents thundering down from the mountains. In it were the
cumulative waters of a score of those torrents, and in its broad, deep
sweep into the big lake the currents and perils of each were combined
into one great threatening force.

The thoughts that were in Rod's mind betrayed themselves as he looked
at his companions. Mukoki was reloading the canoe. Wabi watched the
flood.

"She's running pretty strong," said the Indian youth dubiously. "What
do you think of it, Muky?"

"Keep close to shore," replied the old warrior, without stopping his
work. "We mak' heem--safe!"

There was a good deal of consolation in Mukoki's words, for both
youths still bore smarting reminders of his caution and good judgment.
In a short time the canoe was safely launched where a small eddy had
worked into the shore, and the three adventurers dug in their paddles.
Mukoki, who held the important position in the stern, kept the bow of
the birch within half a dozen yards of the bank, and to Rod's mind
they slipped up-stream with amazing speed and ease. Now and then one
of the upheavings of the currents would catch the canoe, and from the
way in which it was pitched either to one side or the other Rod easily
imagined what perils the middle of the stream would have held for
them. Quick action on the part of Mukoki and Wabigoon was always
necessary to counteract the effect of these upheavals, and in the bow
Wabi was constantly on the alert. At no time could they tell when to
expect the attacks of the unseen forces below. Ten feet ahead the
water might be running as smooth as oil, then--a single huge bubble,
as if a great fish had sent up a gasp of air--and in an instant it
would be boiling like a small maelstrom.

Rod noticed that each time they were caught near one of these some
unseen power seemed sucking them down, and that at those times the
canoe would settle several inches deeper than when they were in calm
water. The discovery thrilled him, and he wondered what one of the big
eruptions out in mid-stream would do to them if they were caught in
it. Other perils were constantly near them. Floating logs and masses
of brush and other debris swept down with the flood, and Wabi's
warning cries of "right," "left," and "back" came with such frequency
that Rod's arms ached with the mighty efforts which he made with his
paddle in response to them. Again the stream would boil with such fury
ahead of them that Mukoki would put in to shore, and a portage would
be made beyond the danger point. Five times during the day were the
canoe and its contents carried in this manner, so that including all
time lost an average of not more than two miles an hour was made. When
camp was struck late that afternoon, however, Mukoki figured that they
had covered half the distance up the Ombabika.

The following day's progress was even slower. With every mile the
stream became narrower and swifter. The treacherous upheavals caused
by undercurrents no longer harassed the gold seekers, but logs and
debris swept down with greater velocity. Several times the frail canoe
was saved from destruction only by the quick and united action of the
three. They worked now like a well-regulated machine, engineered by
Wabigoon, whose sharp eyes were always on the alert for danger ahead.
This second day was one of thrills and tense anxiety for Rod, and he
was glad when it came to an end. It was early, and the sun was still
two hours high, when they stopped to camp.

Mukoki had chosen an open space, backed by a poplar-covered rocky
ridge, and scarce had the bow of the canoe touched shore when Wabi
gave an excited exclamation, caught up his rifle, and fired three
rapid shots in the direction of a small clump of spruce near the foot
of the mountain.

"Missed, by all that's good and great!" he yelled. "Quick, Mukoki,
shove her in! There's the biggest bear I've seen in all my life!"

"Where?" demanded Rod. "Where is he?"

He dropped his paddle and snatched his own rifle, while Mukoki,
keeping his self-possession, brought the canoe so that Wabi could leap
ashore. Rod followed like a flash, and the two excited youths sped in
the direction of the bear, leaving their companion to care for himself
and the heavily-laden birch. A short, swift run brought them to the
edge of the spruce, and with hearts beating wildly the two scanned the
barren side of the mountain ahead of them. There was no sign of the
bear.

"He turned down-stream!" cried Wabi, "We must cut--"

"There he is," whispered Rod sharply.

Just beginning the ascent of the mountain, four or five hundred yards
below them, was the bear. Even at that distance Rod was amazed at the
size of the beast.

"What a monster!" he gasped.

"Blaze away!" urged Wabi. "It's four hundred yards if it's a foot! Aim
for the top of his back and you'll bring him!"

Suiting action to his words he fired the two remaining shots in
his rifle, and as he slipped in fresh cartridges Rod continued the
long-range fusillade. His first and second shots produced no effect.
At his third the running animal paused for a moment and looked down at
them, and the young hunter seized his opportunity to take a careful
aim. At the report of his gun the bear gave a quick lunge forward,
half-fell among the rocks, and then was off again.

"You hit him!" shouted Wabi, setting off on a dead run between the
spruce and the mountain.

For a few brief moments Rod studied the situation as he reloaded. The
bear was rapidly nearing the summit of the ridge. By swift running
Wabigoon would have another fair shot before the animal got out of
range. If that shot were a miss they would lose their game. In a flash
he discerned a break in the mountain. If he could make that, and the
bear turned in his direction--

Without further thought he ran toward the break. He heard the sharp
reports of Wabi's rifle behind him, but didn't stop to see the effect
of the fire. If it was another miss--every second counted. The cut in
the mountain was clear. Breathlessly he dashed through it and stopped
on the opposite side, his eyes eagerly scanning the rock-strewn ridge.
He made no attempt to suppress the exclamation of joy that came to
his lips when, fully eight hundred yards away, he discerned the bear
coming down the side of the mountain, and in his direction. Crouching
behind a huge boulder Rod waited. Seven hundred yards, six hundred,
five hundred, and the bear turned, this time striking into the edge
of the plain. The animal was traveling slowly, partly stopping in his
flight now and then, and Rod knew that he was badly wounded. It was
soon evident that the course being taken by the game would bring it no
nearer, and the young hunter leveled his rifle.

Five hundred yards, more than a quarter of a mile!

This was desperate shooting, shooting that sent a strange thrill
through Roderick Drew. The magnificent weapon in his hands was equal
to the task. It would kill easily at that distance. But would he fail?
He was confident that his first shot went high. His second had no
effect. To his third there came the sharp response of a fourth from
the top of the mountain. Wabigoon had reached the summit, and was
firing at six hundred yards!

The bear stopped. With deadly precision Rod now took aim at the
motionless animal. An instant after he had fired a wild shout burst
from his throat, and was answered by Wabigoon's joyful yell from the
mountain. It was a wonderful shot, and the bear was down!

The animal was dead when the triumphant young hunters reached its
side. It was some time before either of them spoke. Panting from their
exertions, both looked down in silence upon the huge beast at their
feet. That he had made a remarkable kill Rod could see by the look of
wonder in his companion's face. They were still mutely regarding
the dead animal when Mukoki came through the break in the ridge and
hurried toward them. His face, too, became filled with amazement when
he saw the bear.

"Big bear!" he exclaimed.

There was a world of meaning in his words, and Rod flushed with
pleasure.

"He weighs five hundred," said Wabi, "and he stands four feet at the
shoulders if an inch."

"Fine rug!" grinned Mukoki.

"Let's see, Rod; he'll make a rug--" Wabi walked critically around
the bear. "He'll make you a rug over eight feet long by about six in
width. I wonder where he is hit?"

A brief examination showed that while the honors of the actual kill
were with Rod, at least one, and perhaps two, of Wabi's shots had
taken effect. The last shot from the white youth's rifle had struck
the bear just below the right ear, causing almost instantaneous death.
On this same side, which had been exposed to Rod's fire, was a body
wound, undoubtedly made by the shot on the mountain side. When the
animal was rolled over by the combined efforts of the three two more
wounds were discovered on the left side, which had mostly been exposed
to Wabigoon's fire. It was while examining these that the sharp-eyed
Mukoki gave a sudden grunt of surprise.

"Heem shot before--long time ago! Old wound--feel bullet!"

Between his fingers he was working the loose hide back of the foreleg.
The scar of an old wound was plainly visible, and both Rod and Wabi
could feel the ball under the skin. There is something that fascinates
the big game hunter in this discovery of an old wound in his quarry,
and especially in the vast solitudes of the North, where hunters are
few and widely scattered. It brings with it a vivid picture of
what happened long ago, the excitement of some other chase, the
well-directed shot, and at last the escape of the game. And so it was
now. The heads of Rod and Wabigoon hung close over Mukoki's shoulders
while the old Indian dug out the bullet with his knife. Another grunt
of surprise fell from the pathfinder's lips as he dropped the pellet
in the palm of his hand.

It was a strange-looking object, smooth, and curiously flattened.

"Ver' soft bullet," said Mukoki. "Never know lead thin, thin out lak
that!"

With his knife he peeled off a thin slice of the ball.

"Heem--"

He held up the two pieces. In the sun they gleamed a dull, rich
yellow.

"That bullet made of gold!" he breathed, scarcely above a whisper. "No
yellow lead. That gold, pure gold!"




CHAPTER IX


UP THE OMBABIKA

For a few moments after Mukoki's remarkable discovery the three stood
speechless. Wabigoon stared as if he could not bring himself to
believe the evidence of his eyes. Rod was quivering with the old,
thrilling excitement that had first come to him in the cabin where
they had found the skeletons and the buckskin bag with its precious
nuggets, and Mukoki's face was a study. The thin, long fingers which
held the two pieces of the gold bullet trembled, which was an unusual
symptom in the old pathfinder. It was he who broke the silence, and
his words gave utterance to the question which had rushed into the
heads of the two young hunters.

"Who shoot gold bullets at bear?"

And to this question there was, for the time, absolutely no answer. To
tell who shot that bullet was impossible. But why was it used?

Wabigoon had taken the parts of the yellow ball and was weighing them
in the palm of his hand.

"It weighs an ounce," he declared.

"Twenty dollars' worth of gold!" gasped Rod, as if he lacked breath
to express himself. "Who in the wide world is shooting twenty dollar
bullets at bear?" he cried more excitedly, repeating Mukoki's question
of a minute before.

He, too, weighed the yellow pellets in his hand.

The puzzled look had gone out of Mukoki's face. Again the battle-scarred
old warrior wore the stoic mask of his race, which only now and then is
lifted for an instant by some sudden and unexpected happening. Behind
that face, immobile, almost expressionless, worked a mind alive to every
trick and secret of the vast solitudes, and even before his young
comrades had gained the use of their tongues he was, in his savage
imagination, traveling swiftly back over the trail of the monster bear
to the gun that had fired the golden bullet. Wabigoon understood him,
and watched him eagerly.

"What do you think of it, Muky?"

"Man shoot powder and ball gun, not cartridge," replied Mukoki slowly.
"Old gun. Strange; ver' strange!"

"A muzzle loader!" said Wabi.

The Indian nodded.

"Had powder, no lead. Got hungry; used gold."

Eight words had told the story, or at least enough of it to clear away
a part of the cloud of mystery, but the other part still remained.

Who had fired the bullet, _and where had the gold come from?_

"He must have struck it rich," said Wabi "else would he have a chunk
of gold like that?"

"Where that come from--more, much more," agreed Mukoki shortly.

"Do you suppose--" began Rod. There was a curious thrill in his voice,
and he paused, as if scarce daring to venture the rest of what he had
meant to say. "Do you suppose--somebody has found--our gold?"

Mukoki and Wabigoon stared at him as if he had suddenly exploded a
mine. Then Wabi turned and looked silently at the old Indian. Not
a word was spoken. Silently Rod drew something from his pocket,
carefully wrapped in a bit of cloth.

"You remember I kept this little nugget from my share in the buckskin
bag, intending to have a scarf-pin made of it," he explained. "When I
took my course in geology and mineralogy I learned that, if one had
half a dozen specimens of gold, each from a different mine, the
chances were about ten to one that no two of them would be exactly
alike in coloring. Now--"

He exposed the nugget, and made a fresh cut in it with his knife, as
Mukoki had done with the yellow bullet. Then the two gleaming surfaces
were compared.

One glance was sufficient.

The gold was the same!

Wabi drew back, uttering something under his breath, his eyes gleaming
darkly. Rod's face had suddenly turned a shade whiter, and Mukoki, not
understanding the mysteries of mineralogy, stared at the youth in mute
suspense.

"Somebody has found our gold!" cried Wabi, almost savagely.

"We are not sure," interrupted Rod. "We know only that the evidence is
very suspicious. The rock formation throughout this country is almost
identically the same, deep trap on top, with slate beneath, and for
that reason it is very possible that gold found right in this locality
would be of exactly the same appearance as gold found two hundred
miles from here. Only--it's suspicious," Rod concluded.

"Man probably dead," consoled Mukoki. "No lead--hungry--shoot bear an'
no git heem. Mebby starve!"

"The poor devil!" exclaimed Wabigoon. "We've been too selfish to give
a thought to that, Rod. Of course he was hungry, or he wouldn't have
used gold for bullets. And he didn't get this bear! By George--"

"I wish he'd got him," said Rod simply.

Somehow Mukoki's words sent a flush into his face. There came to him,
suddenly, a mental picture of that possible tragedy in the wilderness:
the starving man, his last hopeless molding of a golden bullet, the
sight of the monster bear, the shot, and after that the despair and
suffering and slow death of the man who had fired it.

"I wish he'd got it," he repeated. "We have plenty of grub."

Mukoki was already at work skinning the bear, and Rod and Wabigoon
unsheathed their knives and joined him.

"Wound 'bout fi', six month old," said the Indian. "Shot just before
snow."

"When there wasn't a berry in the woods for a starving man to eat,"
added Wabi. "Well, here's hoping he found something, Rod."

An hour later the three gold seekers returned to their canoe laden
with the choicest of the bear meat, and the animal's skin, which was
immediately stretched between two trees, high up out of the reach of
depredating animals. Rod gazed at it proudly.

"We'll be sure and get it when we come back, won't we?"

"Sure," replied Wabi.

"It will be safe?"

"As safe as though it were at home."

"Unless somebody comes along and steals it," added Rod.

Wabi was busy unloading certain necessary articles from the canoe, but
he ceased his work to look at Rod.

"Steal!" he cried in astonishment.

Mukoki, too, had heard Rod's remark and was listening.

"Rod," continued Wabigoon quietly, "that is one thing we don't have up
here. Our great big glorious North doesn't know the word thief, except
when it is applied to a Woonga. If a white hunter came along here
to-morrow, and found that hide stretched so low that the animals were
getting at it, he would nail it higher for us. An Indian, if he camped
here, would build his fire so that the sparks wouldn't strike it. Rod,
up here, where we don't know civilization, we're honest!"

"But down in the States," said Rod, "the Indians steal."

The words slipped from him. The next instant he would have given
anything to have been able to recall them. Mukoki had grown a little
more tense in his attitude.

"That's because white men have lived so much among them, white men who
are called civilized," answered the young scion of Wabinosh House, his
eyes growing bright. "White blood makes thieves. Pardon me for saying
it, Rod, but it does, at least among Indians. But our white blood
up here is different from yours. It's the same blood that's in our
Indians, every drop of it honest, loyal to its friends, and it runs
red and strong with the love of this great wilderness. There are
exceptions, of course, as you have seen in the Woongas, who are an
outlaw race. But we are honest, and Mukoki there, if he were dying of
cold, wouldn't steal a skin to save himself. An ordinary Indian might
take it, if he were dying for want of it, but not unless he had a gun
to leave in its place!"

"I didn't mean to say what I did," said Rod. "Oh, I wish I were one
of you! I love this big wilderness, and everything in it, and it's
glorious to hear you say what you do!"

"You are one of us," cried Wabi, gripping his hand.

That evening, after they had finished their supper and the three were
gathered about the fire, Wabigoon said:

"Muky could tell you one reason why the Indians of the North are
honest if he wanted to, Rod. But he won't, so I will. There was once a
tribe in the country of Mukoki's fore-fathers, along the Makoki River,
which empties into the Albany, whose men were great thieves, and who
stole from one another. No man's snare was safe from his neighbor,
fights and killings were of almost daily occurrence, and the chief
of the tribe was the greatest thief of all, and of course escaped
punishment. This chief loved to set his own snares, and one day he was
enraged to find that one of his tribe had been so bold as to set a
snare within a few inches of his own, and in the trail of the same
animal. He determined on meting out a terrible punishment, and waited.

"While he was waiting a rabbit ran into the snare of his rival.
Picking up a stick he approached to kill the game, when suddenly there
seemed to pass a white mist before his eyes, and when he looked again
there was no rabbit, but the most wonderful creature he had ever
beheld in the form of man, and he knew that it was the Great Spirit,
and fell upon his face. And a great voice came to him, as if rolling
from far beyond the most distant mountains, and it told him that the
forests and streams of the red man's heaven were closed to him and his
people, that in the hunting-grounds that came after death there was no
place for thieves.

"'Go to your people,' he said, 'and tell them this. Tell them that
from this day on, moon upon moon, until the end of time, must they
live like brothers, setting their snares side by side without war, to
escape the punishment that hovers over them.'

"And the chief told his people this," finished Wabi, "and from that
hour there was no more thievery in the land. And because the Great
Spirit came in the form he did the rabbit is the good luck animal of
the Crees and Chippewayans of the far North, and wherever the snows
fall deep, men set their traps side by side to this day, and do not
rob."

Rod had listened with glowing eyes.

"It's glorious!" he repeated. "It's glorious, if it's true!"

"It is true," said Wabi. "In all this great country between here and
the Barren Lands, where the musk-ox lives, there is not one Indian in
a hundred who would steal another Indian's trap, or the game in it.
It is one of the understood laws of the North that every hunter shall
have his 'trap line,' or 'run,' and it is not courtesy for another
trapper to encroach upon it; but if he should, and he should lay a
trap close beside another's, it would not be wrong, for the law of the
Great Spirit is greater than the law of man. Why, last winter even the
outlaw Woongas made no effort to steal our traps, though they thirsted
for our lives!"

"Mukoki," said Rod, rising, "I want to shake hands with you before I
go to bed. I'm learning--fast. I wish I were half Indian!"

The next morning the journey up the Ombabika was resumed, and a
little more of anxiety was now mingled with the enthusiasm of the
adventurers. For no one of them could relieve himself of the possible
significance of the gold bullet, the fear that their treasure had been
discovered by another. Wabi regained his confidence first.

"I don't believe it!" he exclaimed at last. Without questioning, the
others knew to what he referred. "I don't believe that our gold
has been found. It is in the heart of the wildest country on the
continent, and surely if such a rich find had been made we would have
heard something about it at Wabinosh House or Kenegami, which are the
nearest points of supply."

"Or, if it was found, the discoverer is dead," added Rod.

"Yes."

In the stern, Mukoki nodded and grunted his conviction.

"Dead," he repeated.

The Ombabika had now become narrow and violent. Against its swift
current the canoe made but little headway, and at noon Mukoki
announced that the river journey was at an end. For a few moments Rod
did not recognize where they had landed. Then he gave a sudden cry of
glad surprise.

"Why, this is where we had supper that night after our terrible
adventure on the river last winter," he exclaimed.

From far off there came faintly to his ears a low, rumbling thunder.

"Listen! That's the river rushing through the break in the mountain
where we walked the edge of the precipice!"

Wabi shrugged his shoulders at the memory of that fearful night and
its desperate race to escape from the Woonga country.

"We've got to do the same thing again, only this time it will be in
daylight."

"Long portage," said Mukoki. "Six mile. Carry everything."

"Until we reach the little creek in the plains beyond the mountain,
where you shot the caribou?" asked Rod.

"Yes," replied Wabigoon. "That little creek will now be a pretty husky
stream, and by hard work we can paddle up it until we come within
about eight miles of our old camp at the head of the chasm, where we
found the skeletons and the map."

"And from that point we shall have to carry our canoe and supplies
to the creek in the chasm," finished Rod. "And then--hurrah for the
gold!"

"Mak' old camp on mountain by night," said Mukoki.

Wabi broke into a happy laugh and thumped Rod on the back.

"Remember the big lynx you shot, Rod, and thought it was a Woonga, and
had us all frightened out of our wits?" he cried.

Rod colored at the memory of his funny adventure, which was thrilling
enough at the time, and began assisting Mukoki in unloading the canoe.
Two hours were taken for dinner and rest, and then the young hunters
shouldered their canoe while Mukoki hurried on ahead of them, weighted
with a half of their supplies. Every step now brought the thunder of
the torrent rushing through the mountain more clearly to their ears,
and they had not progressed more than a mile when they were compelled
to shout to make each other hear. On their right the wall of the
mountain closed in rapidly, and as they stumbled with their burden
over a mass of huge boulders the two boys saw just ahead of them the
narrow trail at the edge of the precipice.

At its beginning they rested their canoe. On one side of them, a dozen
yards away, the face of the mountain rose sheer above them for a
thousand feet; on the other, scarce that distance from where they
stood, was the roaring chasm. And ahead of them the mountain wall and
the edge of the precipice came nearer and nearer, until there was no
more than a six-foot ledge to walk upon. Rod's face turned strangely
white as he realized, for the first time, the terrible chances they
had taken on that black, eventful night of a few months ago; and for a
time Wabi stood silent, his face as hard-set as a rock. Up out of the
chasm there came a deafening thunder of raging waters, like the
hollow explosions of great guns echoing and re√´choing in subterranean
caverns.

"Let's take a look!" shouted Wabi close up to his companion's ear.

He went to the edge of the precipice, and Rod forced himself to
follow, though there was in him a powerful inclination to hug close
to the mountain wall. For half a minute he stood fascinated,
terror-stricken, and yet in those thirty seconds he saw that which
would remain with him for a lifetime. Five hundred feet below him the
over-running floods of spring were caught between the ragged edges of
the two chasm walls, beating themselves in their fury to the whiteness
of milk froth, until it seemed as though the earth itself must tremble
under their mad rush. Now and then through the twisting foam there
shot the black crests of great rocks, as though huge monsters of
some kind were at play, whipping the torrent into greater fury, and
bellowing forth thunderous voices when they rose triumphant for an
instant above the sweep of the flood.

All this Rod saw in less than a breath, and he drew back, shivering
in every fiber of his body. But Wabigoon did not move. For several
minutes the Indian youth stood looking down upon the wonderful force
at play below him, his body as motionless as though hewn out of stone,
the wild blood in his veins leaping in response to the tumult and
thunder of the magnificent spectacle deep down in the chasm. When he
turned to Rod his lips made no sound, but his eyes glowed with that
half-slumbering fire which came only when the red blood of the
princess mother gained ascendency, and the wild in him called out
greeting to the savage in nature. It is not music, or fine talk, or
artificial wonders that waken a thrill deep down in the Indian soul,
it is the great mountain, the vast plain, the roaring cataract! And so
it was with Wabigoon.

They went on, now, with the canoe upon their shoulders, and hugging
close to the mountain wall. Slowly, avoiding every stone and stick
that might cause one of them to stumble, they passed along the
perilously narrow ledge, and did not rest again until they had come
in safety to the broader trail leading up the mountain. An hour later
Mukoki met them on his return for the remainder of their supplies.
Shortly after this they reached the small plateau where they had
camped during the previous winter, and lowered their canoe close to
the old balsam shelter.

Everything was as they had left it. Neither snow nor storm had
destroyed their lodging of boughs. There were the charred remains of
their fire, the bones of the huge lynx which Roderick had thought was
an attacking Woonga, and had killed; and beside the shelter was a
stake driven into the ground, the stake to which they had fastened
their faithful comrade of many an adventure, the tame wolf.

To this stake went Wabigoon, speaking no word. He sat down close
beside it, with his arm resting upon it, and when he looked up at Rod
there was an expression in his face which spoke more than words.

"Poor old Wolf!"

Rod turned and walked to the edge of the plateau, something hot and
uncomfortable filling his eyes. Below him, as far as he could see,
there stretched the vast, mysterious wilderness that reached to Hudson
Bay. And somewhere out there in that limitless space was Wolf.

As he looked, the hot film clouding his vision, he thought of the old
tragedy in Mukoki's life, and of how Wolf had helped him to avenge
himself. In his imagination he went back to that terrible day many,
many years ago, when Mukoki, happy in the strength of his youth, found
his young wife and child dead upon the trail, killed by wolves; he
thought of the story that Wabi had told him of the madness that came
to the young warrior, of how year after year he followed the trail of
wolves, wreaking his vengeance on their breed. And last he thought
of Wolf--how Mukoki and Wabigoon had found the whelp in one of their
traps; how they tamed him, grew to love him, and taught him to decoy
other wolves to their rifles. Wolf had been their comrade of a few
months before; fearless, faithful, until at last, escaping from the
final murderous assault of the Woongas, he had fled into the forests,
while his human friends fought their way back to civilization.

Where was Wolf now?

Unconsciously Rod questioned himself aloud, and from close behind him
Wabi answered.

"With the hunt-pack, Rod. He's forgotten us; gone back to the wild."

"Gone back to the wild, yes," said Rod; "but forgotten us, no!"

Wabi made no reply.




CHAPTER X


THE MYSTERIOUS SHOT

For many minutes the two stood silently gazing into the North. At
their feet spread the broad plain where Mukoki had killed the caribou
while they watched him from the plateau; beyond that were the dense
stretches of forest, broken here and there by other plains and
meadows, and a dozen lakes glistened in the red tints of the setting
sun. When Rod first looked upon that country a few months before it
was a world of ice and snow, a cold, dazzling panorama of white that
reached from where he stood to the Pole. Now it was wakening under
the first magic touch of spring. Far away the two young gold hunters
caught a glimmer of the stream which they were to follow up to the
chasm. Last winter it had been a tiny creek; now it was swollen to the
size of a river.

Suddenly, as they looked, two dark objects came slowly out into an
opening a mile away. At that distance they appeared hardly larger
than dogs, and Rod, whose mind was still filled with thoughts of
Wolf, exclaimed "Wolves!"

In the same breath he caught himself, and added:

"Moose!"

"A cow and her calf," said Wabi.

"How do you know?" asked Rod.

"There; watch them now!" cried Wabi, catching his companion by the
arm. "The mother is ahead, and even from here I can see that she is
pacing. A moose never trots or gallops, like a deer, but paces, using
both feet on a side at the same time. Notice how the calf jumps about.
An old moose would never do that."

"But both animals look to be about the same size," replied Rod, still
doubtful.

"It's a two-year-old calf; almost as big as its mother. In fact, it's
not really a calf, because it is too old; but so long as young moose
stick to their mothers we call them calves up here. I've known them to
remain together for three years."

"They're coming this way!" whispered the white youth.

The moose had turned, heading for the base of the mountain upon which
they stood. Wabi drew his companion behind a big rock, from which both
could look down without being seen.

"Be quiet!" he warned. "They're coming to feed on the sprouting poplar
along the mountain side. Just been over to the creek to get a drink.
We may have some fun!"

He wet a finger in his mouth and held it above his head, the forest
pathfinder's infallible method of telling how the wind blows. No
matter how slight the movement of the air may be, one side of the
finger dries first, in an instant, and is warm, while the side that
remains damp is cold, and in the lee, that side toward which the wind
is blowing.

"The wind is wrong, dead wrong," said Wabi. "It's blowing straight
toward them. Unless we are so high that our scent goes above them they
won't come much nearer."

Another minute and Rod nudged Wabigoon.

"They're within range!"

"Yes, but we won't shoot. We don't need meat."

As the young Indian spoke the cow brought herself to a dead stop so
suddenly that Wabi gave a delighted grunt.

"Great!" he whispered. "She's caught a whiff of us, a quarter of a
mile away. See how she holds her head, her great ears chucked forward
to hear, her nose half to the sky! She knows there's danger on this
mountain. Now--"

He did not finish. Like a flash the cow had darted ahead of her calf,
seeming to shoulder it back, and in another moment the two were racing
swiftly into the North, the mother this time in the rear instead of
leading.

"I love moose," said Wabi, his eyes glowing. "Do you notice that I
never shoot them, Rod?"

"By George, so you don't! I never thought of it. What is the reason?"

"There are a good many reasons. Of course I have shot them, when in
very great need of meat; but it's an unpleasant job for me. You call
the lion the king of beasts. Well, he isn't. The moose is monarch of
them all. You saw how the mother moose acted. She led her calf when
approaching, because if there should be danger she wanted to meet it
first; and when she found danger she drove her calf ahead of her in
retreat, so that if harm came to either of them it would come to her.
Isn't that the human mother instinct? And the bull is glorious! In the
mating season he will face a dozen men in defense of his cow. If she
falls first he will stand between her body and the hunters' rifles,
pawing the earth, his eyes glaring defiance, until he is riddled with
bullets. Once I saw a wounded cow, and as she staggered away the big
bull that was with her hugged her close behind, never for a moment
leaving her exposed to the fire, but unflinchingly taking every bullet
in his own body. So beautiful was his courage that you would not have
known he was wounded until he fell dead in his tracks, literally cut
to pieces. It was that sight that made me swear never to kill another
moose--unless I had to."

Rod was silent. The mother and the calf had disappeared when he turned
to Wabigoon.

"I'm glad you told me that, Wabi," he said. "You are teaching me new
things about this big wilderness every day. I've shot one moose. I
won't shoot another unless we need him."

They went back to their old camp, and by the time Mukoki returned with
his second load everything was in shape for the night, and a supper of
delicious bear steaks, coffee and "hot-stone biscuits," as Rod called
their baked combination of flour, water and salt, was soon ready.
After their meal the three sat for a long time near the fire, for
there was still a slight chill in the night air, and talked
mostly about Wolf and his adventures. Rod, in his distant home in
civilization had read and heard much that was false about wild
animals, was confident that Wolf would find they had returned into the
wilderness and would join them again, and to corroborate his belief
he narrated several stories of similar happenings. Wabigoon listened
courteously to him, which is the way of the Indian. Then he said:

"Such stories as those are false, Rod. When I spent my year at school
with you I read dozens of stories about wild animals, and very few of
them were true. All sorts of people write about the wilderness, and
yet not one out of a hundred of those same people have ever been in
the real wilderness. And it is wonderful what some of them make wild
animals do!"

Rod straightened himself with a jerk.

"I have been here only a few months, Wabi, and yet I have seen more
wonderful things about animals than I have ever read in print," he
declared.

"Of course you have," agreed his companion. "And there is just the
point I want to make clear. Wild animals are the most wonderful
creatures in existence, and if some of their actual habits and
adventures were told they would be laughed at down where you came
from. Where your writers make their mistake is in bringing them into
too close association with human beings, and making them half human.
Wolf remained with us because he knew no better. We caught him when he
was a whelp, and as he grew older both Mukoki and I could see that at
times he was filled with a wild longing to join his people. We knew
that it was coming. He will never return to us."

Mukoki made a soft sound deep down in his throat, and Rod turned
suddenly toward him.

"You believe that, Mukoki?"

"Wolf gone!"

"But animals think, don't they?" persisted Rod, to whom the discussion
was of absorbing interest. "They reason, they remember!"

"They do all of that," replied Wabi, "and more. I have read certain
so-called natural history stories which ridiculed the idea of wild
animals possessing mental abilities, and which ascribed pretty nearly
all their actions to instinct. Such stories are as wrong as those
which give wild animals human endowments. Animals do think. Don't you
suppose that mother moose was thinking when she stopped out there in
the plain? Wasn't she turning the situation over in her mind, if you
want to speak of it as that, and mentally figuring just where the
danger lay, and in which direction she ought to take flight? And
besides reason wild animals have instinct. One proof of this is their
sixth sense; the sense of--of--what do you call it?"

"Orientation?" assisted Rod.

"Yes; that's it. Orientation. A bear, for instance, doesn't carry
a compass with him, as some nature writers would like to have you
believe, and yet he can go from this mountain to a den a hundred miles
away as straight as a bird can fly. That's instinct."

"Then Wolf--" mused Rod slowly.

"Is with the hunt pack," finished the young Indian.

Mukoki spoke softly, as though to himself.

"Last winter the snow came, and now it is water. Two moons past, Wolf,
heem tame. Now wild. The Great Spirit say that is right, I guess so."

"He means that it is nature," said Wabi.

For an hour after the others had wrapped themselves in their blankets
Rod sat alone beside the fire, listening, and thinking. And after that
he went to the edge of the plateau, and watched the great spring moon
as it floated slowly over the vast, still wilderness. How wonderful
these solitudes were, how little the teeming millions of civilization
knew about them! Somehow, in those moments, as he watched the
shivering Northern Lights playing far beyond the farthest footstep of
man, there came to Roderick Drew the thought that God must be nearer
to earth here than anywhere else in the world. For the first time his
soul was filled with something that was almost love for the red man's
Great Spirit. And why not? For was not that Great Spirit his own God?
Sad, lonely, silent, mysterious, a whole world lay before him, a world
that was the Indian Bible, that contained for the red man of the North
the teachings and the voice of the Creator of all things. A wind had
risen and was whispering over the plains; he heard the hushed voices
of the quivering poplar boughs, and there came from far below him the
soft, chuckling, mating hoot of an owl. Gradually his eyes closed,
and he leaned more heavily upon the rock against which he had seated
himself. After that he dreamed of what he had looked upon, while
the fire at the camp died away, and Mukoki and Wabigoon slumbered,
oblivious of his absence.

Of how long he slept Rod had no idea. He was suddenly brought back
into wakefulness by a sound that startled him to the marrow of his
bones, a terrible scream close to his ears. He sat bolt upright,
quaking in every limb. For a moment he tried to cry out, but his
tongue clove to the roof of his mouth. What had happened? Was it Wabi,
or Mukoki?

A dozen paces away was a huge rock and as he looked he saw something
move upon it, a long, lithe object that shone a silvery white in the
moonlight, and he knew that it was a lynx. Stealthily Rod reached for
his rifle, which had slipped between his knees, and as he did so the
lynx sent forth another of its blood-curdling screams. Even now the
white youth shivered at the sound, so much like the terrible cry of
some person in dying agony. He leveled his gun. There was a flash in
the moonlight, a sharp report, and a shout from the direction of the
camp. In another moment Rod was upon his feet, and sorry that he had
shot. It flashed upon him that he might have watched the lynx, one of
the night pirates of all this strange wilderness, and that its pelt,
at this season, would be worthless. He went to the rock cautiously.
The lynx was not there. He walked around it, holding his rifle in
readiness for attack. The lynx was gone. He had made a clean miss!

Both Mukoki and Wabigoon met him on the opposite side of the rock.

"'Nother heap big Woonga," grinned the old pathfinder remembering
Rod's former adventure on this same plateau. "Kill?"

"Missed!" said Rod shortly. "What a scream that was! Ugh!"

This time he went to bed with the others, and slept until early dawn.
The morning was one of those rare gifts of budding spring, warm and
redolent with the sweetness of new life, and its beauty acted as a
tonic on the three adventurers. Their fears of the day before were
gone, and with song and whistle and cheery voice they began the
descent of the mountain. Mukoki went on ahead of Rod and Wabigoon with
his pack, and the two boys had not made more than two of the six miles
in the portage across the plain when he met them again, returning for
his second load. By noon the canoe and its contents were safely at
the creek, and the gold hunters halted until after dinner. The little
stream across which Rod had easily leaped without wetting his feet a
few weeks before had swollen into a fair-sized river, and in places
its searching waters had formed tiny lakes. Unlike the Ombabika,
sweeping down from its mountain heights, there was but little current
here, a fact that immensely pleased Mukoki and his companions.

"We near mak' cabin to-night," said the old Indian. "I take load
to-night."

During the two hours' paddle up-stream Mukoki spoke but little, and as
they approached nearer to their last winter's thrilling fight with the
Woongas, in which they had so nearly lost their lives, he ceased even
to respond by nod or grunt to the conversation of his companions. Once
Wabigoon spoke again of Wolf, and for an instant the old Indian, who
was in the bow, half turned to them, and for two strokes his paddle
rested in mid air. From the stern Wabi reached forward and poked Rod,
and the white youth understood. Next to Minnetaki and Wabigoon, and
perhaps himself, he knew that the faithful pathfinder loved Wolf best,
and that; he was filled with a little of that savage madness which
came to him now and then when he dwelt on the terrible tragedy that
had entered his life many years before. When the hunters reached the
end of their canoe journey up the stream Mukoki silently shouldered
his pack and set out over the plain. He spoke no word, made no sign.

"It would be useless," said Wabigoon, as Rod made a movement as if to
follow and stop their comrade. "No persuasion could turn Mukoki now.
He wants to reach the old camp to-night, where Wolf disappeared. He
won't be back until morning."

And Mukoki went on, never for an instant turning his face, until his
companions lost sight of him. But once out of their vision his manner
took on a strange and sudden change. He lowered the head strap of his
pack over his breast, so that he might clutch at it with one hand, and
move his head freely. His eyes glowed with the dull fire of wakening
excitement; his steps were quick, and yet cautious, every movement in
his advance was one of listening and watchful expectancy. A person
watching the old warrior would have said that he was keenly on the
alert for game, or danger. And yet the safety of his rifle was locked,
a fresh trail of bear aroused no new interest in him, and when he
heard a crashing in the brush on his right, where a buck had got wind
of him, he gave but a single glance in its direction. He was not
seeking game. Nor were his fears aroused by suspicion of possible
danger. Wherever the ground was soft and moist he traveled slowly,
with his eyes on the earth, and at one of these spots he came to a
sudden pause. Before him were the clearly defined imprints of a wolf's
feet.

With a low cry Mukoki threw off his pack and fell upon his knees. His
eyes burned fiercely now. There was something of madness in the way in
which he groveled in the soft earth, creeping from one footprint to
the next ahead of it, and stopping always where the right forefoot
had left its track. It was that foot which had held Wolf a captive in
Mukoki's trap, and he had lost two toes. None was missing here, and
the old pathfinder rose to his feet again, disappointment shadowing
the twitching expectancy in his face.

Five times that afternoon Mukoki fell on his knees beside the trails
of wolves, and five times the light of hope went out for a moment in
his eyes. It was sunset when he climbed the mountain ridge to the
little lake hidden away in the dip; only a last pale glow tinted the
sky behind the forests when he set down his pack close to the charred
remains of the old cabin. For many minutes he rested, his gaze fixed
on those blackened reminders of their thrilling battle for life the
winter before. His wild blood leaped again at the thought of the
strife, of the desperate race that he and Roderick had run over the
mountain to the burning cabin, and of their rescue of Wabigoon.
Suddenly his eyes caught the white gleam of something half a hundred
paces away, and he rose and walked toward it, grunting and chuckling
in half-savage pleasure. The Woongas had not returned to bury their
dead, and the bones beside which he stopped were those of the outlaw
whom Wabigoon had killed, picked clean by the small animals of the
forest.

Mukoki returned to his pack and sat down. As darkness fell about him he
made no effort to build a fire. He had brought food, but did not eat
it. More dense grew the shadows in the forest, thicker the gloom that
hung over the mountains. Still he sat, silent, listening. To him,
softly and timidly at first, came the sounds of the night: the
chuckling notes of birds that awakened when the earth masked itself
in darkness, the hoot of an owl, the faint wailing echo of a far-away
lynx cry, the plunge of a mink in the lake. And now the wind began
whispering in the balsams, singing gently its age-old song of
loneliness, of desolation, of mystery, and Mukoki straightened himself
and looked to where the red glow of the moon was rising above the
mountain. After a little he rose to his feet, took his rifle,
and climbed to the summit of the ridge, with a thousand miles of
wilderness sweeping between him and the Arctic sea. And somewhere out
there in that wilderness--was Wolf!

The moon rose higher. It disclosed the old Indian, as rigid as a rock,
with his back to a white, barkless tree in which the sap had run dry a
generation before. As he stood there he heard a sound, and turned his
face toward it, a sound that came from a mass of tumbled boulders,
like the falling of a small rock upon a larger one. And as he looked
there came from the darkness of the boulders a flash of fire and the
explosion of a gun, and as Mukoki crumpled down in his tracks there
followed a cry so terrible, so unhuman, so blood-curdling that, as
he fell, an answering cry of horror burst from the lips of the old
warrior. He lay like dead, though he was not touched. Instinct more
than reason had impelled him to fall at the sound of the mysterious
shot. Cautiously he wormed his rifle to his shoulder. But there came
no movement from the rocks.

Then, from half-way down the mountain, there came again that terrible
cry, and Mukoki knew that no animal in all these wilds could make it,
but that it was human, and yet more savage than anything that had ever
brought terror into his soul. Trembling, he crouched to the earth, a
nameless fear chilling the blood in his veins. And the cry came again,
and yet again, always farther and farther away, now at the foot of
the mountain, now upon the plain, now floating away toward the chasm,
echoing and reechoing between the mountain ridges, startling the
creatures of the night into silence, and wresting deep sobbing breaths
from out of Mukoki's soul. And the old warrior moved not a muscle
until far away, miles and miles, it seemed, there died the last echo
of it, and only the whispering winds rustled over the mountain top.




CHAPTER XI


THE CRY IN THE CHASM

If Mukoki had been a white man he would have analyzed in some way the
meaning of those strange cries. But the wild and its savage things
formed his world; and his world, until this night, had never known
human or beast that could make the terrible sounds he had heard. So
for an hour he crouched where he had fallen, still trembling with
that nameless fear, and trying hard to form a solution of what had
happened. Slowly he recovered himself. For many years he had mingled
with white people at the Post and reason now battled with the
superstitions of his race.

He had been fired at. He had heard the whistling song of the ball over
his head, and had heard it strike the tree behind him. For a time
those rocks toward which he stared like fascinated beast had concealed
a man. But what kind of man! He remembered the ancient battle-cries
of his tribe, and of the enemies of his tribe, but none was like the
cries that had followed the shot. He heard them still; they rang in
his ears, and sent shivering chills up his back. And the more he tried
to reason the greater that nameless fear grew in him, until he slunk
like an animal down the side of the mountain, through the dip, and out
again upon the plain. And with that same nameless fear always close
behind him, urging him on with its terrors, he sped back over the
trail that he had followed that day, nor for an instant did he stop to
rest until he came to the camp-fire of Rod and Wabigoon.

Usually an Indian hides his fears; he conceals them as a white man
does his sins. But to-night Mukoki's experience had passed beyond the
knowledge of his race, and he told of what had happened, trembling
still, cringing when a great white rabbit darted close to the fire.
Rod and Wabi listened to him in mute astonishment.

"Could it have been a Woonga?" asked Wabi.

"No Woonga," replied the old warrior quickly, shaking his head.
"Woonga no mak' noise lak that!"

He drew away from the fire, wrapped himself in a blanket, and crept
into the shelter that Rod and Wabigoon had built. The two boys looked
at each other in silence.

"Muky has certainly had some most extraordinary adventure," said Wabi
at last. "I have never seen him like this before. It is easy to guess
the meaning of the shot. Some of the Woongas may still be in the
country, and one of them saw Mukoki, and fired at him. But the scream!
What do you make of that?"

"Do you suppose," whispered Rod, speaking close to his companion's
ear, "that Mukoki's imagination helped him out to-night?" He paused
for a moment as he saw the look of disapproval in Wabigoon's eyes,
and then went on. "I don't mean to hint that he stretched his story
purposely. He was standing on the mountain top. Suddenly there came a
flash of fire, the report of a rifle, and a bullet zipped close to his
head. And at that same instant, or a moment later--well, you remember
the scream of the lynx!"

"You believe that it might have been a lynx, startled by the shot, and
sent screaming across the plain?"

"Yes."

"Impossible. At the sound of that shot a lynx would have remained as
still as death!"

"Still there are always exceptions," persisted the white youth.

"Not in the case of lynx," declared Wabigoon. "No animal made those
cries. Mukoki is as fearless as a lion. The cry of a lynx would have
stirred his blood with pleasure instead of fear. Whatever the sounds
were they turned Mukoki's blood into water. They made him a coward,
and he ran, ran, mind you! until he got back to us! Is that like
Mukoki? I tell you the cries--"

"What?"

"Were something very unusual," finished Wabigoon quietly, rising to
his feet "Perhaps we will find out more to-morrow. As it is, I believe
we had better stand guard in camp to-night. I will go to bed now and
you can awaken me after a while."

Wabigoon's words and the strangeness of his manner put Rod ill at
ease, despite his arguments of a few moments before, and no sooner did
he find himself alone beside the fire than he began to be filled with
an unpleasant premonition of lurking danger. For a time he sat very
still, trying to peer into the shadows beyond the fire and listening
to the sounds that came to him from out of the night. As he watched
and listened his brain worked ceaselessly, conjuring picture after
picture of what that danger might be, and at last he drew out of the
firelight and concealed himself in the deep gloom of the bush. From
here he could see the camp, and at the same time was safe from a
possible rifle shot.

The night passed with tedious slowness, and he was glad when, a little
after midnight, Wabi came out to relieve him. At dawn he was in turn
awakened by the young Indian. Mukoki was already up and had prepared
his pack. Apparently he had regained his old spirits, but both Rod and
Wabigoon could see that behind them the fear of the preceding night
still haunted him. That morning he did not set off ahead of the two
boys with his pack but walked beside them, stopping to rest when they
lowered their canoe, his eyes never ceasing their sharp scrutiny of
the plain and distant ridges. Once when Mukoki mounted a big rock to
look about him, Wabi whispered,

"I tell you it's strange, Rod--mighty strange!"

An hour later the old warrior halted and threw off his load. The three
had approached within a quarter of a mile of the dip in the mountain.

"Leave canoe here," he said. "Go lak fox to old camp. Mebbe see!"

He took the lead now, followed closely by the boys. The safety of the
old pathfinder's rifle was down, and following his example Rod and
Wabigoon held their own guns in readiness for instant fire. As they
neared the summit of the ridge on which Mukoki's life had been
attempted the suspense of the two young hunters became almost
painfully acute. Mukoki's actions not only astonished them, but
set their blood tingling with his own strange fear. Many times had
Wabigoon seen his faithful comrade in moments of deadly peril but
never, even when the Woongas were close upon their trail, had he known
him to take them as seriously as he did the ascent of this mountain.
Every few steps Mukoki paused, listening and watchful. Not the
smallest twig broke under his moccasined feet; the movement of the
smallest bird, the trembling of a bush, the scurry of a rabbit halted
him, rigid, his rifle half to shoulder. And Rod and Wabigoon soon
become filled with this same panic-stricken fear. What terrible dread
was it that filled Mukoki's soul? Had he seen something of which he
had not told them? Did he think something which he had not revealed?

Foot by foot the three came to the top of the ridge. There Mukoki
straightened himself, and stood erect. There were no signs of a living
creature about them. Down in the dip nestled the little lake, gleaming
in the midday sun. They could make out the debris of the burned cabin
in which they had passed their hunting season, and close to this was
the pack which Mukoki had dropped there the night before. No one had
molested it. Wabi's face relaxed. Rod, breathing easier, laughed
softly. What had there been to fear? He glanced questioningly at
Mukoki.

"There rocks, there tree," said the old warrior, in answer to Rod's
glance, "down there went scream!" He pointed far out across the plain.

Wabi had gone to the tree.

"See here, Rod!" he cried. "By George, this was a close shave!" He
pointed to a tiny hole freshly made in the smooth white surface of the
tree as the others came up. "There--stand there, Mukoki, back to the
tree, as you said you were when the shot was fired. Great Caesar, that
fellow had a dead line on your head--two inches high! No wonder it
made you think the scream of a lynx was something else!"

"No lynx," said Mukoki, his face darkening.

"Shame on you, Muky!" laughed Wabigoon. "Don't get angry. I won't say
it again if it makes you mad."

Rod had drawn his hunting-knife and was prodding the point of it in
the bullet hole.

"I can feel the ball," he said. "It's not in more than an inch."

"That's curious," exclaimed Wabigoon, coming close beside him. "It
ought to be half-way through the tree at least! Eh, Muky? I don't
believe it would have hurt--"

He stopped. Rod had turned with a sudden excited cry. He held out his
knife, tip upward, and pointed to it with the index finger of his free
hand. Wabi's eyes fell on the tip of the blade. Mukoki stared. For a
full half minute the three stood in speechless amazement. Clinging to
the knife tip was a tiny fleck of yellow, gleaming lustrously in the
sun as Rod slowly turned the handle of his weapon.

"Another--gold--bullet!"

The words fell from Wabi's lips very slowly, and so low that they were
scarce above a whisper. Mukoki seemed to have ceased breathing. Rod's
eyes met the old warrior's.

"What does it mean?"

Wabi had pulled his knife and was digging into the tree. A few deep
cuts and the golden bullet lay exposed to view.

"What does it mean?" repeated the white youth.

Again he addressed his question to Mukoki.

"Man who shoot bear--heem no dead," replied the old pathfinder. "Same
gun, same gold, same--"

"Same what?"

A strange gleam came for an instant into Mukoki's eyes, and without
finishing he turned and pointed across the narrow plain that lay
between them and the mysterious chasm which they were to follow in
their search for treasure.

"Cry went there!" he said shortly.

"To the chasm!" said Wabi.

"To the chasm!" repeated Rod.

Impelled by the same thought the three adventurers went toward the
rocks from which the shot had been fired. Surely they would discover
some sign there, or lower down upon the plain, where the melting snows
had softened the earth. Mukoki led in the search, and foot by foot
they examined the spot where the mysterious marksman must have stood
when he sent his golden bullet so close to the Indian's head.

But not a trace of his presence had he left behind. Working abreast,
the three began the descent of the ridge. Hardly had they covered a
third of the distance to the plain when Wabi, who was trailing between
Rod and the old Indian, called out that he had made a discovery.
Mukoki had already reached him when Rod came up, and the two were
gazing silently at something fluttering from a bush.

"Lynx hair!" cried Rod. "A lynx has been this way!" He could not
entirely conceal the triumph in his voice. He had been right in his
conjecture of the night before, the cry that had frightened Mukoki had
been made by a lynx!

"Yes, a lynx has been this way, a lynx four feet high," said Wabigoon
quietly, and the touch of raillery in his voice assured Rod that he
had still other lessons to learn in the life of this big wilderness.
"Lynx don't grow that big, Rod!"

"Then it's--" Rod feared to go on.

"Lynx fur. That's just what it is. Whoever fired at Mukoki last night
was dressed in skins! Now, can you tell us what that means?"

Without waiting for an answer Wabigoon resumed his search. But the
mountain side gave no further evidence. Not a footprint was found upon
the plain. If the mysterious person who had fired the golden bullet
had leaped from the mountain top into space he could have left no
fewer traces behind him. At the end of an hour Rod and his companions
returned to the canoe, carried their loads to the pack in the dip,
and prepared dinner. Their suspense and fear, and specially Mukoki's
dread, were in a large measure gone. But at the same time they were
more hopelessly mystified than ever. That there was danger ahead of
them, that the menace of golden bullets was actual and thrilling, all
three were well agreed, but the sunlight of day and a little sound
reasoning had dispelled their half superstitious terrors of the
previous night and they began to face the new situation with their
former confidence.

"We can't let this delay us," said Wabi, as they ate their dinner. "By
night we ought to be in our old camp at the head of the chasm, where
we held the Woongas at bay last winter. The sooner we get out of the
way of these golden bullets the better it will be for us!"

Mukoki shrugged his shoulders.

"Gold bullet follow, I guess so," he grunted, "Cry went there--to
chasm!"

"I don't believe this fellow, whoever he is, will hang to our trail,"
continued Wabi, giving Rod a suggestive look. A few moments later he
found an opportunity to whisper, "We've got to get that cry out of
Muky's head, Rod, or we'll never find our gold!"

When Mukoki had gone to arrange his pack the young Indian spoke
earnestly to his companion.

"Muky isn't afraid of bullets, either gold or lead; he isn't afraid of
any danger on earth. But that cry haunts him. He is trying not to
let us know, yet it haunts him just the same. Do you know what he is
thinking? No? Well, I do! He is superstitious, like the rest of his
race, and the two gold bullets, the terrible cries, and the fact that
we found no tracks upon the plain are all carrying him toward one
conclusion, that the strange thing that fired at him is--"

Wabigoon paused and wiped his face, and it was easy for Rod to see
that he was suppressing some unusual excitement.

"What does he think it is?"

"I'm not sure, not quite sure, yet," went on the Indian youth. "But
listen! It is a legend in Mukoki's tribe, and always has been, that
once in every so many generations they are visited by a terrible
warrior sent by the Great Spirit who takes sacrifice of them, a
sacrifice of human life, because of a great wrong that was once done
by their people. And this warrior, though invisible, has a voice that
makes the mountains quake and the rivers stand still with fear, and
in his great bow he shoots shafts that are made of gold! Do you
understand? Last night I heard Mukoki talking about it in his sleep.
Either we must hear this cry, and find out more about it, or hurry to
a place where it won't be heard again. Golden bullets and cries and
Mukoki's superstitions are going to be worse than Woongas if we don't
watch out!"

"But the whole thing is as plain as day!" declared Rod in
astonishment. "A man shot at the bear, and the same man shot at
Mukoki, and he fired gold each time. Surely--"

"It's not the man part of it," interrupted the other. "It's the cry.
There, Mukoki has his pack ready. Let's start for the chasm at once!"

This time the boys had a heavier burden than usual, for in the canoe
they placed one of the two loads carried by Mukoki, and consequently
their progress toward the chasm was much slower than that across the
plain. It was late in the afternoon when they reached the break that
led into the chasm, and as they cautiously made the descent now Rod
thought of the thrilling pursuit of the Woonga horde, and how a few
weeks before they had discovered this break just in time for Wabi and
him to save their lives, and that of the wounded Mukoki. It was with a
feeling almost of awe that the three adventurers penetrated deeper and
deeper into the silent gloom of this mystery-filled gulch between the
mountains, and when they reached the bottom they set their loads down
without speaking, their eyes roving over the black walls of rock,
their hearts throbbing a little faster with excitement.

For here, at this break in the mountain, began the romantic trail
drawn by men long dead, the trail that led to a treasure of gold.

As the three sat in silence, the gloom in the chasm thickened. The sun
had passed beyond the southwestern forests, and through the narrow
rift between the mountain walls there fell but the ebbing light of
day, dissolving itself into the shadows of dusk as it struggled weakly
in the cavernous depths. For a few minutes this swift fading of day
into night gripped the adventurers in its spell. What did the lonely
solitudes of that chasm hold for them? Where would they lead them? To
Rod's mind there came a picture of the silver fox and a thought of
his dream, when for a few miles he had explored the mysteries of this
strange, sunless world shut in by rock walls. Again he saw the dancing
skeletons, heard the rattle of their bones, and watched the wonderful
dream-battle that had led him to the birch-bark map. Wabigoon, his
eyes gleaming in the gathering darkness, thought of their flight from
the outlaw savages, and Mukoki--

The white youth had turned a little to look at the old warrior. Mukoki
sat as rigid as a pillar of stone an arm's reach from him. Head erect,
arms tense, his eyes gleaming strangely, he stared straight out into
the gloom between the chasm walls. Rod shivered. He knew, knew without
questioning, that Mukoki was thinking of the cry!

And at that instant there floated up from the black chaos ahead a
sound, a sound low and weird, like the moaning of a winter's wind
through the pine tops, swelling, advancing, until it ended in a
shriek--a shriek that echoed and re√´choed between the chasm walls,
dying away in a wail that froze the blood of the three who sat and
listened!




CHAPTER XII


WABI MAKES A STRANGE DISCOVERY

Mukoki broke the silence which followed the terrible cry. With a
choking sound, as if some unseen hand were clutching at his throat, he
slipped from the rock upon which he was sitting and crouched behind
it, his rifle gleaming faintly as he leveled it down the chasm. There
came the warning click of Wabigoon's gun, and the young Indian hunched
himself forward until he was no more than an indistinct shadow in the
fast-deepening gloom of night. Only Rod still sat erect. For a moment
his heart seemed to stand still. Then something leaped into his brain
and spread like fire through his veins, calling him to his feet,
trembling with the knowledge of what that cry had told him! It was not
a lesson from the wilderness that Roderick Drew was learning now. As
fast as the mind could travel he had gone far back into the strife and
misery and madness of civilization, and there he found the language
of that fearful cry floating up the chasm. He had heard it once,
twice--yes, again and again, and the memory of it had burned deep down
into his soul. He turned to his companions, trying to speak, but the
horror that had first filled Mukoki now fastened itself on him, and
his tongue was lifeless.

"A madman!"

Wabi's fingers dug into his arm like the claws of a bear.

"A what!"

"A madman!" repeated Rod, trying to speak more calmly. "The man who
shot the bear and fired at Mukoki and who uses gold bullets in his gun
is mad--raving mad! I have heard those screams before--in the Eloise
insane asylum, near Detroit. He's--"

The words were frozen on his lips. Again the cry echoed up the
chasm. It was nearer this time, and with a sobbing, terrified sound,
something that Wabi had never heard fall from Mukoki's lips before,
the old warrior clung to Roderick's arm. Darkness hid the terror in
his face, but the white boy could feel it in the grip of his hands.

"Mad, raving mad!" he cried. Suddenly he gripped Mukoki fiercely by
the shoulders, and as Wabigoon crouched forward, ready to fire at the
first movement in the gloom, he thrust the butt of his rifle in his
back. "Don't shoot!" he commanded. "Mukoki, don't be a fool! That's
a man back there, a man who has suffered and starved, starved, mind
you!--until he's mad, stark mad! It would be worse than murder to kill
him!"

He stopped, and Mukoki drew back a step, breathing deeply.

"Heem--starve--no eat--gone bad dog?" he questioned softly. In an
instant Wabi was at his side.

"That's it, Muky--he's gone bad dog, just like that husky of ours who
went bad because he swallowed a fish bone. White men sometimes go bad
dog when they are thirsty and starving!"

"Our Great Spirit tells us that we must never harm them," added Rod.
"We put them in big houses, larger than all of the houses at the Post
together, and feed them and clothe them and care for them all their
lives. Are you afraid of a bad dog, Muky, or of a man who has gone bad
dog?"

"Bad dog bite deep--mebby so we kill heem!"

"But we don't kill them until we have to," persisted the quick-witted
Wabigoon, who saw the way in which Rod's efforts were being directed.
"Didn't we save our husky by taking the fish bone out of his throat?
We must save this bad dog, because he is a white man, like Rod. He
thinks all men are his enemies, just as a bad dog thinks all other
dogs are his enemies. So we must be careful and not give him a chance
to shoot us but we mustn't harm him!"

"It will be best if we don't let him know we are in the chasm," said
Rod, still speaking for Mukoki's benefit. "He's probably going out on
the plain, and must climb up this break in the mountain. Let's move
our stuff a little out of his path."

As the two boys went to the canoe their hands touched. Wabi was
startled by the coldness of his friend's fingers.

"We've fixed Mukoki," he whispered. "He won't shoot. But--"

"We may have to," replied Rod. "That will be up to you and me, Wabi.
We must use judgment, and unless it's a case of life or death--"

"Ugh!" shuddered the young Indian.

"If he doesn't discover our presence to-night we will get out of his
way to-morrow," continued Rod. "No fire--no talking. We must be as
still as death!"

For some time after their outfit was concealed among the rocks
Wabigoon sat with his mouth close to the old pathfinder's ear. Then he
returned to Rod.

"Muky understands. He has never seen or heard of a madman, and it is
hard for him to comprehend. But he knows--now, and understands what he
must do."

"Sh-h-h-h-h!"

"What is it?"

"I thought I heard a sound!" breathed Rod. "Did you hear it?"

"No."

The two listened. There was an awesome silence in the chasm now,
broken only by the distant murmur of running water, a strange,
chilling stillness in which the young hunters could hear the excited
beating of their own hearts. To Roderick the minutes passed like so
many hours. His ears were keyed to the highest tension of expectancy,
his eyes stared into the gloom beyond them until they ached with
his efforts to see. At every instant he expected to hear again that
terrible scream, this time very near, and he prepared himself to meet
it. But the seconds passed, and then the minutes, and still there came
no quick running of mad footsteps, no repetition of the cry. Had the
madman turned the other way? Was he plunging deeper into the blackness
of this mysterious world of his between the mountains?

"I guess I was mistaken," he whispered softly to Wabigoon. "Shall we
get out our blankets?"

"We might as well make ourselves comfortable," replied the young
Indian. "You sit here, and listen while I undo the pack."

He went noiselessly to Mukoki, who was leaning against the pack, and
Rod could hear them fumbling at the straps on the bundle. After a
little Wabi returned and the two boys spread out their blankets beside
the rock upon which they had been sitting. But there was no thought of
sleep in the mind of either, though both were dead tired from their
long day's work. They sat closer together, shoulder touching shoulder,
and unknown to his companion Roderick drew his revolver, cocked it
silently and placed it where he could feel the cold touch of its steel
between his fingers. He knew that he was the only one of the three who
fully realized the horror of their situation.

Mukoki's mind, simple in its reasoning of things that did not belong
to the wilderness, had accepted the assurances and explanations of
Rod and Wabigoon. Wabi, half-bred in the wild, felt alarm only in the
sense of physical peril. It was different with the white youth. What
is there in civilization that sends the chill of terror to one's heart
more quickly than the presence of a human being who has gone mad? And
this madman was at large! At that very instant he might be listening
to their breathing and their whispered words half a dozen feet away;
any moment might see the blackness take form and the terrible thing
hurl itself at their throats. Rod, unlike Wabigoon, knew that the
powers of this strange creature of the chasm were greater than their
own, that it could travel with the swiftness and silence of an animal
through the darkness, that perhaps it could smell them and feel their
presence as it passed on its way to the plain. He was anxious now to
hear the cry again. What was the meaning of this silence? Was the
madman already conscious of their presence? Was he creeping upon them
at that moment, as still as the black shadows that shut in their
vision? His mind was working in such vivid imaginings that he was
startled when Wabi prodded him gently in the side.

"Look over there--across the chasm," he whispered. "See that glow on
the mountain wall?"

"The moon!" replied Rod.

"Yes. I've been watching it, and it's creeping down and down. The
moon is going to swing across this break in the mountains. In fifteen
minutes we shall be able to see."

"It won't swing across so much as it will come up in line with us,"
replied Rod. "Watch how that light is lengthening! We shall be able to
see for several hours."

He started to rise to his feet but fell back with an astonished cry.
For a third time there came the mad hunter's scream, this time far
above and beyond them, floating down from the distance of the moon-lit
plain!

"He passed us!" exclaimed Wabi. "He passed us--and we didn't hear
him!" He leaped to his feet and his voice rose excitedly until it rang
in a hundred echoes between the chasm walls. "He passed us, and we
didn't hear him!"

Mukoki's voice came strangely from out of the gloom.

"No man do that! No man--no man--"

"Hush!" commanded Rod. "Now is our time, boys! Quick, get everything
to the creek. He's half a mile out on the plain and we can get away
before he comes back. I'd rather risk a few rocks than another one of
his golden bullets!"

"So had I!" cried Wabi.

As if their lives depended on their exertions the three set to work.
Mukoki staggered ahead over the rocks with his burden while the boys
followed with the light canoe and the remaining pack. Their previous
experiences in the chasm had taught them where to approach the stream,
and ten minutes later they were at its side. Without a moment's
hesitation Mukoki dropped his pack and plunged in. The edge of the
moon was just appearing over the southern mountain wall and by its
light Rod and Wabigoon could see that the water of the creek was
rushing with great swiftness as high as the old warrior's knees.

"No ver' deep," said the Indian. "Rocks--"

"I followed this creek for half a dozen miles and its bottom is as
smooth as a floor!" interrupted Rod. "There's no danger of rocks for
that distance!"

He made no effort now to suppress the pleasure which he felt at the
escape from their unpleasant situation. Mukoki steadied the canoe as
it was placed in the water, and was the last to climb into it, taking
his usual position in the stern where he could use to best advantage
the powerful sweeps of his paddle. In an instant the swift current
of the little stream caught the birch bark and carried it along with
remarkable speed. After several futile strokes of his paddle Wabi
settled back upon his heels.

"It's all up to you, Muky," he called softly. "I can't do a thing from
the bow. The current is too swift. All you can do is to keep her nose
straight."

The light of the moon was now filling the chasm and the adventurers
could see distinctly for a hundred yards or more ahead of them. Each
minute seemed to add to the swiftness and size of the stream, and by
the use of his paddle Wabi found that it was constantly deepening,
until he could no longer touch bottom. Rod's eyes were ceaselessly on
the alert for familiar signs along the shore. He was sure that he
knew when they passed the spot where he killed the silver fox, and
he called Wabi's attention to it. Then the rocks sped past with
increasing swiftness, and as the moon rose higher the three could see
where the overflowing torrent sent out little streams that twisted
and dashed themselves into leaping foam in the wildness of the chasm
beyond the main channel. These increased in number and size as the
journey continued, until Mukoki began to feel the influence of their
currents and called on Wabi and Rod for assistance. Suddenly Rod gave
a muffled shout as they shot past a mass of huge boulders on their
right.

"That's where I camped the night I dreamed of the skeletons!" he
cried. "I don't know what the stream is like from here on. Be
careful!"

Wabi gave a terrific lunge with his paddle and the cone of a black
rock hissed past half a canoe length away.

"It's as black as a dungeon ahead, and I can hear rocks!" he shouted.
"Bring her in if you can, Muky, bring her in!"

There came the sudden sharp crack of snapping wood and a low
exclamation of alarm fell from Mukoki. His paddle had broken at the
shaft. In a flash Rod realized what had happened and passed back his
own, but that moment's loss of time proved almost fatal. Freed of its
guiding hand the birch bark swung broadside to the current, and at the
same time Wabi's voice rose in a shrill cry of warning.

"It's not rocks, it's a whirlpool!" he yelled. "The other shore, swing
her out, swing her out!"

He dug his own paddle deep down into the racing current and from
behind Mukoki exerted his most powerful efforts, but it was too late!
A hundred feet ahead the stream tore between two huge rocks as big as
houses, and just beyond these Rod caught a glimpse of frothing water
churning itself milk-white in the moonlight. But it was only a
glimpse. With a velocity that was startling the canoe shot between
the rocks, and as a choking sea of spray leaped into their faces
Wabigoon's voice came back again in a loud command for the others to
hang to the gunwales of their frail craft. For an instant, in which
his thoughts seemed to have left him, a roaring din filled Rod's ears;
a white, churning mist hid everything but his own arms and clutching
hands, and then the birch bark darted with the sudden impetus of a
freshly-shot arrow around the jagged edge of the boulder--and he could
see again.

Here was the whirlpool! More than once Wabi had told him of these
treacherous traps, made by the mountain streams, and of the almost
certain death that awaited the unlucky canoe man drawn into their
smothering embrace. There was no angry raging of the flood here; at
first it seemed to Rod that they were floating almost without motion
upon a black, lazy sea that made neither sound nor riffle. Scarce half
a dozen canoe lengths away he saw the white center of the maelstrom,
and there came to his ears above the dash of the stream between the
two great rocks a faint hissing sound that curdled the blood in his
veins, the hissing of the treacherous undertow that would soon drag
them to their death! In the passing of a thought there flashed into
the white youth's mind a story that Mukoki had told him of an Indian
who had been lost in one of these whirlpools of the spring floods, and
whose body had been tossed and pitched about in its center for more
than a week. For the first time the power of speech came to him.

"Shall we jump?" he shouted.

"Hang to the canoe."

Wabi fairly shrieked the words, and yet as he spoke he drew himself
half erect, as if about to leap into the flood. The momentum gathered
in its swift rush between the rocks had carried their frail craft
almost to the outer edge of the deadly trap, and as this momentum
ceased and the canoe yielded to the sucking forces of the maelstrom
the young Indian shrieked out his warning again.

"Hang to the canoe!"

The words were scarcely out of his mouth when he stood erect and
launched himself like an animal into the black depths toward shore.
With a terrified cry Rod rose to his knees. In another instant he
would have plunged recklessly after Wabi, but Mukoki's voice sounding
behind him, snarling in its fierceness, stopped him.

"Hang to canoe!"

There came a jerk. The bow of the canoe swung inward and the stern
whirled so quickly that Rod, half kneeling, nearly lost his balance.
In that instant he turned his face and saw the old warrior standing,
as Wabigoon had done before him, and as Mukoki leaped there came for a
third time that warning cry:

"Hang to canoe!"

And Rod hung. He knew that for some reason those commands were meant
for him, and him alone; he knew that the desperate plunges of his
comrades were not inspired by cowardice or fear, but not until the
birch bark ground upon the shore and he tumbled out in safety did he
fully comprehend what had happened. Holding the rope with which they
tied their canoe, Wabigoon had taken a desperate chance. His quick
mind had leaped like a flash of powder to their last hope, and at the
crucial moment, just as the momentum of the birch bark gave way to the
whirling forces of the pool, he had jumped a good seven feet toward
shore, and had found bottom! Another twelve inches of water under him
and all would have been lost.

Wabigoon stood panting and dripping wet, and in the moonlight his face
was as white as the tub-like spot of foam out in the center of the
maelstrom.

"That's what you call going to kingdomcome and getting out again!" he
gasped. "Muky, that was the closest shave we've ever had! It has your
avalanche beaten to a frazzle!"

Mukoki was dragging the canoe upon the pebbly shore, and still
overcome by the suddenness of all that had happened Rod went to his
assistance.

The adventurers now discovered themselves in a most interesting
situation. The night had indeed been one of curious and thrilling
happenings for them, and here was a pretty climax to it all! They had
escaped the mad hunter by running into the almost fatal grip of the
whirlpool, and now they had escaped the perils of that seething
death-trap by plunging into a tiny rock-bound prison which seemed
destined to hold them for all time, or at least until the floods of
spring subsided. Straight above them, and shutting them in entirely,
rose precipitous rock walls. On the only open side was the deadly
maelstrom.

Even Mukoki as he glanced about him was struck by the humor of their
situation, and chuckled softly.

Wabi stood with his hands deep in his soaked pockets, facing the
moonlit walls. Then he turned to Rod, and grinned; then he faced the
whirlpool, and after that his eyes swept the space of sky above them.
The situation was funny, at first; but when he looked at the white
youth again the smile had died out of his face.

"Wouldn't that madman have fun if he found us now!" he whispered.

Mukoki was traveling slowly around the rock walls. The space in which
they were confined was not more than fifty feet in diameter, and there
was not even a crack by means of which a squirrel might have found
exit. The prison was perfect. The old pathfinder came back and sat
down with a grunt.

"We might as well have supper and a good sleep," suggested Rod,
who was hungry. "Surely we need fear no attack from beast or man
to-night!"

At least there was this consolation, and the gold hunters ate a
hearty meal of cold bear meat and prepared for slumber. The night
was unusually warm, and both Mukoki and Wabigoon hung out their wet
clothes to dry while they slept in their blankets. Rod did not open
his eyes again until Wabi awakened him in the morning. Both Indians
were dressed and it was evident that they had been up for some time.
When Rod went to the water to wash himself he was surprised to find
all of their supplies repacked in the canoe, as though their journey
was about to be resumed immediately after breakfast, and when he
returned to where Mukoki and Wabigoon had placed their food on a
flat stone in the center of what he had regarded as their prison, he
observed that both of his companions were in an unusually cheerful
frame of mind.

"Looks as though you expected to get out of here pretty soon," he
said, nodding toward the canoe.

"So we do!" responded Wabi. "We're going to take a swim through the
whirlpool!"

He laughed at the incredulity in Rod's face.

"That is, we're going to navigate along the edge of it," he amended.
"Muky and I have tied together every bit of rope and strap in our
outfit, even to our gun-slings, and we've got a piece about eighty
feet long. We'll show you how to use it after breakfast."

It took but a few minutes to dispose of the rather unappetizing repast
of cold bear meat, biscuits and water. Wabi then led the way to the
extreme edge of the great rock which formed the eastern wall of their
prison, waded in the water to his knees, and directed Rod's gaze to a
point of land jutting out into the stream about sixty feet beyond the
rock.

"If we can reach that," explained Wabi, "we can portage around the
rest of the whirlpool to the main channel. The water is very deep
along the edge of this rock, but the undertow doesn't seem to have any
great force. I believe that we can make it. The experiment won't be a
dangerous one at any rate."

The canoe was now dragged to the edge of the rock and launched, Mukoki
taking his place in the stern while Wabigoon placed Rod a little ahead
of the midship rib.

"You must paddle on your left side, every minute and as fast as you
can," advised the young Indian. "I am to remain behind, holding one
end of this rope, so that if you are drawn toward the maelstrom I can
pull you back. Understand?"

"Yes--but you. How--"

"Oh, I'll swim!" said Wabi in rank bravado. "I don't mind a little
whirlpool like that at all!"

Mukoki chuckled in high humor, and Roderick asked no more questions,
but at Wabi's command dug in his paddle and kept at it until the birch
bark safely made the point of land beyond the rock. When he looked
back Wabi had tied the rope around his body and was already waist
deep in the water. At a signal from Mukoki the young Indian plunged
fearlessly into the edge of the whirlpool and like a great floundering
fish he was quickly pulled across to safety. Most of his clothes had
been brought over in the canoe, and after Wabigoon had exchanged his
wet garments for these the adventurers were ready to continue their
journey down the chasm. A short portage brought them to the main
channel of the stream, where they once more launched their birch bark.

"If the whole trip is as exciting as this we'll never reach our gold,"
said Wabi, as they slipped out into the swift current. "A madman, a
whirlpool and a prison, all in one night, is almost more than we can
stand."

"There's a good deal of truth in the old saying that it never rains
but it pours," replied Rod. "Maybe we'll have smooth sailing from now
on."

"Mebby!" grunted the old pathfinder from behind.

Rod's optimism was vindicated for that day, at least. Until noon the
canoe sped swiftly down the chasm without mishap. The stream, to which
each mile added its contribution of flood water from the mountain
tops, increased constantly in width and depth, but only now and then
was there a rock to threaten their progress, and no driftwood at all.
When the gold seekers landed for dinner they were confident of two
things: that they had passed far beyond the mad hunter's reach,
and were very near to the first waterfall. Memory of the thrilling
experiences through which they had so recently run the gauntlet was
replaced by the most exciting anticipation of the sound and sight
of that first waterfall, which was so vitally associated with their
search for the lost treasure. This time a hearty dinner was cooked,
and it took more than an hour to prepare and eat it.

When the journey was resumed Mukoki placed himself in the bow, his
sharp eyes scanning the rocks and mountain walls ahead of him. Two
hours after the start he gave an exultant exclamation, and raised a
warning hand above his head. The three listened. Faintly above the
rush of the swift current there came to their ears the distant rumble
of falling water!

Forgetful now of the madman back in the chasm, oblivious of everything
but the fact that they had at last reached the first of the three
falls which were to lead them to the gold, Wabi gave a whoop that
echoed and re√´choed between the mountain walls, and Rod joined him
with all the power of his lungs. Mukoki grinned, chuckled in his
curious way, and a few moments later signaled Wabi to guide the canoe
ashore.

"We portage here," he explained. "Current swift there--mebby go over
fall!"

A short carry of two or three hundred yards brought them to the
cataract. It was, as Mukoki had said after his long trip of
exploration a few months before, a very small fall, not more than a
dozen feet in height. But over it there was now rushing a thundering
deluge of water. An easy trail led to the stream below it, and no time
was lost in getting under way again.

Although they had traveled fully forty miles since morning, the day
had been an easy and most interesting one for the three adventurers.
On the swift current of the chasm stream they had worked but little,
and the ceaseless change of scenery in this wonderful break between
the mountain ridges held an ever-increasing fascination for them. Late
in the afternoon the course changed from its northeasterly direction
to due north, and at this point there was an ideal spot for camping.
Over an extent of an acre or more there was a sweeping hollow of fine
white sand, with great quantities of dry wood cluttering the edge of
the depression.

"That's a curious spot!" said Wabi as they drew up their canoe. "Looks
like--"

"A lake," grunted Mukoki. "Long time ago--a lake."

"The curve of the stream right here has swept up so much sand that the
water can't get into it," added Rod, looking the place over.

Wabi had gone a few paces back. Suddenly he stopped, and with a half
shout he gesticulated excitedly to his companions. Something in his
manner took Rod and Mukoki to him on the run.

When they came up the Indian youth stood mutely pointing at something
in the sand.

Clearly imprinted in that sand was the shape of a human foot, a foot
that had worn neither boot nor moccasin when it left its trail in the
lake bed, but which was as naked as the quivering hand which Wabigoon
now held toward it!

And from that single footprint the eyes of the astonished adventurers
traveled quickly to a hundred others, until it seemed to them that a
dozen naked savages must have been dancing in these sands only a few
hours before.

And Rod, glancing toward the driftwood, saw something else,--something
toward which he pointed, speechless, white with that same strange
excitement that had taken possession of Wabigoon!




CHAPTER XIII


THE THIRD WATERFALL

The others followed Rod's arm. Behind him he heard the gentle click
of Wabigoon's revolver and the sharp, vicious snap of the safety on
Mukoki's rifle.

From beyond the driftwood there was rising a thin spiral of smoke!

"Whoever they are, they have certainly seen or heard us!" said Wabi,
after they had stood in silence for a full minute.

"Unless they are gone from camp," replied Rod in a whisper.

"Keep eyes open!" warned Mukoki as they advanced cautiously in the
direction of the smoke. "No can tell what, I guess so!"

He was first to mount the driftwood, and then he gave vent to a huge
grunt. The smoke was rising from beside a charred log which was heaped
half-way up its side with ashes and earth. In a flash the meaning
of the ash and dirt dawned on Rod and his companions. The fire was
banked. Those who had built it were gone, but they expected to return.
The naked footprints were thick about the camp-fire, and close to one
end of the charred log were scattered a number of bones. One after
another Mukoki picked up several of these and closely examined
them. While Rod and Wabigoon were still gazing about them in blank
astonishment, half expecting attack from a savage horde at any moment,
the old warrior had already reached a conclusion, and calling to his
companions he brought their attention to the tracks in the sand.

"Same feet!" he exclaimed. "One man mak' all track!"

"Impossible!" cried Wabi. "There are--thousands of them!"

Mukoki grunted and fell upon his knees.

"Heem big toe--right foot--broke sometime. Same in all track. See?"

Disgusted at his own lack of observation, Wabigoon saw at once that
the old pathfinder was right. The joint of the big toe on the right
foot was twisted fully half an inch outward, a deformity that left
a peculiar impression in the sand, and every other track bore
this telltale mark. No sooner were the two boys convinced of the
correctness of Mukoki's assertion than another and still more
startling surprise was sprung on them. Holding out his handful of
bones, Mukoki said:

"Meat no cook--eat raw!"

"Great Scott!" gasped Rod.

Wabi's eyes flashed with a new understanding, and as he gazed into
Rod's astonished face the latter, too, began to comprehend the
significance of it all.

"It must have been the madman!"

"Yes."

"And he was here yesterday!"

"Probably the day before," said Wabi. The young Indian turned suddenly
to Mukoki. "What did he want of the fire if he didn't cook meat?" he
asked.

Mukoki shrugged his shoulders but did not answer.

"Well, it wasn't cooked, anyway," declared Wabi, again examining the
bones. "Here are chunks of raw flesh clinging to the bones. Perhaps he
just singed the outside of his meat."

The old Indian nodded at this suggestion and turned to investigate the
fire. On the end of the log were two stones, one flat and the other
round and smooth, and after a moment's inspection of these he dropped
an exclamation which was unusual for him, and which he used only in
those rare intervals when all other language seemed to fail him.

"Bad dog man--mak' bullet--here!" he called, holding out the stones.
"See--gold--gold!"

The boys hurried to his side.

"See--gold!" he repeated excitedly.

In the center of the flat stone there was a gleaming yellow film. A
single glance told the story. With the round stone for a hammer the
mad hunter had pounded his golden bullets into shape upon the flat
stone! There was no longer a doubt in their minds; they were in the
madman's camp. That morning they had left this strange creature of the
wilderness fifty miles away. But how far away was he now? The fire
slumbering under its covering of ash and earth proved that he meant to
return--and soon. Would he travel by night as well as by day? Was it
possible that he was already close behind them?

"He travels with the swiftness of an animal," said Wabi, speaking in a
low voice to Rod. "Perhaps he will return to-night!"

Mukoki overheard him and shook his head.

"Mak' heem through chasm in two day on snow-shoe," he declared,
referring to his trip of exploration to the first waterfall over the
snows of the previous winter. "No mak' in t'ree day over rock!"

"If Mukoki is satisfied, I am," said Rod. "We can pull up behind the
driftwood on the farther edge of the lake bed."

Wabi made no objection, and the camp site was chosen. Strangely
enough, with the discovery of the footprints, the fire, the picked
bones and the stones with which the mad hunter had manufactured his
golden bullets, Mukoki seemed to have lost all fear of the wild
creature of the chasm. He was confident now that he had only a man to
deal with, a man who had gone "bad dog," and his curiosity overcame
his alarm. His assurance served to dispel the apprehension of his
companions, and sleep came early to the tired adventurers. Nor did
anything occur during the night to awaken them.

Soon after dawn the trip down the chasm stream was resumed. With the
abrupt turning of the channel to the north, however, there was an
almost immediate change in the topography of the country. Within
an hour the precipitous walls of the mountains gave place to
verdure-covered slopes, and now and then the gold seekers found
themselves between plains that swept back for a mile or more on either
side. Frequent signs of game were observed along the shores of the
river and several times during the morning moose and caribou were
seen in the distance. A few months before, when they had invaded the
wilderness to hunt and trap, this country would have aroused the
wildest enthusiasm among Rod and his friends, but now they gave but
little thought to their rifles. That morning they had set out with the
intention of reaching the second waterfall before dusk, and it was
with disappointment rather than gladness that they saw the swift
current of the chasm torrent change into the slower, steadier sweep of
a stream that had now widened into a fair-sized river. According
to the map the second fall was about fifty-five miles from the mad
hunter's camp. Darkness found them still fifteen miles from where it
should be.

Excitement kept Rod awake most of that night. Try as he would, he
could not keep visions of the lost treasure out of his mind. The next
day they would be far on their way to the third and last waterfall.
And then--the gold! That they might not find it, that the passing of
half a century or more might have obliterated all traces left by its
ancient discoverers, never for a moment disturbed his belief.

He was the first awake the following morning, the first to take his
place in the canoe. Every minute now his ears were keenly attuned for
that distant sound of falling water. But hours passed without a
sign of it. Noon came. They had traveled six hours and had covered
twenty-five miles instead of fifteen! Where was the waterfall?

There was a little more of anxiety in Wabigoon's eyes when they
resumed their journey after dinner. Again and again Rod looked at his
map, figuring out the distances as drawn by John Ball, the murdered
Englishman. Surely the second waterfall could not be far away now! And
still hour after hour passed, and mile after mile slipped behind them,
until the three knew that they had gone fully thirty miles beyond
where the cataract should have been, if the map was right. Twilight
was falling when they stopped for supper. For the last hour Mukoki
had spoken no word. A feeling of gloom was on them all; without
questioning, each knew what the fears of the others were.

Was it possible that, after all, they had not solved the secret of the
mysterious map?

The more Rod thought of it the more his fears possessed him. The
two men who fought and died in the old cabin were on their way to
civilization. They were taking gold with them, gold which they meant
to exchange for supplies. Would they, at the same time, dare to have
in their possession a map so closely defining their trail as the rude
sketch on the bit of birch bark? Was there not some strange key, known
only to themselves, necessary to the understanding of that sketch?

Mukoki had taken his rifle and disappeared in the plain along the
river, and for a long time after they had eaten their bear steak and
drank their hot coffee Rod and Wabigoon sat talking in the glow of
the camp-fire. The old warrior had been gone for about an hour when
suddenly there came the report of a gun from far down the stream,
which was quickly followed by two others--three in rapid succession.
After an interval of a few seconds there sounded two other shots.

"The signal!" cried Rod. "Mukoki wants us!"

Wabigoon sprang to his feet and emptied the five shots of his magazine
into the air.

"Listen!"

Hardly had the echoes died away when there came again the reports of
Mukoki's rifle.

Without another word the two boys hurried to the canoe, which had not
been unloaded.

"He's a couple of miles down-stream," said Wabi, as they shoved off.
"I wonder what's the matter?"

"I can make a pretty good guess," replied Rod, his voice trembling
with a new excitement. "He has found the second waterfall!"

The thought gave fresh strength to their aching arms and the canoe
sped swiftly down the stream. Fifteen minutes later another shot
signaled to them, this time not more than a quarter of a mile away,
and Wabi responded to it with a loud shout. Mukoki's voice floated
back in an answering halloo, but before the young hunters came within
sight of their comrade another sound reached their ears,--the muffled
roar of a cataract! Again and again the boys sent their shouts of joy
echoing through the night, and above the tumult of their own voices
they heard the old warrior calling on them to put into shore. Mukoki
was waiting for them when they landed.

"This is big un!" he greeted. "Mak' much noise, much swift water!"

"Hurrah!" yelled Rod for the twentieth time, jumping up and down in
his excitement.

"Hurrah!" cried Wabi.

And Mukoki chuckled, and grinned, and rubbed his leathery hands
together in high glee.

At last, when they had somewhat cooled down, Wabi said:

"That John Ball was a pretty poor fellow at a guess, eh? What do you
say, Rod?"

"Or else pretty clever," added Rod. "By George, I wonder if he had a
reason for making his scale fifty miles or so out of the way?"

Wabi looked at him, only partly understanding.

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that our third waterfall is more than likely to be mighty
close to this one! And if it is--well, John Ball had a reason, and a
good one! If we strike the last fall to-morrow it will be pretty
good proof that he drew the map in a way intended to puzzle
somebody,--perhaps his two partners, who were just about to start for
civilization."

"Muky, how far have we come?" asked Wabigoon.

"T'ree time first fall," replied the old Indian quickly.

"A hundred and fifty miles--in three days and one night. I don't
believe that is far out of the way. Then, according to the map, we
should still be a hundred miles from the third fall."

"And we're not more than twenty-five!" declared Rod confidently.
"Let's build a fire and go to bed. We'll have enough to do
to-morrow--hunting gold!"

The fourth day's journey was begun before it was yet light. Breakfast
was eaten in the glow of the camp-fire, and by the time dawn broke the
adventurers were already an hour upon their way. Nothing but confidence
now animated them. The mad hunter and his golden bullets were entirely
forgotten in these last hours of their exciting quest. Once, far back,
Rod had thought with chilling dread that this might be the madman's
trail, that his golden bullets might come from the treasure they were
seeking. But he gave no thought to this possibility now. His own belief
that the third and last fall was not far distant, in spite of the
evidence of the map, gradually gained possession of his companions, and
the nerves of all three were keyed to the highest tension of expectancy.
The preceding night Mukoki had made himself a paddle to replace the one
he had broken, and not a stroke of the three pairs of arms was lost.
Early in the morning a young moose allowed them to pass within a hundred
yards of him. But no shot was fired, for to obtain the meat would have
meant an hour's loss of time.

Two hours after the start the country again began taking on a sudden
change. From east and west the wild mountain ridges closed in, and
with each mile's progress the stream narrowed and grew swifter, until
again it was running between chasm walls that rose black and silent
over the adventurers' heads. Darker and gloomier became the break
between the mountains. Far above, a thousand feet or more, dense
forests of red pine flung their thick shadows over the edge of the
chasm, in places almost completely shutting out the light of day.
This was not like the other chasm. It was deeper and darker and more
sullen. Under its walls the gloom was almost that of night. Its
solitude was voiceless; not a bird fluttered or chirped among
its rocks; the lowest of whispered words sounded with startling
distinctness. Once Rod spoke aloud, and his voice rose and beat itself
in the cavernous depths of the walls until it seemed as though he had
shouted. Now they ceased paddling, and Mukoki steered. Noiselessly the
current swept them on. In the twilight gloom Rod's face shone
with singular whiteness. Mukoki and Wabigoon crouched like bronze
silhouettes. It was as if some mysterious influence held them in its
power, forbidding speech, holding their eyes in staring expectancy
straight ahead, filling them with indefinable sensations that made
their hearts beat faster and their blood tingle.

Softly, from far ahead, at last there came a murmur. It was like the
first gentle whispering of an approaching wind, the soughing of a
breath among the pines at the top of the chasm. But a wind among the
trees rises, and then dies away, like a chord struck low and gently
upon some soft-toned instrument. This whisper that came up the chasm
remained. It grew no louder, and sometimes it almost faded away, until
the straining ears of those who listened could barely detect it; but
after a moment it was there again, as plainly as before. Little by
little it became more distinct, until there were no longer intervals
when it died away, and at last Wabigoon turned in the bow and faced
his companions, and though he spoke no word there was the gleam of a
great excitement in his eyes. Rod's heart beat like a drum. He, too,
began to understand. That moaning, whispering sound floating up
the chasm was not the wind, but the far-away rumble of the third
waterfall!

Mukoki's voice broke the tense silence from behind.

"That the fall!"

Wabigoon replied in words scarcely louder than a whisper. There was no
joyful shouting now, as there had been at the discovery of the second
fall. Even Mukoki's voice was so low that the others could barely
hear. Something between these chasm walls seemed to demand silence
from them, and as the rumble of the cataract came more and
more clearly to their ears they held their breath in voiceless
anticipation. A few hundred yards ahead of them was the treasure which
men long since dead had discovered more than half a century before;
between the black mountain walls that so silently guarded that
treasure there seemed to lurk the spirit presence of the three men who
had died because of it. Here, somewhere very near, John Ball had been
murdered, and Rod almost fancied that along the sandy edge of the
chasm stream they might stumble on the footprints of the men whose
skeletons they had discovered in the ancient cabin.

Mukoki uttered no sound as he guided the canoe ashore. Still without
word, the three picked up their rifles and Wabigoon led the way along
the edge of the stream. Soon it dashed a swift racing torrent between
the rocks, and Rod and his companions knew that they were close upon
the fall. A hundred yards or more and they saw the white mist of it
leaping up before their eyes. Wabi began to run, his moccasined feet
springing from stone to stone with the caution of a hunter approaching
game, and Mukoki and Rod came close behind him.

They paused upon the edge of a great mass of rock with the spray of
the plunging cataract rising in their faces. Breathless they gazed
down. It was not a large fall. Wabi silently measured it at forty
feet. But it added just that much more to the depth and the gloom of
the chasm beyond, into which there seemed no way of descent. The rock
walls rose sheer and black, with clumps of cedar and stunted pine
growing at their feet. Farther on the space between the mountains
became wider, and the river reached out on either side, frothing and
beating itself into white fury in a chaos of slippery water-worn
rocks.

Down there--somewhere--was the golden treasure they had come to seek,
unless the map lied! Was it among those rocks, where the water dashed
and fumed? Was it hidden in some gloomy cavern of the mountain sides,
its trail concealed by the men who discovered it half an age ago?
Would they find it, after all--would they find it?

A great gulp of excitement rose in Rod's throat, and he looked at
Wabigoon.

The Indian youth had stretched out an arm. His eyes were blazing, his
whole attitude was one of tense emotion.

"There's the cabin," he cried, "the cabin built by John Ball and the
two Frenchmen! See, over there among those cedars, almost hidden in
that black shadow of the mountain! Great Scott, Muky--Rod--can't you
see? Can't you see?"




CHAPTER XIV


THE PAPER IN THE OLD TIN BOX

Slowly out of that mysterious gloom there grew a shape before Rod's
eyes. At first it was only a shadow, then it might have been a rock,
and then the gulp in his throat leaped out in a shout when he saw that
Wabigoon's sharp eyes had in truth discovered the old cabin of the
map. For what else could it be? What else but the wilderness home of
the adventurers whose skeletons they had found, Peter Plante and Henri
Langlois, and John Ball, the man whom these two had murdered?

Rod's joyous voice was like the touch of fire to Wabi's enthusiasm and
in a moment the oppressive silence of their journey down the chasm was
broken by the wild cheers which the young gold seekers sent echoing
between the mountains. Grimacing and chuckling in his own curious way,
Mukoki was already slipping along the edge of the rock, seeking some
break by which he might reach the lower chasm. They were on the point
of turning to the ascent of the mountain, along which they would have
to go until they found such a break, when the old pathfinder directed
the attention of his companions to the white top of a dead cedar stub
projecting over the edge of the precipice.

"Go down that, mebby," he suggested, shrugging his shoulders to
suggest that the experiment might be a dangerous one.

Rod looked over. The top of the stub was within easy reach, and the
whole tree was entirely free of bark or limbs, a fact which in his
present excitement did not strike him as especially unusual. Swinging
his rifle strap over his shoulders he reached out, caught the slender
apex of the stub, and before the others could offer a word of
encouragement or warning was sliding down the wall of the rock into
the chasm. Wabi was close behind him, and not waiting for Mukoki's
descent the two boys hurried toward the cabin. Half-way to it Wabi
stopped.

"This isn't fair. We've got to wait for Muky."

They looked back. Mukoki was not following. The old warrior was upon
his knees at the base of the dead tree, as though he was searching for
something among the rocks at its foot. Then he rose slowly, and rubbed
his hands along the stub as high as he could reach. When he saw that
Rod and Wabi were observing him he quickly came toward them, and
Wabigoon, who was quick to notice any change in him, was confident
that he had made a discovery of some kind.

"What have you found, Muky?"

"No so ver' much. Funny tree," grunted the Indian.

"Smooth as a fireman's brass pole," added Rod, seeing no significance
in Mukoki's words. "Listen!"

He stopped so suddenly that Wabigoon bumped into him from behind.

"Did you hear that?"

"No."

For a few moments the three huddled close together in watchful
silence. Mukoki was behind the boys or they would have seen that his
rifle was ready to spring to his shoulder and that his black eyes were
snapping with something not aroused by curiosity alone. The cabin was
not more than twenty paces away. It was old, so old that Rod wondered
how it had withstood the heavy storms of the last winter. A growth of
saplings had found root in its rotting roof and the logs of which it
was built were in the last stage of decay. There was no window,
and where the door had once been there had grown a tree a foot in
diameter, almost closing the narrow aperture through which the
mysterious inhabitants had passed years before. A dozen paces, five
paces from this door, and Mukoki's hand reached out and laid itself
gently upon Wabi's shoulder. Rod saw the movement and stopped. A
strange look had come into the old Indian's face, an expression in
which there was incredulity and astonishment, as if he believed and
yet doubted what his eyes beheld. Mutely he pointed to the tree
growing before the door, and to the reddish, crumbling rot into which
the logs had been turned by the passing of generations.

"Red pine," he said at last. "That cabin more'n' twent' t'ous'nd year
old!"

There was an awesome ring in his voice. Rod understood, and clutched
Wabi's arm. In an instant he thought of the other old cabin, in which
they had found the skeletons. They had repaired that cabin and had
passed the winter in it, and they knew that it had been built half a
century or more before. But this cabin was beyond repair. To Rod it
seemed as though centuries of time instead of decades had been at work
on its timbers. Following close after Wabi he thrust his head through
the door. Deep gloom shut out their vision. But as they looked,
steadily inuring their eyes to the darkness within, the walls of the
old cabin took form, and they saw that everywhere was vacancy. There
was no ancient table, as in the other cabin they had discovered at the
head of the first chasm, there were no signs of the life that had once
existed, not even the remnants of a chair or a stool. The cabin was
bare.

Foot by foot the two boys went around its walls. Mukoki took but a
single glance inside and disappeared. Once alone he snapped down the
safety of his rifle. Quickly, as if he feared interruption, he hurried
around the old cabin, his eyes close to the earth. When Rod and Wabi
returned to the door he was at the edge of the fall, crouching low
among the rocks like an animal seeking a trail. Wabi pulled his
companion back.

"Look!"

The old warrior rose, suddenly erect, and turned toward them, but the
boys were hidden in the gloom. Then he hurried to the dead stub beside
the chasm wall. Again he reached far up, rubbing his hand along its
surface.

"I'm going to have a look at that tree!" whispered Wabi. "Something is
puzzling Mukoki. Are you coming?"

He hurried across the rock-strewn opening, but Rod hung back. He could
not understand his companions. For weeks and months they had planned
to find this third waterfall. Visions of a great treasure had been
constantly before their eyes, and now that they were here, with the
gold perhaps under their very feet, both Mukoki and Wabigoon were more
interested in a dead stub than in their search for it! His own heart
was almost bursting with excitement. The very air which he breathed
in the old cabin set his blood leaping with anticipation. Here those
earlier adventurers had lived half a century or more ago. In it the
life-blood of the murdered John Ball might have ebbed away. In this
cabin the men whose skeletons he had found had slept, and planned, and
measured their gold. And the gold! It was that and not the stub that
interested Roderick Drew! Where was the lost treasure? Surely the old
cabin must hold some clue for them, it would at least tell them more
than the limbless white corpse of a tree!

From the door he looked back into the dank gloom, straining his eyes
to see, and then glanced across the opening. Wabi had reached the
stub, and both he and Mukoki were on their knees beside it. Probably
they have found the marks of a lynx or a bear, thought Rod. A dozen
paces away something else caught his eyes, a fallen red pine, dry and
heavy with pitch, and in less than a minute he had gone to it and was
back with a torch. Breathlessly he touched the tiny flame of a match
to the stick. For a moment the pitch sputtered and hissed, then flared
into light, and Rod held the burning wood above his head.

The young gold seeker's first look about him was disappointing.
Nothing but the bare walls met his eyes. Then, in the farthest corner,
he observed something that in the dancing torch-light was darker than
the logs themselves, and he moved toward it. It was a tiny shelf, not
more than a foot long, and upon it was a small tin box, black and
rust-eaten by the passing of ages. With trembling fingers Rod took it
in his hand. It was very light, probably empty. In it he might find
the dust of John Ball's last tobacco. Then, suddenly, as he thought of
this, he stopped in his search and a muffled exclamation of surprise
fell from him. In the glow of the torch he looked at the tin box. It
was crumbling with age and he might easily have crushed it in his
hand--and yet it was still a tin box! If this box had remained why
had not other things? Where were the pans and kettles, the pail and
frying-pan, knives, cups and other articles which John Ball and the
two Frenchmen must at one time have possessed in this cabin?

He returned to the door. Mukoki and Wabigoon were still at the dead
stub. Even the flare of light in the old cabin had not attracted them.
Tossing his torch away Rod tore off the top of the tin box. Something
fell at his feet, and as he reached for it he saw that it was a little
roll of paper, almost as discolored as the rust-eaten box itself. As
gently as Mukoki had unrolled the precious birchbark map a few months
before he smoothed out the paper. The edges of it broke and crumbled
under his fingers, but the inner side of the roll was still quite
white. Mukoki and Wabigoon, looking back, saw him suddenly turn toward
them with a shrill cry on his lips, and the next instant he was racing
in their direction, shouting wildly at every step.

"The gold!" he shrieked. "The gold! Hurrah!"

He was almost sobbing in his excitement when he stopped between them,
holding out the bit of paper.

"I found it in the cabin--in a tin box! See, it's John Ball's
writing--the writing that was on the old map! I found it--in a tin
box--"

Wabi seized the paper. His own breath came more quickly when he saw
what was upon it. There were a few lines of writing, dim but still
legible, and a number of figures. Across the top of the paper was
written,

"Account of John Ball, Henri Langlois, and Peter Plante for month
ending June thirtieth, 1859."

Below these lines was the following:

"Plante's work: nuggets, 7 pounds, nine ounces; dust, 1 pound, 3
ounces. Langlois' work: nuggets, 9 pounds, 13 ounces; dust, none.
Ball's work: nuggets, 6 pounds, 4 ounces; dust, 2 pounds, 3 ounces.
Total, 27 pounds.
Plante's share, 6 pounds, 12 ounces.
Langlois' share, 6 pounds, 12 ounces.
Ball's share, 13 pounds, 8 ounces.
Division made."

Softly Wabigoon read the words aloud. When he finished his eyes met
Rod's, Mukoki was still crouching at the foot of the stub, staring at
the two boys in silence, as if stupefied by what he had just heard.

"This doesn't leave a doubt," said Wabi at last. "We've struck the
right place!"

"The gold is somewhere--very near--"

Rod could not master the tremble in his voice. As though hoping to see
the yellow treasure heaped in a pile before his eyes he turned to the
waterfall, to the gloomy walls of the chasm, and finally extended an
arm to where the spring torrent, leaping over the edge of the chasm
above, beat itself into frothing rage among the rocks between the two
mountains.

"It's there!"

"In the stream?"

"Yes. Where else near this cabin would they have found pure nuggets
of gold? Surely not in rock! And gold-dust is always in the sands of
streams. It's there--without a doubt!"

Both Indians went with him to the edge of the water.

"The creek widens here until it is very shallow," said Wabi. "I don't
believe that it is more than four feet deep out there in the middle.
What do you say--" He paused as he saw Mukoki slip back to the dead
stub again, then went on, "What do you say to making a trip to the
canoe after grub for our dinner, and the pans?"

The first flash of enthusiasm that had filled Wabigoon on reading the
paper discovered by Rod was quickly passing away, and the white youth
could not but notice the change which came over both Mukoki and his
young friend when they stood once more beside the smooth white stub
that reached up to the floor of the chasm above. He controlled his
own enthusiasm enough to inspect more closely the dead tree which had
affected them so strangely. The discovery he made fairly startled him.
The surface of the stub was not only smooth and free of limbs, but was
polished until it shone with the reflecting luster of a waxed pillar!
For a moment he forgot the paper which he held in his hand, forgot
the old cabin, and the nearness of gold. In blank wonder he stared at
Mukoki, and the old Indian shrugged his shoulders.

"Ver' nice an' smooth!"

"Ver' dam' smooth!" emphasized Wabi, without a suggestion of humor in
his voice.

"What does it mean?" asked Rod.

"It means," continued Wabigoon, "that this old stub has for a good
many years been used by something as a sort of stairway in and out of
this chasm! Now if it were a bear, there would be claw marks. If it
were a lynx, the surface of the stub would be cut into shreds. Any
kind of animal would have left his mark behind, and no animal would
have put this polish on it!"

"Then what in the world--"

Rod did not finish. Mukoki lifted his shoulders to a level with his
chin, and Wabi whistled as he looked straight at him.

"Not a hard guess, eh?"

"You mean--"

"That it's a man! Only the arms and legs of a man going up and down
that stub hundreds and thousands of times could have worn it so
smooth! Now, can you guess who that man is?"

In a flash the answer shot into Rod's brain. He understood now why
this old stub had drawn his companions away from their search for
gold, and he felt the flush of excitement go out of his own cheeks,
and an involuntary thrill pass up his back.

"The mad hunter!"

Wabi nodded. Mukoki grunted and rubbed his hands.

"Gold in bullet come from here!" said the old pathfinder. "Bad dog man
ver' swift on trail. We hurry get canoe--cut down tree!"

"That's more than you've said in the last half-hour, and it's a good
idea!" exclaimed Wabi. "Let's get our stuff down here and chop this
stub into firewood! When he comes back and finds his ladder gone he'll
give a screech or two, I'll wager, and then it will be our chance to
do something with him. Here goes!"

He started to climb the stub, and a minute or two later stood safely
on the rock above.

"Slippery as a greased pole!" he called down. "Bet you can't make it,
Rod!"

But Rod did, after a tremendous effort that left him breathless and
gasping by the time Wabi stretched out a helping hand to him. Mukoki
came up more easily. Taking only their revolvers with them the
three hurried to the birch bark, and in a single load brought their
possessions to the rock. By means of ropes the packs and other
contents of the canoe, and finally the canoe itself, were lowered into
the chasm, and while the others looked on Mukoki seized the ax and
chopped down the stub.

"There!" he grunted, as a last blow sent the tree crashing among the
rocks. "Too high for heem jump!"

"But a mighty good place for him to shoot from," said Wabi, looking
up. "We'd better camp out of range."

"Not until we know what we've struck," cried Rod, unstrapping a pan
from one of the packs. "Boys, the first thing to do is to wash out a
little of that river-bed!"

He started for the creek, with Wabi close behind him bearing a second
pan. Mukoki looked after them and chuckled softly to himself as he
began making preparations for dinner. Choosing a point where the
current had swept up a small bar of pebbles and sand Wabi and Rod both
set to work. The white youth had never before panned gold, but he
had been told how it was done, and there now shot through him that
strange, thrilling excitement which enthralls the treasure hunter
when he believes that at last he has struck pay dirt. Scooping up a
quantity of the gravel and sand he filled his pan with water, then
moved it quickly back and forth, every few moments splashing some of
the "wash" or muddy water, over the side. Thus, filling and refilling
his pan with fresh water, he excitedly went through the process of
"washing" everything but solid substance out of it.

With each fresh dip into the stream the water in the pan became
clearer, and within fifteen minutes the three or four double handfuls
of sand and gravel with which he began work dwindled down to one.
Scarcely breathing in his eagerness he watched for the yellow gleam of
gold. Once a glitter among the pebbles drew a low cry from him, but
when with the point of his knife he found it to be only mica he was
glad that Wabi had not heard him. The young Indian was squatting upon
the sand, with his pan turned toward a gleam of the sun that shot
faintly down into the chasm. Without raising his head he called to
Rod.

"Found anything?"

"No. Have you?"

"No--yes--but I don't think it's gold."

"What does it look like?"

"It gleams yellow but is as hard as steel."

"Mica!" said Rod.

Neither of the boys looked up during the conversation. With the point
of his hunting-knife Rod still searched in the bottom of his pan,
turning over the pebbles and raking the gravelly sand with a
painstaking care that would have made a veteran gold seeker laugh.
Some minutes had passed when Wabi spoke again.

"I say, Rod, that's a funny-looking thing I found! If it wasn't so
hard I'd swear it was gold? Want to see it?"

"It's mica," repeated Rod, as another gleam of "fool's gold" in his
own pan caught his eyes. "The stream is full of it!"

"Never saw mica in chunks before," mumbled Wabi, bending low over his
pan.

"Chunks!" cried Rod, straightening as if some one had run a pin into
his back. "How big is it?"

"Big as a pea--a big pea!"

The words were no sooner out of the young Indian's mouth than Roderick
was upon his feet and running to his companion.

"Mica doesn't come in chunks! Where--"

He bent over Wabi's pan. In the very middle of it lay a suspiciously
yellow pebble, worn round and smooth by the water, and when Rod took
it in his fingers he gave a low whistle of mock astonishment as he
gazed down into Wabigoon's face.

"Wabi, I'm ashamed of you!" he said, trying hard to choke back the
quiver in his voice. "Mica doesn't come in round chunks like this.
Mica isn't heavy. And this is _both_!"

From the cedars beyond the old cabin came Mukoki's whooping signal
that dinner was ready.




CHAPTER XV


THE TREASURE IN THE POOL

For a few moments after Rod's words and Mukoki's signal from the
cedars Wabigoon sat as if stunned.

"It isn't--gold," he said, his voice filled with questioning doubt.

"That's just what it is!" declared Rod, his words now rising in the
excitement which he was vainly striving to suppress. "It's hard, but
see how your knife point has scratched it! It weighs a quarter of an
ounce! Are there any more nuggets in there?"

He fell upon his knees beside Wabi, and their two heads were close
together, their four eyes eagerly searching the contents of the pan,
when Mukoki came up behind them. Rod passed the golden nugget to the
old Indian, and rose to his feet.

"That settles it, boys. We've hit the right spot. Let's give three
cheers for John Ball and the old map, and go to dinner!"

"I agree to dinner, but cut out the cheers," said Wabi, "or else let's
give them under our breath. Notice how hollow our voices sound in this
chasm! I believe we could hear a shout half a dozen miles away!"

For their camp Mukoki had chosen a site in the edge of the cedars,
and had spread dinner on a big flat rock about which the three now
gathered. For inspiration, as Wabi said, the young Indian placed
the yellow nugget in the center of the improvised table, and if the
enthusiasm with which they hurried through their meal counted for
anything there was great merit in the golden centerpiece. Mukoki
joined the young gold seekers when they again returned to the chasm
stream, and the quest of the yellow treasure was vigorously renewed in
trembling and feverish expectancy.

Only those who have lived in this quest and who have pursued that
elusive _ignis fatuus_ of all nations--the lure of gold--can realize
the sensations which stir the blood and heat the brain of the treasure
seeker as he dips his pan into the sands of the stream where he
believes nature has hidden her wealth. As Roderick Drew, a child of
that civilization where the dollar is law as well as might, returned
to the exciting work which promised him a fortune he seemed to be in
a half dream. About him, everywhere, was gold! For no moment did he
doubt it; not for an instant did he fear that there might be no more
gold in the sand and gravel from which Wabigoon's nugget had come.
Treasure was in the very sandbar under his feet! It was out there
among the rocks, where the water beat itself angrily into sputtering
froth; it was under the fall, and down in the chasm, everywhere,
everywhere about him. In one month John Ball and his companions had
gathered twenty-seven pounds of it, a fortune of nearly seven thousand
dollars! And they had gathered it here! Eagerly he scooped up a fresh
pan of the precious earth. He heard the swish-swish of the water in
Wabigoon's and Mukoki's pans. But beyond this there were no sounds
made by them.

In these first minutes of treasure seeking no words were spoken. Who
would give the first shout of discovery? Five minutes, ten, fifteen of
them passed, and Rod found no gold. As he emptied his pan he saw Wabi
scooping up fresh dirt. He, too, had failed. Mukoki had waded out
waist deep among the rocks. A second and a third pan, and a little
chill of disappointment cooled Rod's blood. Perhaps he had chosen an
unlucky spot, where the gold had not settled! He moved his position,
and noticed that Wabigoon had done the same. A fourth and a fifth pan
and the result was the same. Mukoki had waded across the stream, which
was shallow below the fall, and was working on the opposite side. A
sixth pan, and Rod approached the young Indian. The excitement was
gone out of their faces. An hour and a half--and no more gold!

"Guess we haven't hit the right place, after all," said Wabi.

"It must be here," replied Rod. "Where there is one nugget there must
be more. Gold is heavy, and settles. Perhaps it's deeper down in the
river bed."

Mukoki came across to join them. Out among the rocks he had found a
fleck of gold no larger than the head of a pin, and this new sign gave
them all fresh enthusiasm. Taking off their boots both Rod and Wabi
joined the old pathfinder in midstream. But each succeeding pan added
to the depressing conviction that was slowly replacing their hopes.
The shadows in the chasm began growing longer and deeper. Far overhead
the dense canopies of red pine shut out the last sun-glow of day, and
the gathering gloom between the mountains gave warning that in this
mysterious world of the ancient cabin the dusk of night was not far
away. But not until they could no longer see the gleaming mica in
their pans did the three cease work. Wet to the waist, tired, and with
sadly-shattered dreams they returned to their camp. For a short time
Rod's hopes were at their lowest ebb. Was it possible that there was
no more gold, that the three adventurers of long ago had discovered a
"pocket" here, and worked it out? The thought had been growing in his
head. Now it worried him.

But his depression did not last long. The big fire which Mukoki
built and the stimulating aroma of strong coffee revived his natural
spirits, and both Wabi and he were soon laughing and planning again as
they made their cedar-bough shelter. Supper on the big flat stone--a
feast of bear steak, hot-stone biscuits, coffee, and that most
delectable of all wilderness luxuries, a potato apiece,--and the two
irrepressible young gold hunters were once more scheming and building
their air-castles for the following day. Mukoki listened, and attended
to the clothes drying before the fire, now and then walking out into
the gloom of the chasm to look up to where the white rim of the fall
burst over the edge of the great rock above them. All that afternoon
Wabi and Rod had forgotten the mad hunter and the strange, smoothly
worn tree. Mukoki had not.

In the glow of the camp-fire the two boys read over again the old
account of John Ball and the two Frenchmen. The tiny slip of paper,
yellow with age, was the connecting link between them and the dim
and romantic past, a relic of the grim tragedy which these black and
gloomy chasm walls would probably keep for ever a secret.

"Twenty-seven pounds," repeated Rod, as if half to himself. "That was
one month's work!"

"Pretty nearly a pound a day!" gasped Wabi. "I tell you, Rod, we
haven't hit the right spot--yet!"

"I wonder why John Ball's share was twice that of his companions'? Do
you suppose it was because he discovered the gold in the first place?"
speculated Rod.

"In all probability it was. That accounts for his murder. The
Frenchmen were getting the small end of the deal."

"Eighteen hundred fifty-nine," mused Rod. "That was forty-nine years
ago, before the great Civil War. Say--"

He stopped and looked hard at Wabigoon.

"Did it ever strike you that John Ball might not have been murdered?"

Wabi leaned forward with more than usual eagerness.

"I have had a thought--" he began.

"What?"

"That perhaps he was not killed."

"And that after the two Frenchmen died in the knife duel he returned
and got the gold," continued Rod.

"No, I had not thought of that," said Wabi. Suddenly he rose to his
feet and joined Mukoki out in the gloom of the chasm.

Rod was puzzled. Something in his companion's voice, in his face and
words, disturbed him. What had Wabigoon meant?

The young Indian soon rejoined him, but he spoke no more of John Ball.

When the two boys went to their blankets Mukoki still remained awake.
For a long time he sat beside the fire, his hands gripping the rifle
across his knees, his head slightly bowed in that statue-like posture
so characteristic of the Indian. For fully an hour he sat motionless,
and in his own way he was deeply absorbed in thought. Soon after their
discovery of the first golden bullet Wabigoon had whispered a few
words into his ear, unknown to Rod; and to-night out in the gloom of
the chasm, he had repeated those same words. They had set Mukoki's
mind working. He was thinking now of something that happened long ago,
when, in his reasoning, the wilderness was young and he was a youth.
In those days his one great treasure was a dog, and one winter he
went with this faithful companion far into the hunting regions of the
North, a long moon's travel from his village. When he returned,
months later, he was alone. From his lonely hunting shack deep in the
solitudes his comrade had disappeared, and had never returned. This
all happened before Mukoki met the pretty Indian girl who became his
wife, and was afterward killed by the wolves, and he missed the dog
as he would have missed a human brother. The Indian's love, even
for brutes, is some thing that lives, and more than twenty moons
later--two years in the life of a man--he returned once again to the
old shack, and there he found Wholdaia, the dog! The animal knew him,
and bounded about on three legs for joy, and because of the missing
leg Mukoki understood why he had not returned to him two years before.
Two years is a long time in the life of a dog, and the gray hairs of
suffering and age were freely sprinkled in Wholdaia's muzzle and along
his spine.

Mukoki was not thinking of Wholdaia without a reason. He was thinking
of Wabigoon's words--and the mad hunter. Could not the mad hunter do
as Wholdaia had done? Was it possible that the bad-dog man who shot
golden bullets and who screamed like a lynx was the man who had lived
there many, many years ago, and whom the boys called John Ball? Those
were the thoughts that Wabi had set working in his brain. The young
Indian had not suggested this to Rod. He had spoken of it to Mukoki
only because he knew the old pathfinder might help him to solve the
riddle, and so he had started Mukoki upon the trail.

The next morning, while the others were finishing their breakfast,
Mukoki equipped himself for a journey.

"Go down chasm," he explained to Rod. "Fin' where get out to plain.
Shoot meat."

That day the gold hunters were more systematic in their work,
beginning close to the fall, one on each side of the stream, and
panning their way slowly down the chasm. By noon they had covered two
hundred yards, and their only reward was a tiny bit of gold, worth
no more than a dollar, which Rod had found in his pan. By the time
darkness again compelled them to stop they had prospected a quarter
of a mile down stream without discovering other signs of John Ball's
treasure. In spite of their failure they were less discouraged than
the previous evening, for this failure, in a way, was having a
sedative and healthful effect. It convinced them that there was a hard
and perhaps long task ahead of them, and that they could not expect to
find their treasure winnowed in yellow piles for them.

Early in the evening Mukoki returned laden with caribou meat, and with
the news that the first break in the chasm walls was fully five miles
below. The adventurers now regretted that they had chopped down the
stub, for it was decided that the next work should be in the stream
above the fall, which would necessitate a ten-mile tramp, five miles
to the break and five miles back. When the journey was begun at dawn
the following morning several days' supplies were taken along, and
also a stout rope by means of which the gold hunters could lower
themselves back into their old camp when their work above was
completed. Rod noticed that the rocks in the stream seemed much
larger than when he had first seen them, and he mentioned the fact to
Wabigoon.

"The floods are going down rapidly," explained the young Indian. "All
of the snow is melted from the sides of the mountains, and there are
no lakes to feed this chasm stream. Within a week there won't be more
than a few inches of water below the fall."

"And that is when we shall find the gold!" declared Rod with his old
enthusiasm. "I tell you, we haven't gone deep enough! This gold has
been here for centuries and centuries, and it has probably settled
several feet below the surface of the river-bed. Ball and the
Frenchmen found twenty-seven pounds in June, when the creek was
practically dry. Did you ever read about the discoveries of gold in
Alaska and the Yukon?"

"A little, when I was going to school with you."

"Well, the richest finds were nearly always from three to a dozen
feet under the surface, and when a prospector found signs in surface
panning he knew there was rich dirt below. We‚Äôll find our gold in this
chasm, and near the fall!"

Rod's confidence was the chief thing that kept up the spirits of the
treasure seekers during the next few days, for not the first sign
of gold was discovered above the fall. Yard by yard the prospectors
worked up the chasm until they had washed its sands for more than a
mile. And with the passing of each day, as Wabigoon had predicted, the
stream became more and more shallow, until they could wade across it
without wetting themselves above their knees. At the close of the
fourth day the three lowered themselves over the face of the rock into
the second chasm. So convinced was Rod in his belief that the gold was
hidden deep down under the creek bed that he dug a four-foot hole by
torch-light and that night after supper washed out several pans of
dirt in the glow of the camp-fire. He still found no signs of gold.

The next day's exertions left no room for doubt. Beyond two or three
tiny flecks of gold the three adventurers found nothing of value
in the deeper sand and gravel of the stream. That night absolute
dejection settled on the camp. Both Rod and Wabigoon made vain efforts
to liven up their drooping spirits. Only Mukoki, to whom gold
carried but a fleeting and elusive value, was himself, and even his
hopefulness was dampened by the gloom of his companions. Rod could see
but one explanation of their failure. Somewhere near the cataract John
Ball and the Frenchmen had found a rich pocket of gold, and they had
worked it out, probably before the fatal tragedy in the old cabin.

"But how about the mad hunter and his golden bullets?" insisted Wabi,
in another effort to brighten their prospects. "The bullets weighed an
ounce each, and I'll stake my life they came from this chasm. He knows
where the gold is, if we don't!"

"Come back soon!" grunted Mukoki. "Watch heem. Fin' gol'!"

"That's what we'll do!" cried the young Indian, jumping suddenly to
his feet and toppling Rod backward off the rock upon which he was
sitting. "Come, cheer up, Rod! The gold is here, somewhere, and we're
going to find it! I'm heartily ashamed of you; you, whom I thought
would never get discouraged!"

Rod was laughing when he recovered from the playful mauling which Wabi
administered before he could regain his feet.

"That's right, I deserve another licking! We've got all the spring and
summer before us, and if we don't find the gold by the time snow flies
we'll come back and try it again next year! What do you say?"

"And bring Minnetaki with us!" added Wabi, jumping into the air and
kicking his heels together. "How will you like that, Rod?" He nudged
his comrade in the ribs, and in another moment both were puffing and
laughing in one of their good-natured wrestling bouts, in which the
cat-like agility of the young Indian always won for him in the end.

In spite of momentary times like this, when the natural buoyancy and
enthusiasm of the young adventurers rose above their discouragement,
the week that followed added to their general depression. For miles
the chasm was explored and at the end of the week they had found less
than an ounce of gold. If their pans had given them no returns at all
their disappointment would have been less, for then, as Wabi said,
they could have given up the ghost with good grace. But the few
precious yellow grains which they found now and then lured them on, as
these same grains have lured other hundreds and thousands since the
dawn of civilization. Day after day they persisted in their efforts;
night after night about their camp-fire they inspired each other with
new hope and made new plans. The spring sun grew stronger, the poplar
buds burst into tiny leaf and out beyond the walls of the chasm the
first promises of summer came in the sweetly scented winds of the
south, redolent with the breath of balsam and pine and the thousand
growing things of the plains.

But at last the search came to an end. For three days not even a grain
of gold had been found. Around the big rock, where they were eating
dinner, Rod and his friends came to a final conclusion. The following
morning they would break camp, and leaving their canoe behind, for the
creek was now too shallow for even birch-bark navigation, they would
continue their exploration of the chasm in search of other adventures.
The whole summer was ahead of them, and though they had failed
in discovering a treasure where John Ball and the Frenchmen had
succeeded, they might find one farther on. At least the trip deeper
into the unexplored wilderness would be filled with excitement.

Mukoki rose to his feet, leaving Rod and Wabi still discussing their
plans. Suddenly he turned toward them, and a startled cry fell from
his lips, while with one long arm he pointed beyond the fall into the
upper chasm.

"Listen--heem--heem!"

The old warrior's face twitched with excitement, and for a full half
minute he stood motionless, his arm still extended, his black eyes
staring steadily at Rod and Wabigoon who sat as silent as the rocks
about them. Then there came to them from a great distance a quavering,
thrilling sound, a sound that filled them again with the old horror of
the upper chasm--the cry of the mad hunter.

At that distant cry Wabigoon sprang to his feet, his eyes leaping
fire, his bronzed cheeks whitening in an excitement even greater than
that of Mukoki.

"Muky, I told you!" he cried. "I told you!" The young Indian's body
quivered, his hands were clenched, and when he turned upon Rod the
white youth was startled by the look in his face.

"Rod, John Ball is coming back to his gold!"

Hardly had he spoken the words when the tenseness left his body and
his hands dropped to his side.

The words shot from him before he could control himself enough to hold
them back. In another moment he was sorry. The thought that John Ball
and the mad hunter were the same person he had kept to himself, until
for reasons of his own he had let Mukoki into his secret. While the
idea had taken larger and larger growth in his mind he knew that
from every logical point of view the thing was impossible, and that
constraint which came of the Indian blood in him held him from
discussing it with Rod. But now the words were out. A quick flush
replaced the whiteness that had come into his face. In another instant
he was leaning eagerly toward Rod, his eyes kindling into fire again.
He had not expected the change that he now saw come over the white
youth.

"I have been thinking that for a long time," he continued. "Ever since
we found the footprints in the sand. There's just one proof that we
need, just one, and--"

"Listen!"

Rod fairly hissed the word as he held up a warning hand.

This time the cry of the mad hunter came to them more distinctly. He
was approaching through the upper chasm!

The white youth rose to his feet, his eyes steadily fixed upon
Wabigoon's. His face was deathly pale.

"John Ball!" he repeated, as if he had just heard what the other had
said. "John Ball!" What seemed to him to be the only truth swept upon
him like a flood, and for a score of seconds, in every one of which he
could hear his heart thumping excitedly, he stood like one stunned.
John Ball! John Ball returned to life to find their gold for them, to
tell them of the tragedy and mystery of those days long dead and gone!
Like powder touched by a spark of fire his imagination leaped at
Wabi's thrilling suggestion.

Mukoki set to work.

"Hide!" he exclaimed. "Hide thees--thees--thees!" He pointed about him
at all the things in camp.

Both of the boys understood.

"He must see no signs of our presence from the top of the fall!" cried
Wabi, gathering an armful of camp utensils. "Hide them back among the
cedars!"

Mukoki hurried to the cedar bough shelter and began tearing it down.
For five minutes the adventurers worked on the run. Once during that
time they heard the madman's wailing cry, and hardly had they finished
and concealed themselves in the gloom of the old cabin when it came
again, this time from not more than a rifle-shot's distance beyond
the cataract. It was not a scream that now fell from the mad hunter's
lips, but a low wail and in it there was something that drove the old
horror from the three wildly beating hearts and filled them with a
measureless, nameless pity. What change had come over the madman? The
cry was repeated every few seconds now, each time nearer than before,
and in it there was a questioning, appealing note that seemed to end
in sobbing despair, a something that gripped at Rod's heart and filled
him with a great half-mastering impulse to answer it, to run out and
stretch his hands forth in greeting to the strange, wild creature
coming down the chasm!

Then, as he looked, something ran out upon the edge of the great rock
beside the cataract, and he clutched at his own breast to hold back
what he thought must burst forth in words. For he knew--as surely as
he knew that Wabi was at his side--that he was looking upon John Ball!
For a moment the strange creature crouched where the stub had been,
and when he saw that it was gone he stood erect, and a quavering,
pitiful cry echoed softly through the chasm. And as he stood there
motionless the watchers saw that the mad hunter was an old man, tall
and thin, but as straight as a sapling, and that his head and breast
were hidden in shaggy beard and hair. In his hands he carried a
gun--the gun that had fired the golden bullets--and even at that
distance those who were peering from the gloom of the cabin saw that
it was a long barreled weapon similar to those they had found in the
other old cabin, along with the skeletons of the Frenchmen who had
died in the fatal knife duel.

In breathless suspense the three waited, not a muscle of their bodies
moving. Again the old man leaned over the edge of the rock, and his
voice came to them in a moaning, sobbing appeal, and after a little
he stretched out his arms, still crying softly, as if beseeching help
from some one below. The spectacle gripped at Rod's soul. A hot film
came into his eyes and there was an odd little tremble in his throat.
The Indians were looking with dark, staring eyes. To them this was
another unusual incident of the wilderness. But to Rod it was the
white man's soul crying out to his own. The old man's outstretched
arms seemed reaching to him, the sobbing voice, filled with its
pathos, its despair, its hopeless loneliness, seemed a supplication
for him to come forth, to reach up his own arms, to respond to this
lost soul of the solitudes. With a little cry Rod darted between his
companions. He threw off his cap and lifted his white face to the
startled creature on the rock, and as he advanced step by step,
reaching out his hands in friendship, he called softly a name:

"John Ball, John Ball, John Ball!"

In an instant the mad hunter had straightened himself, half turned to
flee.

"John Ball! Hello, John Ball--John Ball--"

In his earnestness Rod was almost sobbing the name. He forgot
everything now, everything but that lonely figure on the rock, and he
drew nearer and nearer, gently calling the name, until the mad hunter
dropped on his knees and, crumpled in his long beard and gray lynx
skin, looked down upon Rod and sent back a low moaning, answering cry.

"John Ball! John Ball, is that you?"

Rod stopped, with the madman forty feet above him, and something
seemed choking back the very breath in him when he saw the strange
look that had come into the old man's eyes.

"John Ball--"

The wild eyes above shifted for a moment. They caught a glimpse of two
heads thrust from the door of the old cabin, and the madman sprang to
his feet. For a breath he stood on the edge of the rock, then with a
cry he leaped with the fierce agility of an animal far out into the
swirl of the cataract! For an instant he was visible in the downward
plunge of the water. Another instant and with a heavy splash he
disappeared in the deep pool under the fall!

Wabi and Mukoki had seen the desperate leap and the young Indian
was beside the pool before Rod had recovered from his horrified
astonishment. For centuries the water of the chasm stream had been
tumbling into this pool wearing it deeper and deeper each year, until
the water in it was over a man's head. In width it was not more than a
dozen feet.

"Watch for him! He'll drown if we don't get him out," shouted Wabi.

Rod leaped to the edge of the pool, with Mukoki between him and
Wabigoon. Ready to spring into the cold depths at the first sign of
the old man's gray head or struggling arms the three stood with every
muscle ready for action. A second, two seconds, five seconds passed,
and there was no sign of him. Rod's heart began to beat with drum-like
fierceness. Ten seconds! A quarter of a minute! He looked at Wabigoon.
The young Indian had thrown off his caribou-skin coat; his eyes, as he
turned them for a moment toward Rod, flashed back the white youth's
fear.

"I'm going to dive for him!"

In another instant he had plunged head foremost into the pool.
Mukoki's coat fell to the ground. He crouched forward until it seemed
he must topple from the stone upon which he stood. Another fifteen
seconds and Wabigoon's head appeared above the water, and the old
warrior gave a shout.

"Me come!"

He shot out and disappeared in a huge splash close to Wabi. Rod stood
transfixed, filled with a fear that was growing in him at every breath
he drew. He saw the convulsions of the water made by the two Indians,
who were groping about below the surface. Wabigoon came up again for
breath, then Mukoki. It seemed to him that an age had passed, and he
felt no hope. John Ball was dead!

Not for a moment now did he doubt the identity of the mad hunter. The
strange, wistful light that had replaced the glare in the old man's
eyes when he heard his own name called to him had spoken more than
words. It was John Ball! And he was dead! For a third time, a fourth,
and a fifth Mukoki and Wabigoon came up for air, and the fifth time
they dragged themselves out upon the rocks that edged the pool. Mukoki
spoke no word but ran back to the camp and threw a great armful of dry
fuel upon the fire. Wabigoon still remained at the edge of the pool,
dripping and shivering. His hands were clenched, and Rod could see
that they were filled with sand and gravel. Mechanically the Indian
opened his fingers and looked at what he had unconsciously brought up
from under the fall.

For a moment he stared, then with his gasping breath there came a low,
thrilling cry.

He held out his hands to Rod.

Gleaming richly among the pebbles which he held was a nugget of pure
gold, a nugget so large that Rod gave a wild yell, and in that one
moment forgot that John Ball, the mad hunter, was dead or dying
beneath the fall!




CHAPTER XVI


JOHN BALL AND THE MYSTERY OF THE GOLD

Mukoki, hearing Rod's cry, hurried to the pool, but before he reached
the spot where the white youth was standing with the yellow nugget in
his hand Wabigoon had again plunged beneath the surface. For several
minutes he remained in the water, and when he once more crawled out
upon the rocks there was something so strange in his face and eyes
that for a moment Rod believed he had found the dead body of the
madman.

"He isn't--in--the--pool!" he panted. Mukoki shrugged his shoulders
and shivered.

"Dead!" he grunted.

"He isn't in the pool!"

Wabigoon's black eyes gleamed in uncanny emphasis of his words.

"He isn't in the pool!"

The others understood what he meant. Mukoki's eyes wandered to where
the water of the pool gushed between the rocks into the broader
channel of the chasm stream. It was not more than knee deep!

"He no go out there!"

"No!"

"Then--where?"

He shrugged his shoulders suggestively again, and pointed into the
pool.

"Body slip under rock. He there!"

"Try it!" said Wabigoon tersely.

He hurried to the fire, and Rod went with him to gather more fuel
while the young Indian warmed his chilled body. They heard the old
pathfinder leap into the water under the fall as they ran.

Ten minutes later Mukoki joined them.

"Gone! Bad-dog man no there!"

He stretched out one of his dripping arms.

"Gol' bullet!" he grunted.

In the palm of his hand lay another yellow nugget, as large as a
hazelnut!

"I told you," said Wabi softly, "that John Ball was coming back to his
gold. And he has done so! The treasure is in the pool!"

But where was John Ball?

Dead or alive, where could he have disappeared?

Under other conditions the chasm would have rung with the wild
rejoicing of the gold seekers. But there was something now that
stilled the enthusiasm in them. At last the ancient map had given up
its secret, and riches were within their grasp. But no one of the
three shouted out his triumph. Somehow it seemed that John Ball had
died for them, and the thought clutched at their hearts that if they
had not cut down the stub he would still be alive. Indirectly they had
brought about the death of the poor creature who for nearly half a
century had lived alone with the beasts in these solitudes. And that
one glimpse of the old man on the rock, the prayerful entreaty in his
wailing voice, the despair which he sobbed forth when he found his
tree gone, had livened in them something that was more than sympathy.
At this moment the three adventurers would willingly have given up all
hopes of gold could sacrifice have brought back that sad, lonely old
man who had looked down upon them from the wall of the upper chasm.

"I am sorry we cut down the stub," said Rod.

They were the first words spoken.

"So am I," replied Wabi simply, beginning to strip off his wet
clothes. "But--" He stopped, and shrugged his shoulders.

"What?"

"Well, we're taking it for granted that John Ball is dead. If he is
dead why isn't he in the pool? By George, I should think that Mukoki's
old superstition would be getting the best of him!"

"I believe he is in the pool!" declared Rod.

Wabi turned upon him and repeated the words he had spoken to the old
warrior half an hour before.

"Try it!"

After the attempts of the two Indians, who could dive like otter, Rod
had no inclination to follow Wabi's invitation. Mukoki, who had hung
up a half of his clothes near the fire, was fitting one of the pans
to the end of a long pole which he had cut from a sapling, and it was
obvious that his intention was to begin at once the dredging of
the pool for gold. Rod joined him, and once more the excitement of
treasure hunting stirred in his veins. When the pan was on securely
Wabi left the fire to join his companions, and the three returned to
the pool. With a long sweep of his improvised dredge Mukoki scooped up
two quarts or more of sand and gravel and emptied it upon one of the
flat rocks, and the two boys pounced upon it eagerly, raking it out
with their fingers and wiping the mud and sand from every suspicious
looking pebble.

"The quickest way is to wash it!" said Rod, as Mukoki dumped another
load upon the rock. "I'll get some water!"

He ran to the camp for the remaining pans and when he turned back he
saw Wabi leaping in a grotesque dance about the rock while Mukoki
stood on the edge of the pool, his dredge poised over it, silent and
grinning.

"What do you think of that?" cried the young Indian as Rod hurried to
him. "What do you think of that?"

He held out his hand, and in it there gleamed a third yellow nugget,
fully twice as large as the one discovered by Mukoki!

Rod fairly gasped. "The pool must be full of 'em!"

He half-filled his pan with the sand and gravel and ran knee-deep out
into the running stream. In his eagerness he splashed over a part of
his material with the wash, but he excused himself by thinking that
this was his first pan, and that with the rest he would be more
careful. He began to notice now that all of the sand was not washing
out, and when he saw that it persisted in lying heavy and thick among
the pebbles his heart leaped into his mouth. One more dip, and he held
his pan to the light coming through the rift in the chasm. A thousand
tiny, glittering particles met his eyes! In the center of the pan
there gleamed dully a nugget of pure gold as big as a pea! At last
they had struck it rich, so rich that he trembled as he stared down
into the pan, and the cry that had welled up in his throat was choked
back by the swift, excited beating of his heart. In that moment's
glance down into his treasure-laden pan he saw all of his hopes
and all of his ambitions achieved. He was rich! In those gleaming
particles he saw freedom for his mother and himself. No longer a
bitter struggle for existence in the city, no more pinching and
striving and sacrifice that they might keep the little home in which
his father had died! When he turned toward Wabigoon his face was
filled with the ecstasy of those visions. He waded ashore and held his
pan under the other's eyes.

"Another nugget!" exclaimed Wabi excitedly.

"Yes. But it isn't the nugget. It's the--" He moved the pan until the
thousand little particles glittered and swam before the Indian's eyes.
"It's the dust. The sand is full of gold!"

His voice trembled, his face was white. From his crouching posture
Wabi looked up at him, and they spoke no more words.

Mukoki looked, and was silent. Then he went back to his dredging.
Little by little Rod washed down his pan. Half an hour later he showed
it again to Wabigoon. The pebbles were gone. What sand was left was
heavy with the gleaming particles, and half buried in it all was the
yellow nugget! In Wabi's pan there was no nugget but it was rich with
the gleam of fine gold.

Mukoki had dredged a bushel of sand and gravel from the pool, and was
upon his knees beside the heap which he had piled on the rock. When
Rod went to that rock for his third pan of dirt the old warrior made
no sign that he had discovered anything. The early gloom of afternoon
was beginning to settle between the chasm walls, and at the end of his
fourth pan Rod found that it was becoming so dark that he could
no longer distinguish the yellow particles in the sand. With the
exception of one nugget he had found only fine gold. With Wabi's dust
were three small nuggets.

When they ceased work Mukoki rose from beside the rock, chuckling,
grimacing, and holding out his hand. Wabi was the first to see, and
his cry of astonishment drew Rod quickly to his side. The hollow of
the old warrior's hand was filled with nuggets! He turned them into
Wabigoon's hand, and the young Indian turned them into Rod's, and
as he felt the weight of the treasure he held Rod could no longer
restrain the yell of exultation that had been held in all that
afternoon. Jumping high into the air and whooping at every other step
he raced to the camp and soon had the small scale which they had
brought with them from Wabinosh House. The nuggets they had found that
afternoon weighed full seven ounces, and the fine gold, after allowing
the deduction of a third for sand, weighed a little more than eleven
ounces.

"Eighteen ounces--and a quarter!"

Rod gave the total in a voice tremulous with incredulity.

"Eighteen ounces--at twenty dollars an ounce--three hundred and sixty
dollars!" he figured rapidly. "By George--" The prospect seemed too
big for him, and he stopped.

"Less than half a day's work," added Wabi. "We're doing better than
John Ball and the Frenchmen. It means eighteen thousand dollars a
month!"

"And by autumn--" began Rod.

He was interrupted by the inimitable chuckling laugh of Mukoki and
found the old warrior's face a map of creases and grimaces.

"In twent' t'ous'nd moon--mak' heem how much?" he questioned.

In all his life Wabigoon had never heard Mukoki joke before, and with
a wild whoop of joy he rolled the stoical old pathfinder off the rock
on which he was sitting, and Rod joined heartily in Wabi's merriment.

And Mukoki's question proved not to be so much of a joke after all,
as the boys were soon to learn. For several days the work went on
uninterrupted. The buckskin bags in the balsam shelter grew heavier
and heavier. Each succeeding hour added to the visions of the gold
seekers. On the fifth day Rod found seventeen nuggets among his fine
gold, one of them as large as the end of his thumb. On the seventh
came the richest of all their panning, but on the ninth a startling
thing happened. Mukoki was compelled to work ceaselessly to keep the
two boys supplied with "pay dirt" from the pool. His improvised dredge
now brought up only a handful or two of sand and pebbles at a dip. It
was on this ninth day that the truth dawned upon them all.

The pool was becoming exhausted of its treasure!

But the discovery brought no great gloom with it. Somewhere near that
pool must be the very source of the treasure itself, and the gold
hunters were confident of finding it. Besides, they had already
accumulated what to them was a considerable fortune, at least two
thousand dollars apiece. For three more days the work continued, and
then Mukoki's dredge no longer brought up pebbles or sand from the
bottom of the pool.

The last pan was washed early in the morning, and as the warm
weather had begun to taint the caribou meat Mukoki and Wabigoon left
immediately after dinner to secure fresh meat out on the plains, while
Rod remained in camp. The strange thick gloom of night which began to
gather in the chasm before the sun had disappeared beyond the plains
above was already descending upon him when Rod began preparations for
supper. He knew that the Indians would not wait until dark before
re√´ntering the break between the mountains, and confident that they
would soon appear he began mixing up flour and water for their usual
batch of hot-stone biscuits. So intent was he upon his task that he
did not see a shadowy form creeping up foot by foot from the rocks. He
caught no glimpse of the eyes that glared like smoldering coals from
out of the half darkness between him and the fall.

His first knowledge of another presence came in a low, whining cry, a
cry that was not much more than a whisper, and he leaped to his feet,
every nerve in his body once more tingling with that excitement which
had possessed him when he stood under the rock talking to the madman.
A dozen yards away he saw a face, a great, white, ghost-like face,
staring at him from out of the thickening shadows, and under that face
and its tangled veil of beard and hair he saw the crouching form of
the mad hunter!

In that moment Roderick Drew thanked God that he was not afraid.
Standing full in the glow of the fire he stretched out his arms, as he
had once before reached them out to this weird creature, and again,
softly, pleadingly, he called the name of John Ball! There came in
reply a faint, almost unheard sound from the wild man, a sound that
was repeated again and again, and which sent a thrill into the young
hunter, for it was wondrously like the name he was calling: "John
Ball! John Ball! John Ball!" And as the mad hunter repeated that sound
he advanced, foot by foot, as though creeping upon all fours, and Rod
saw then that one of his arms was stretched out to him, and that in
the extended hand was a fish.

He advanced a step, reaching out his own hands eagerly, and the wild
creature stopped, cringing as if fearing a blow.

"John Ball! John Ball!" he repeated. He thought of no other words but
those, and advanced bit by bit as he called them gently again and
again. Now he was within ten feet of the old man, now eight, presently
he was so near that he might have reached him in a single leap. Then
he stopped.

The mad hunter laid down his fish. Slowly he retreated, murmuring
incoherent sounds in his beard, then sprang to his feet and with a
wailing cry sped back toward the pool. Swiftly Rod followed. He saw
the form leap from the rocks at its edge, heard a heavy splash, and
all was still!

For many minutes Rod stood with the spray of the cataract dashing in
his face. This time the madman's plunge into the cold depths at his
feet filled him with none of the horror of that first insane leap from
the rock above. Somewhere in that pool the old man was seeking refuge!
What did it mean? His eyes scanned the thin sheet of water that
plunged down from the upper chasm. It was a dozen feet in width and
hid the black wall of rock behind it like a thick veil. What was there
just behind that falling torrent? Was it possible that in the wall
of rock behind the waterfall there was a place where John Ball found
concealment?

Rod returned to camp, convinced that he had at last guessed a solution
to the mystery. John Ball was behind the cataract! The strange
murmurings of the old man who for a few moments had crouched so
close to him still rang in his ears, and he was sure that in these
half-articulate sounds had been John Ball's own name. If there had
been a doubt in his mind before, it was wiped away now. The mad hunter
was John Ball, and with that thought burning in his brain Rod stopped
beside the fish--the madman's offering of peace--and turned his face
once more back toward the black loneliness of the pool.

Unconsciously a sobbing cry of sympathy fell softly from Rod's lips,
and he called John Ball's name again, louder and louder, until
it echoed far down the gloomy depths of the chasm. There came no
response. Then he turned to the fish. John Ball wished them to be
friends, and he had brought this offering! In the firelight Rod saw
that it was a curious looking, dark-colored fish, covered with small
scales that were almost black. It was the size of a large trout, and
yet it was not a trout. The head was thick and heavy, like a sucker's,
and yet it was not a sucker. He looked at this head more closely, and
gave a sudden start when he saw that it had no eyes!

In one great flood the truth swept upon him, the truth of what lay
behind the cataract, of where John Ball had gone! For he held in his
hands an eyeless creature of another world, a world hidden in the
bowels of the earth itself, a proof that beyond the fall was a great
cavern filled with the mystery and the sightless things of eternal
night, and that in this cavern John Ball found his food and made his
home!




CHAPTER XVII


IN A SUBTERRANEAN WORLD

When Mukoki and Wabigoon returned half an hour later the hot-stone
biscuits were still unbaked. The fire was only a bed of coals. Beside
it sat Rod, the strange fish upon the ground at his feet. Before
Mukoki had thrown down the pack of meat which he was carrying he was
showing them this fish. Quickly he related what had happened. He added
to this some of the things which he had thought while sitting by the
fire. The chief of these things were that just behind the cataract was
the entrance to a great cavern, and that in this cavern they would not
only find John Ball, but also the rich storehouse of that treasure of
which they had discovered a part in the pool.

And as the night lengthened there was little talk about the gold and
much about John Ball. Again and again Rod described the madman's
visit, the trembling, pleading voice, the offering of the fish, the
eager glow that had come into the wild eyes when he talked to him and
called him by name. Even Mukoki's stoic heart was struck by the deep
pathos of it all. The mad hunter no longer carried his gun. He no
longer sought their lives. In his crazed brain something new and
wonderful was at work, something that drew him to them, with the
half-fear of an animal, and yet with growing trust. He was pleading
for their companionship, their friendship, and deep down in his heart
Rod felt that the spark of sanity was not completely gone from John
Ball.

When the three adventurers retired to their blankets in the cedar
shelter it was not the thought of gold that quickened their blood in
anticipation of the morning. The passing of an age would not dull the
luster of what they had come to seek. It would wait for them. The
greatest of all things--the sympathy of man for man--had stilled that
other passion in them. John Ball's salvation, and not more gold, was
the day's work ahead of them now.

With the dawn they were up, and by the time it was light enough to see
they were ready for the exploration of whatever was hidden behind the
fall. In a rubber blanket Wabigoon wrapped a rifle and half a dozen
pine torches. Mukoki carried a quantity of cooked meat. Standing on
the edge of the pool Rod pointed into the falling torrent.

"He dived straight under," he said. "The opening to the cavern is
directly behind the shoot of falling water."

Wabi placed his hat and coat upon a rock.

"I'll try it first. Wait until I come back," he said.

Without another word he plunged into the pool. Minute after minute
passed, and he did not reappear. Rod was conscious of a nervous chill
creeping into his blood. But Mukoki was chuckling confidently.

"Found heem!" he replied in response to the white youth's inquiring
look.

As he spoke Wabigoon came up out of the pool like a great fish. Rod
helped him upon the rocks.

"We're two bright ones, we are, Muky!" he exclaimed, as soon as he
gained his breath. "Just behind the fall I ran up against the wall of
rock we found when we were hunting for John Ball, stood on my feet,
and--" he swung his arms suggestively--"there I was, head and
shoulders out of water, looking into a hole as big as a house!"

"Dive easy!" warned the old pathfinder, turning to Rod. "Bump head on
rock--swush!"

"We won't have to dive," continued Wabi. "The water directly under the
fall of the stream isn't more than four feet deep. If we wade into it
from over there we can make it easy."

Taking his waterproof bundle the young Indian slipped into the pool
close up against the wall of rock that formed the foundation of the
upper chasm and plunged straight into the tumbling cataract. Mukoki
followed close behind and preparing himself with a long breath Rod
hurried into this new experience. For a moment he was conscious of a
smothering weight upon him and a thunderous roaring in his ears, and
he was borne irresistibly down. There was still air in his lungs when
he found himself safely through the deluge so he knew that its passage
had taken him only a brief but thrilling instant. For a time he could
see nothing. Then he made out a dark form drawing itself up out of the
water. Beyond that there lay a chaos of midnight blackness, and he
knew that his eyes were staring into the depths of a great cavern!

Gripping the edge of the rock ledge he dragged himself up as both
Wabigoon and Mukoki had done, and found his feet upon a soft floor of
sand. Suddenly he felt a hand clutch his arm. A half-shout, rising
faintly above the wash of the cataract, sounded in his ear.

"Look!"

He wiped the water from his eyes and gazed ahead of him. For a moment
he saw nothing. Then, so faintly that at first it appeared no larger
than a star, he caught the faint glimmer of a light. As he looked it
became more and more distinct, and to his astonishment he saw that
it was slowly rising, like a huge will-o'-the-wisp that had suddenly
risen from the floor of the cavern to float off into the utter
blackness of space above. And even as he stared, gripping Wabi's arm
in his excitement, the strange light began to descend, and quickly
disappeared!

The two boys saw Mukoki slip off into the gloom, and without
questioning his motive they followed close behind. As they progressed
the sound of the fall came more and more faintly to their ears. A
blackness deeper than the gloom of the darkest night environed them,
and the three now held to one another's arms. Rod understood why his
companions lighted no torches. Somewhere ahead of them was another
light, carried by the mad hunter. His blood thrilled with excitement.
Where would John Ball lead them?

Suddenly he became conscious that they were no longer walking on a
level floor of sand but that they were ascending, as the light had
done. Mukoki stopped and for a full minute they stood and listened.
The tumult of the fall came to them in a far, subdued murmur. Beyond
that there was not the breath of a sound in the strange world of gloom
about them. They were about to start on again when something held
them, a whispering, sobbing echo, and Rod's heart seemed to stop its
beating. It died away slowly, and a weird stillness fell after it.
Then came a low moaning cry, a cry that was human in its agony, and
yet which had in it something so near the savage that even Wabigoon
found himself trembling as he strained in futile effort to pierce
the impenetrable gloom ahead. Before the cry had lost itself in the
distances of the cavern Mukoki was leading them on again.

Step by step they followed in the path taken by the strange light. Rod
knew that they were climbing a hill of sand, and that just beyond
it they would see the light again, but he was not prepared for the
startling suddenness with which the next change came. As if a black
curtain had dropped from before their eyes the three adventurers
beheld a scene that halted them in their tracks. A hundred paces away
a huge pitch-pine torch a yard in length was burning in the sand, and
crouching in the red glow of this, his arms stretched out as if in the
supplication of a strange prayer, was John Ball! Just beyond him was
the gleam of water, inky-black in the weird flickerings of the torch,
and toward this John Ball reached out in his grief. His voice came up
softly to the three watchers now, so low that even in the vast silence
of the cavern it could barely be heard. To Roderick Drew it was as if
the strange creature below him was sobbing like a heart-broken child,
and he whispered in Wabigoon's ear. Then, foot by foot, so gently that
his moccasined feet made no sound, he approached the madman.

Half-way to him he paused.

"Hello, John Ball!" he called softly.

The faint light of the torch was falling upon him, and he advanced
another step. The murmuring of the wild man ceased, but he made no
movement. He still knelt in his rigid posture, his arms stretched
toward the black chaos beyond him. Rod came very close to him before
he spoke again.

"Is that you, John Ball?"

Slowly the kneeling figure turned, and once more Rod saw in those wild
eyes, gleaming brightly now in the torch-light, the softer, thrilling
glow of recognition and returning reason. He reached out his own arms
and advanced boldly, calling John Ball's name, and the madman made no
retreat but crouched lower in the sand, strange, soft sounds again
falling from his lips. Rod had come within half a dozen feet of him
when he sprang up with the quickness of a cat, and with a wailing
cry plunged waist deep into the water. With his arms stretched
entreatingly into the mysterious world beyond the torch-light he
turned his face to the white youth, and Rod knew that he was trying as
best he could to tell him something.

"What is it, John Ball?"

He went to the edge of the black water and waded out until it rose to
his knees, his eyes staring into the blackness.

"What is it?"

He, too, pointed with one arm, and the madman gave an excited gesture.
Then he placed his hands funnel-shaped to his mouth, as Rod had often
seen Wabi and Mukoki do when calling moose, and there burst from him a
far-reaching cry, and Rod's heart gave a sudden bound as he listened,
for the cry was that of a woman's name!

"Dol--o--res-s-s-s--Dol--o--res-s-s-s--"

The cry died away in distant murmuring echoes, and with an answering
cry Rod shouted forth the name which he fancied John Ball had spoken.

"Dolores! Dolores! Dolores!"

There came a sudden leaping plunge, and John Ball was at his feet,
clasping him about the knees, and sobbing again and again that
name--Dolores. Rod put his arms about the old man's shoulders, and the
gray, shaggy head fell against him. The sobbing voice grew lower, the
weight of the head greater, and after a little Rod called loudly for
Mukoki and Wabigoon, for there was no longer movement or sound from
the form at his feet, and he knew that something had happened to John
Ball. The two Indians were quickly at his side, and together they
carried the unconscious form of Ball within the circle of torch-light.
The old man's eyes were closed, his claw-like fingers were clenched
fiercely upon his breast, and not until Mukoki placed a hand over his
heart did the three know that he was still breathing.

"Now is our time to get him to camp," said Wabi. "Lead the way with
the torch, Rod!"

There was not much weight to John Ball, and the two Indians carried
him easily. At the fall the rubber blanket was wound about his head
and the adventurers plunged under the cataract with their burden. It
was an hour after that before the old man opened his eyes again. Rod
was close beside him and for a full minute the mad hunter gazed
up into his face, then once more he sank off into that strange
unconsciousness which had overcome him in the cavern. Rod rose
white-faced and turned to Mukoki and Wabigoon.

"I'm afraid--he's dying," he said.

The Indians made no answer. For several minutes the three sat silently
about John Ball watching for signs of returning consciousness. At
last Mukoki roused himself to take a pot of soup from the fire. The
movement seemed to stir John Ball into life, and Rod was at his side
again, holding a cup of water to his lips. After a little he helped
the old man to sit up, and a spoonful at a time the warm soup was fed
to him.

Through the whole of that day he returned to consciousness only for
brief intervals, lapsing back into a death-like sleep after each
awakening. During one of these periods of unconsciousness Wabi cut
short the tangled beard and hair, and for the first time they saw
in all its emaciation the thin, ghastly face of the man who, half a
century before, had drawn the map that led them to the gold. There was
little change in his condition during the night that followed, except
that now and then he muttered incoherently, and at these times Rod
always caught in his ravings the name that he had heard in the cavern.
The next day there was no change. And there was still none on the
third. Even Mukoki, who had tried every expedient of wilderness craft
in nursing, gave up in despair. So far as they could see John Ball had
no fever. Yet three-quarters of the time he lay as if dead. Nothing
but soup could be forced between his lips.

On the second day Wabi revisited the subterranean world beyond the
cataract. When he came back he had discovered the secret of the
treasure in the pool. The gold came from the cavern. The soft sand
through which they had followed the strange light was rich in dust and
nuggets. During the floods of spring water came into the cavern from
somewhere, and flowing for a brief space out through the mouth of the
cave brought with it the precious burden of treasure-laden sand which
was dumped into the pool. The constant wash of the cataract had caused
most of the sand to overflow into the running stream, but the heavier
gold-dust and nuggets remained in the trap into which they had fallen.

But the joy that came of this discovery was subdued by thoughts of
John Ball. The gold meant everything to Rod, the realization of his
hopes and ambitions; and he knew that it meant everything to his
mother, and to all those who belonged to Mukoki and Wabigoon. But the
gold could wait. They had already accumulated a small fortune, and
they could return for the rest a little later. At present they must do
something for John Ball, the man to whom they were indebted for all
that they had found, and to whom the treasure really belonged. On the
third day Rod laid his plans before Wabi and Mukoki.

"We must take John Ball back to the Post as quickly as we can," he
said. "It is our only chance of saving him. If we start now, while
the water in the creek is deep enough to float our canoe, we can make
Wabinosh House in ten or fifteen days."

"It will be impossible to paddle against the swift current," said
Wabi.

"That is true. But we can put John Ball into the canoe and tow him
up-stream. It will be a long wade and hard work, but--"

He looked at Wabi in silence, then added,

"Do we want John Ball to live, or do we want him to die?"

"If I thought he would live I would wade a thousand miles to save
him," rejoined the young Indian. "It means little to us but work. We
know where the rest of the gold is and can return to it within a few
weeks."

If there had been a doubt in the boys' minds as to the right course to
pursue John Ball settled it himself that very afternoon. He awakened
from an unusually long stupor. His eyes were burning with a new light,
and as Rod bent over him he whispered softly, but distinctly,

"Dolores--Dolores--Where is Dolores?"

"Who is Dolores, John Ball?" whispered the white youth, his heart
thumping wildly. "Who is Dolores?"

Ball drew up one of his emaciated hands and clasped it to his head,
and a sobbing moan fell from his lips. Then, after a moment, he
repeated, as though to himself,

"Dolores--Dolores--Who is Dolores?"

The Indians had come near, and heard. But John Ball said no more. He
swallowed a few spoonfuls of soup and fell again into his death-like
trance.

"Who is Dolores?" repeated Wabigoon, his face whitening as he looked
at Rod. "Is there somebody else in the cavern?"

"He is talking of some one whom he probably knew forty or fifty years
ago," replied Rod. But his own face was white. He stared hard at
Wabigoon, and a strange look came into Mukoki's face.

"Dolores," he mused, without taking his eyes from Wabi. "It's a
woman's name, or a girl's name. We must save John Ball! We must start
for Wabinosh House--now!"

"While he's unconscious we can tie the rope about him and hoist him
into the upper chasm," quickly added Wabigoon. "Muky, get to work. We
move this minute!"

It was still two hours before dusk, and now that they had determined
on returning to Wabinosh House the adventurers lost no time in getting
under way. Wabi climbed the rope that was suspended from the upper
chasm, and that part of their equipment which it was necessary to take
back with them was hoisted up by him. Mukoki sheltered the rest in the
old cabin. John Ball was drawn up last. For an hour after that, until
the gray shadows of night began settling about them, the three waded
up the shallow stream, pulling the canoe and its unconscious burden
after them. That night the madman was not left unwatched for a minute.
Mukoki sat beside him until eleven o'clock. Then Wabi took his turn. A
little after midnight Rod was aroused by being violently pulled from
his bed of balsam boughs.

"For the love of Heaven, get up!" whispered the young Indian. "He's
talking, Rod! He's talking about Dolores, and about some kind of a
great beast that's bigger than anything that ever lived up here!
Listen!"

The madman was moaning softly.

"I've killed it, Dolores--I've killed it--killed it! Where is Dolores?
Where--is--" There came a deep sigh, and John Ball was quiet.

"Killed what?" panted Rod, his heart thumping until it choked him.

"The beast--whatever it was," whispered Wabi. "Rod, something terrible
happened in that cavern! We don't know the whole story. The Frenchmen
who killed themselves for possession of the birch-bark map played
only a small part in it. The greater part was played by John Ball and
Dolores!"

For a long time the two listened, but the old man made no sound or
movement.

"Better go back to bed," said Wabi. "I thought if he was going to keep
it up you would like to hear. I'll call you at two."

But Rod could not sleep. For a long time he lay awake thinking of John
Ball and his strange ravings. Who was Dolores? What terrible tragedy
had that black world under the mountains some time beheld? Despite his
better reason an indefinable sensation of uneasiness possessed him as
the madman's sobbing out of the woman's name recurred to him. He spoke
nothing of this to Wabi when he relieved him, and he said nothing of
it during the days that followed. They were days of unending toil, of
fierce effort to beat out death in the race to Wabinosh House.

For it seemed that the end of time was very near for John Ball. On the
fourth day his thin cheeks showed signs of fever, and on the fifth he
was tossing in delirium. The race now continued by night as well as
by day, only an hour or two of rest being snatched at a time. During
these days John Ball babbled ceaselessly of Dolores, and great beasts,
and the endless cavern; and now the beasts began taking the form of
strange people whose eyes gleamed from out of masses of fur, and who
had hands, and flung spears. On the eighth day the madman sank
back into his old lethargy. On the fourth day after that the three
adventurers, worn and exhausted, reached the shore of Lake Nipigon.
Thirty miles across the lake was Wabinosh House, and it was decided
that Mukoki and Rod should leave for assistance, while Wabigoon
remained with John Ball. The two rolled themselves in their blankets
immediately after supper, and after three hours' sleep were awakened
by the young Indian. All that night they paddled with only occasional
moments of rest. The sun was just rising over the forests when they
grounded their canoe close to the Post. As Rod sprang ashore he saw a
figure walk slowly out from the edge of the forest an eighth of a mile
away. Even at that distance he recognized Minnetaki! He looked at the
sharp-eyed Mukoki. He, too, had seen and recognized the girl.

"Muky, I'm going along in the edge of the woods and give her a
surprise," said Rod courageously. "Will you wait here?"

Mukoki grinned a nodding assent, and the youth darted into the edge of
the forest. He was breathless when he came up a hundred yards behind
the girl, screened from view by the trees. Softly he whistled. It was
a signal that Minnetaki had taught him on his first trip into the
North, and he knew of only two who used it in all that Northland, and
those two were the Indian maiden and himself. The girl turned as
she heard the trilling note, and Rod drew himself farther back.
He whistled again, more loudly than before, and Minnetaki came
hesitatingly toward the forest's edge, and when he whistled a third
time there came a timid response from her, as if she recognized and
yet doubted the notes that floated to her from the shadows of the
balsams.

Again Rod whistled, laughing as he drew a little farther back, and
again Minnetaki answered, peering in among the trees. He saw the
wondering, half-expectant glow in her eyes, and suddenly crying out
her name he sprang from his concealment. With a little cry of joy and
with hands outstretched Minnetaki ran to meet him.




CHAPTER XVIII


JOHN BALL'S STORY

That same morning two big canoes set out across Lake Nipigon for
Wabigoon and John Ball. Mukoki returned with the canoes, but Rod
remained at the Post, and not a moment's rest did he have during the
whole of that day from the eager questions of those whom he had so
completely surprised by his unexpected return. Few stories could have
been more thrilling than his, though he told it in the simplest manner
possible. Rod's appearance more than his words was evidence of
the trials he and his companions had passed through. His face was
emaciated to startling thinness by desperate exertion and lack of
sleep, and both his face and his hands were covered with scratches and
bruises. Not until late in the afternoon did he go to bed, and it was
noon the following day when he awoke from his heavy slumber.

The canoes had returned, and John Ball was in the doctor's care. At
dinner Rod and Wabi were made to go over their adventures again, and
even Mukoki, who had joined them in this reunion, was not allowed to
escape the endless questioning of Minnetaki, the factor's wife, and
Rod's mother. Rod was seated at the table between Mrs. Drew and
Minnetaki. Several times during the conversation he felt the young
girl's hand touch his arm. Once, when the factor spoke about their
return to the gold in the cavern, this mysterious signaling of
Minnetaki's took the form of a pinch that made him squirm. Not until
after dinner, and the two were alone, did he begin to comprehend.

"I'm ashamed of you, Roderick Drew!" said the girl, standing before
him in mock displeasure. "You and Wabi were the stupidest things I
ever saw at dinner! Have you all forgotten your promise to me?--your
promise that I should go with you on your next trip? I wanted you to
speak about it right there at dinner!"

"But I--I--couldn't!" stammered Rod awkwardly.

"But I'm going!" said Minnetaki decisively. "I'm going with you boys
on this next trip--if I have to run away! It's not fair for Wabi and
Mukoki and you to leave me alone all of the time. And, besides, I've
been making all the arrangements while you were gone. I've won over
mamma and your mother, and Maballa, mamma's Indian woman, will go with
me. There's just one who says--'No!'" And Minnetaki clasped her hands
pathetically.

"And that's papa," completed Rod, laughing.

"Yes."

"Well, if he is the only one against us we stand a good chance of
winning."

"I'm going to have mamma and Wabigoon get him by themselves to-night,"
said the girl. "Papa will do anything on earth for her, and he thinks
Wabi is the best boy on earth. Mamma says she will lock the door and
won't let him out until he has given his promise. Oh, what a glorious
time we'll have!"

"Perhaps he would go with us," suggested Rod.

"No, he couldn't leave the Post. If he went Wabi would have to stay."

Rod was counting on his fingers.

"That means six in our next expedition,--Wabi, Mukoki, John Ball and
myself, and you and Maballa. Why, it'll be a regular picnic party!"

Minnetaki's eyes were brimming with fun.

"Do you know," she said, "that Maballa thinks Mukoki is just about the
nicest Indian that ever lived? Oh, I'd be so glad if--if--"

She puckered her mouth into a round, red O, and left Rod to guess the
rest. It was not difficult for him to understand.

"So would I," he cried. Then he added,

"Muky is the best fellow on earth."

"And Maballa is just as good," said the girl loyally.

The boy held out his hand.

"Let's shake on that, Minnetaki! I'll handle Mukoki, you take care of
Maballa. What a picnic this next trip will be!"

"And there'll be lots and lots of adventures, won't there?" asked the
girl a little anxiously.

"Plenty of them." Rod became immediately serious. "This will be the
most important of all our trips, Minnetaki, that is, if John Ball
lives. I haven't told the others, but I believe that great cavern
holds something for us besides gold!"

The smile left the girl's face. Her eyes were soft and eager.

"You believe that--Dolores--"

"I don't know what to believe. But--we'll find something there!"

For an hour Rod and Minnetaki talked of John Ball and of the strange
things he said in his delirium. Then the girl rejoined Mrs. Drew and
the princess mother, while Rod went in search of Mukoki and Wabigoon.
That night the big event happened. George Newsome, the factor, gave
a reluctant consent which meant that Wabi's sister and Maballa would
accompany the adventurers on their next journey into the untraveled
solitudes of Hudson Bay.

For a week John Ball hovered between life and death. After that his
improvement was slow but sure, and each day added strength to his
emaciated body and a new light to his eyes. At the end of the second
week there was no question but that he was slowly returning to sanity.
Gradually he came to know those who sat beside his bed, and whenever
Rod visited him he insisted on holding the youth's hand. At first the
sight of Minnetaki or her mother, or of Mrs. Drew, had a startling
effect on him and in their presence he would moan ceaselessly the name
Rod first heard in the cavern. A little at a time the language of
those about him came back to the old man, and bit by bit those who
waited and listened and watched learned the story of John Ball.
Midsummer came before he could gather the scattered threads of his
life in his memory, and even then there were breaks in this story
which seemed but trivial things to John Ball, but which to the others
meant the passing of forgotten years.

In fact, years played but a small part in the strange story that fell
from the old man's lips. "In time," said the Post physician, "he will
remember everything. Now only the most important happenings in his
life have returned to him."

John Ball could not remember the date when, as a young boy, he
left York Factory, on Hudson Bay, to come a thousand miles down to
civilization in company with the two Frenchmen who killed themselves
in the old cabin. But the slip of paper which Rod had discovered
filled that gap. He was the son of the factor at York Factory, and was
to spend a year at school in Montreal. On their trip down it was the
boy who found gold in the chasm. John Ball could remember none of the
details. He only knew that they remained to gather the treasure, and
that he, as its discoverer and the son of one of the lords of the
Hudson Bay Company, was to receive twice the share of the others, and
that in the autumn they were to return to York Factory instead of
going on to Montreal. He remembered indistinctly a quarrel over the
gold, and after that of writing some sort of agreement, and then,
early one morning, he awoke to find the two Frenchmen standing over
him, and after that, for a long time, everything seemed to pass as in
a dream.

When he awoke into life he was no longer in the chasm, but among a
strange people who were so small that they reached barely to his
shoulders, and who dressed in fur, and carried spears, and though the
sick man said no more about these people those who listened to him
knew that he had wandered far north among the Eskimos. They treated
him kindly, and he lived among them for a long time, hunting and
fishing with them, and sleeping in houses built of ice and snow.

The next that John Ball remembered was of white people. In some way
he returned to York Factory, and he knew that when this happened many
years had passed, for his father and mother were dead, and there were
strangers at the Post. At this time John Ball must have returned
fully to his reason again. He remembered, faintly, leading several
unsuccessful expeditions in search of the gold which he and the
Frenchmen had discovered, and that once he went to a great city, which
must have been Montreal, and that he stayed there a long time doing
something for the Hudson Bay Company, and met a girl whom he married.
When he spoke of the girl John Ball's eyes would glow feverishly and
her name would fall from him in a moaning sob. For as yet returning
reason had not placed the hand of age upon him. It was as if he was
awakening from a deep sleep, and Dolores, his young wife, had been
with him but a few hours before.

There came another break in John Ball's life after this. He could not
remember how long they lived in Montreal, but he knew that after a
time he returned with his wife into the far North, and that they were
very happy, and one summer set off in a canoe to search for the lost
chasm together. They found it. How or when he could not remember.
After this John Ball's story was filled with wild visions of a great
black world where there was neither sun nor moon nor stars, and they
found gold and dug it by the light of fires. And one day the woman
went a little way back in this world and never came back.

It was then that the old madness returned. In his search for his lost
wife John Ball never found the end of the great cavern. He saw strange
people, he fought great beasts in this black world that were larger
than the biggest moose in the forests, and he told of rushing torrents
and thundering cataracts in the bowels of the earth. Even in his
returning sanity the old man told these things as true.

George Newsome, the factor, lost no time in writing to the Company at
Montreal, inquiring about John Ball, and a month later he received
word that a man by that name had worked as an inspector of raw furs
during the years 1877 and 1878. He had left Montreal for the North
thirty years before. In all probability he soon after went in search
of the lost gold, and for more than a quarter of a century had lived
as a wild man in the solitudes.

It was at this time in the convalescence of the doctor's patient that
Roderick's mother made a suggestion which took the Post by storm.
It was that the factor and his family accompany her and Rod back to
civilization for a few weeks' visit. To the astonishment of all, and
especially to Minnetaki and the princess mother, the factor fell in
heartily with the scheme, with the stipulation that the Drews return
with them early in the autumn. An agent from the head office of the
Company had come up for a month's fishing and he cheerfully expressed
his willingness to take charge of affairs at the Post during their
absence.

The happiness of Rod and Wabi was complete when Mukoki was compelled
to give his promise to go with them. For several days the old warrior
withstood their combined assaults, but at last he surrendered when
Minnetaki put her arms around his neck and nestled her soft cheek
against his leathery face, with the avowal that she would not move a
step unless he went with her.

So it happened, one beautiful summer morning, that three big canoes
put out into the lake from Wabinosh House and headed into the
South, and only Mukoki, of all the seven who were going down into
civilization, felt something that was not joy as the forests slipped
behind them. For Mukoki was to get a glimpse of a new world, a world
far from the land of his fathers, and the loyal heart inside his
caribou-skin coat quickened its pulse a little as he thought of the
wonderful journey.

Thus began the journey to civilization.




THE END






End of Project Gutenberg's The Gold Hunters, by James Oliver Curwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLD HUNTERS ***

***** This file should be named 11668-8.txt or 11668-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/6/6/11668/

Produced by Roger Frank and Sue Clark, Suzanne Shell, Bj√∂rn Lijnema 
and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year. For example:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL

