The Project Gutenberg EBook of Chocolate and Cocoa Recipes and Home Made
Candy Recipes, by Miss Parloa

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Chocolate and Cocoa Recipes and Home Made Candy Recipes

Author: Miss Parloa

Release Date: August 13, 2004 [EBook #13177]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHOCOLATE ***




Produced by Paul Murray, Annika and PG Distributed Proofreaders.
This book was produced from images from Feeding America: The Historic
American Cookbook Project at Michigan State University










Chocolate and Cocoa Recipes By Miss Parloa

and

Home Made Candy Recipes By Mrs. Janet McKenzie Hill


Compliments of Walter Baker & Co., Ltd.

ESTABLISHED DORCHESTER
1780              MASS


1909



[Illustration: BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF WALTER BAKER & CO.'S MILLS. DORCHESTER
AND MILTON, MASS. FLOOR SPACE, 350,000 SQUARE FEET.]




Cocoa and Chocolate

The term "Cocoa," a corruption of "Cacao," is almost universally used in
English-speaking countries to designate the seeds of the small tropical
tree known to botanists as THEOBROMA CACAO, from which a great variety
of preparations under the name of cocoa and chocolate for eating and
drinking are made. The name "Chocolatl" is nearly the same in most
European languages, and is taken from the Mexican name of the drink,
"Chocolate" or "Cacahuatl." The Spaniards found chocolate in common use
among the Mexicans at the time of the invasion under Cortez in 1519, and
it was introduced into Spain immediately after. The Mexicans not only
used chocolate as a staple article of food, but they used the seeds of
the cacao tree as a medium of exchange.

No better evidence could be offered of the great advance which has been
made in recent years in the knowledge of dietetics than the remarkable
increase in the consumption of cocoa and chocolate in this country. The
amount retained for home consumption in 1860 was only 1,181,054
pounds--about 3-5 of an ounce for each inhabitant. The amount retained
for home consumption for the year ending Dec. 31, 1908, was 93,956,721
pounds--over 16 ounces for each inhabitant.

Although there was a marked increase in the consumption of tea and
coffee during the same period, the ratio of increase fell far below that
of cocoa. It is evident that the coming American is going to be less of
a tea and coffee drinker, and more of a cocoa and chocolate drinker.
This is the natural result of a better knowledge of the laws of health,
and of the food value of a beverage which nourishes the body while it
also stimulates the brain.

Baron von Liebig, one of the best-known writers on dietetics, says:

"It is a perfect food, as wholesome as delicious, a beneficient restorer
of exhausted power; but its quality must be good and it must be
carefully prepared. It is highly nourishing and easily digested, and is
fitted to repair wasted strength, preserve health, and prolong life. It
agrees with dry temperaments and convalescents; with mothers who nurse
their children; with those whose occupations oblige them to undergo
severe mental strains; with public speakers, and with all those who give
to work a portion of the time needed for sleep. It soothes both stomach
and brain, and for this reason, as well as for others, it is the best
friend of those engaged in literary pursuits."

M. Brillat-Savarin, in his entertaining and valuable work, _Physiologie
du Goût_, says: "Chocolate came over the mountains [from Spain to
France] with Anne of Austria, daughter of Philip III and queen of Louis
XIII. The Spanish monks also spread the knowledge of it by the presents
they made to their brothers in France. It is well known that Linnæus
called the fruit of the cocoa tree _theobroma_, 'food for the gods.' The
cause of this emphatic qualification has been sought, and attributed by
some to the fact that he was extravagantly fond of chocolate; by others
to his desire to please his confessor; and by others to his gallantry, a
queen having first introduced it into France.

"The Spanish ladies of the New World, it is said, carried their love for
chocolate to such a degree that, not content with partaking of it
several times a day, they had it sometimes carried after them to church.
This favoring of the senses often drew upon them the censures of the
bishop; but the Reverend Father Escobar, whose metaphysics were as
subtle as his morality was accommodating, declared, formally, that a
fast was not broken by chocolate prepared with water; thus wire-drawing,
in favor of his penitents, the ancient adage, '_Liquidum non frangit
jejunium._'

"Time and experience," he says further, "have shown that chocolate,
carefully prepared, is an article of food as wholesome as it is
agreeable; that it is nourishing, easy of digestion, and does not
possess those qualities injurious to beauty with which coffee has been
reproached; that it is excellently adapted to persons who are obliged to
a great concentration of intellect; in the toils of the pulpit or the
bar, and especially to travellers; that it suits the most feeble
stomach; that excellent effects have been produced by it in chronic
complaints, and that it is a last resource in affections of the pylorus.

"Some persons complain of being unable to digest chocolate; others, on
the contrary, pretend that it has not sufficient nourishment, and that
the effect disappears too soon. It is probable that the former have only
themselves to blame, and that the chocolate which they use is of bad
quality or badly made; for good and well-made chocolate must suit every
stomach which retains the slightest digestive power.

"In regard to the others, the remedy is an easy one: they should
reinforce their breakfast with a _pâté_, a cutlet, or a kidney, moisten
the whole with a good draught of soconusco chocolate, and thank God for
a stomach of such superior activity.

"This gives me an opportunity to make an observation whose accuracy may
be depended upon.

"After a good, complete, and copious breakfast, if we take, in addition,
a cup of well-made chocolate, digestion will be perfectly accomplished
in three hours, and we may dine whenever we like. Out of zeal for
science, and by dint of eloquence, I have induced many ladies to try
this experiment. They all declared, in the beginning, that it would kill
them; but they have all thriven on it and have not failed to glorify
their teacher.

"The people who make constant use of chocolate are the ones who enjoy
the most steady health, and are the least subject to a multitude of
little ailments which destroy the comfort of life; their plumpness is
also more equal. These are two advantages which every one may verify
among his own friends, and wherever the practice is in use."

In corroboration of M. Brillat-Savarin's statement as to the value of
chocolate as an aid to digestion, we may quote from one of Mme. de
Sévigné's letters to her daughter:

"I took chocolate night before last to digest my dinner, in order to
have a good supper. I took some yesterday for nourishment, so as to be
able to fast until night. What I consider amusing about chocolate is
that it acts according to the wishes of the one who takes it."

Chocolate appears to have been highly valued as a remedial agent by the
leading physicians of that day. Christoph Ludwig Hoffman wrote a
treatise entitled, "Potus Chocolate," in which he recommended it in many
diseases, and instanced the case of Cardinal Richelieu, who, he stated,
was cured of general atrophy by its use.

A French officer who served in the West Indies for a period of fifteen
years, during the early part of the last century, wrote, as the result
of his personal observations, a treatise on "The Natural History of
Chocolate, Being a distinct and Particular Account of the Cacao Tree,
its Growth and Culture, and the Preparation, Excellent Properties, and
Medicinal Virtues of its Fruit," which received the approbation of the
Regent of the Faculty of Medicine at Paris, and which was translated and
published in London, in 1730. After describing the different methods of
raising and curing the fruit and preparing it for food (which it is not
worth while to reproduce here, as the methods have essentially changed
since that time), he goes on to demonstrate, as the result of actual
experiment, that chocolate is a substance "very temperate, very
nourishing, and of easy digestion; very proper to repair the exhausted
spirits and decayed strength; and very suitable to preserve the health
and prolong the lives of old men....

"I could produce several instances," he says, "in favor of this
excellent nourishment; but I shall content myself with two only, equally
certain and decisive, in proof of its goodness. The first is an
experiment of chocolate's being taken for the only nourishment--made by
a surgeon's wife of Martinico. She had lost, by a very deplorable
accident, her lower jaw, which reduced her to such a condition that she
did not know how to subsist. She was not capable of taking anything
solid, and not rich enough to live upon jellies and nourishing broths.
In this strait she determined to take three dishes of chocolate,
prepared after the manner of the country, one in the morning, one at
noon, and one at night. There chocolate is nothing else but cocoa
kernels dissolved in hot water, with sugar, and seasoned with a bit of
cinnamon. This new way of life succeeded so well that she has lived a
long while since, more lively and robust than before this accident.

"I had the second relation from a gentleman of Martinico, and one of my
friends not capable of a falsity. He assured me that in his neighborhood
an infant of four months old unfortunately lost his nurse, and its
parents not being able to put it to another, resolved, through
necessity, to feed it with chocolate. The success was very happy, for
the infant came on to a miracle, and was neither less healthy nor less
vigorous than those who are brought up by the best nurses.

"Before chocolate was known in Europe, good old wine was called the milk
of old men; but this title is now applied with greater reason to
chocolate, since its use has become so common that it has been perceived
that chocolate is, with respect to them, what milk is to infants. In
reality, if one examines the nature of chocolate a little, with respect
to the constitution of aged persons, it seems as though the one was made
on purpose to remedy the defects of the other, and that it is truly the
panacea of old age."

The three associated beverages, cocoa, tea, and coffee are known to the
French as _aromatic_ drinks. Each of these has its characteristic aroma.
The fragrance and flavor are so marked that they cannot be imitated by
any artificial products, although numerous attempts have been made in
regard to all three. Hence the detection of adulteration is not a
difficult matter. Designing persons, aware of the extreme difficulty of
imitating these substances, have undertaken to employ lower grades, and,
by manipulation, copy, as far as may be, the higher sorts. Every one
knows how readily tea, and coffee, for that matter, will take up odors
and flavors from substances placed near them. This is abundantly
exemplified in the country grocery or general store, where the teas and
coffees share in the pervasive fragrance of the cheese and kerosene. But
perhaps it is not so widely understood that some of these very teas and
coffees had been artificially flavored or corrected before they reached
their destination in this country.

Cacao lends itself very readily to such preliminary treatment. In a
first-class article, the beans should be of the highest excellence; they
should be carefully grown on the plantation and there prepared with
great skill, arriving in the factory in good condition. In the factory
they should simply receive the mechanical treatment requisite to
develop their high and attractive natural flavor and fragrance. They
should be most carefully shelled after roasting and finely ground
without concealed additions. This is the process in all honest
manufactories of the cacao products.

Now, as a matter of fact, in the preparation of many of the cacao
products on the market, a wholly different course has been pursued.
Beans of poor quality are used, because of their cheapness, and in some
instances they are only imperfectly, if at all, shelled before grinding.
Chemical treatment is relied on to correct in part the odor and taste of
such inferior goods, and artificial flavors, other than the time-honored
natural vanilla and the like, are added freely. The detection of such
imposition is easy enough to the expert, but is difficult to the novice;
therefore the public is largely unable to discriminate between the good
and the inferior, and it is perforce compelled to depend almost entirely
on the character and reputation of the manufacturer.

A distinguished London Physician, in giving some hints concerning the
proper preparation of cocoa, says:

"Start with a pure cocoa of undoubted quality and excellence of
manufacture, and which bears the name of a respectable firm. This point
is important, for there are many cocoas on the market which have been
doctored by the addition of alkali, starch, malt, kola, hops, etc."

Baker's Breakfast Cocoa is absolutely pure, and, being ground to an
extraordinary degree of fineness, is highly soluble. The analyst of the
Massachusetts State Board of Health states in his recent valuable work
on "Food Inspection and Analysis," that the treatment of cocoa with
alkali for the purpose of producing a more perfect emulsion is
objectionable, even if not considered as a form of adulteration. Cocoa
thus treated is generally darker in color than the pure article. The
legitimate means, he says, for making it as soluble as possible is to
pulverize it very fine, so that particles remain in even suspension and
form a smooth paste.

That is the way the Baker Cocoa is treated. It has received the Grand
Prize--the highest award ever given in this country, and altogether 52
highest awards in Europe and America.




Choice Recipes by Miss Maria Parloa

SPECIALLY PREPARED FOR WALTER BAKER & Co. LTD.


PLAIN CHOCOLATE

For six people, use one quart of milk, two ounces of Walter Baker &
Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate, one tablespoonful of cornstarch, three
tablespoonfuls of sugar, and two tablespoonfuls of hot water.

Mix the cornstarch with one gill of the milk. Put the remainder of the
milk on to heat in the double-boiler. When the milk comes to the boiling
point, stir in the cornstarch and cook for ten minutes. Have the
chocolate cut in fine bits, and put it in a small iron or granite-ware
pan; add the sugar and water, and place the pan over a hot fire. Stir
constantly until the mixture is smooth and glossy. Add this to the hot
milk, and beat the mixture with a whisk until it is frothy. Or, the
chocolate may be poured back and forth from the boiler to a pitcher,
holding high the vessel from which you pour. This will give a thick
froth. Serve at once.

If you prefer not to have the chocolate thick, omit the cornstarch. If
condensed milk is used, substitute water for the milk named above and
add three tablespoonfuls of condensed milk when the chocolate is added.


CHOCOLATE, VIENNA STYLE

Use four ounces of Walter Baker & Co.'s Vanilla Chocolate, one quart of
milk, three tablespoonfuls of hot water, and one tablespoonful of sugar.

Cut the chocolate in fine bits. Put the milk on the stove in the
double-boiler, and when it has been heated to the boiling point, put the
chocolate, sugar and water in a small iron or granite-ware pan, and stir
over a hot fire until smooth and glossy. Stir this mixture into the hot
milk, and beat well with a whisk. Serve at once, putting a tablespoonful
of whipped cream in each cup and then filling up with the chocolate.

The plain chocolate may be used instead of the vanilla, but in that case
use a teaspoonful of vanilla extract and three generous tablespoonfuls
of sugar instead of one.


BREAKFAST COCOA

Walter Baker & Co.'s Breakfast Cocoa is powdered so fine that it can be
dissolved by pouring boiling water on it. For this reason it is often
prepared at the table. A small teaspoonful of the powder is put in the
cup with a teaspoonful of sugar; on this is poured two-thirds of a cup
of boiling water, and milk or cream is added to suit the individual
taste. This is very convenient; but cocoa is not nearly so good when
prepared in this manner as when it is boiled.

For six cupfuls of cocoa use two tablespoonfuls of the powder, two
tablespoonfuls of sugar, half a pint of boiling water, and a pint and a
half of milk. Put the milk on the stove in the double-boiler. Put the
cocoa and sugar in a saucepan, and gradually pour the hot water upon
them, stirring all the time. Place the saucepan on the fire and stir
until the contents boil. Let this mixture boil for five minutes; then
add the boiling milk and serve.

A gill of cream is a great addition to this cocoa.

Scalded milk may be used in place of boiled milk, if preferred. For
flavoring, a few grains of salt and half a teaspoonful of vanilla
extract may be added.


CHOCOLATE LAYER CAKE

Beat half a cupful of butter to a cream, and gradually beat into it one
cupful of sugar. When this is light, beat in half a cupful of milk, a
little at a time, and one teaspoonful of vanilla. Beat the whites of six
eggs to a stiff froth. Mix half a teaspoonful of baking powder with two
scant cupfuls of sifted flour. Stir the flour and whites of eggs
alternately into the mixture. Have three deep tin plates well buttered,
and spread two-thirds of the batter in two of them.

Into the remaining batter stir one ounce of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium
No. 1 Chocolate, melted, and spread this batter in the third plate. Bake
the cakes in a moderate oven for about twenty minutes. Put a layer of
white cake on a large plate, and spread with white icing. Put the dark
cake on this, and also spread with white icing. On this put the third
cake. Spread with chocolate icing.

TO MAKE THE ICING. Put into a granite-ware saucepan two gills of sugar
and one of water, and boil gently until bubbles begin to come from the
bottom--say, about five minutes. Take from the fire instantly. Do not
stir or shake the sugar while it is cooking. Pour the hot syrup in a
thin stream into the whites of two eggs that have been beaten to a stiff
froth, beating the mixture all the time. Continue to beat until the
icing is thick. Flavor with one teaspoonful of vanilla. Use two-thirds
of this as a white icing, and to the remaining third add one ounce of
melted chocolate. To melt the chocolate, shave it fine and put in a cup,
which is then to be placed in a pan of boiling water.


CHOCOLATE CAKE

For two sheets of cake, use three ounces of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium
No. 1 Chocolate, three eggs, one cupful and three-fourths of sifted
pastry flour, one cupful and three-fourths of sugar, half a cupful of
butter, half a cupful of milk, half a teaspoonful of vanilla extract,
one teaspoonful and a half of baking powder.

Grate the chocolate. Beat the butter to a cream, and gradually beat in
the sugar. Beat in the milk and vanilla, then the eggs (already well
beaten), next the chocolate, and finally the flour, in which the baking
powder should be mixed. Pour into two well buttered shallow cake pans.
Bake for twenty-five minutes in a moderate oven. Frost or not, as you
like.


CHOCOLATE MARBLE CAKE

Put one ounce of Walter Baker & Co.'s Chocolate and one tablespoonful of
butter in a cup, and set this in a pan of boiling water. Beat to a cream
half a cupful of butter and one cupful of sugar. Gradually beat in half
a cupful of milk. Now add the whites of six eggs beaten to a stiff
froth, one teaspoonful of vanilla, and a cupful and a half of sifted
flour, in which is mixed one teaspoonful of baking powder. Put about
one-third of this mixture into another bowl, and stir the melted butter
and chocolate into it. Drop the white-and-brown mixture in spoonfuls
into a well buttered deep cake pan, and bake in a moderate oven for
about forty-five minutes; or, the cake can be baked in a sheet and iced
with a chocolate or white icing.


CHOCOLATE GLACÉ CAKE

Beat to a cream a generous half cupful of butter, and gradually beat
into this one cupful of sugar. Add one ounce of Walter Baker & Co.'s
Premium No. 1 Chocolate, melted; also two unbeaten eggs. Beat vigorously
for five minutes; then stir in half a cupful of milk, and lastly, one
cupful and a half of flour, with which has been mixed one generous
teaspoonful of baking powder. Flavor with one teaspoonful of vanilla.
Pour into a buttered, shallow cake pan, and bake for half an hour in a
moderate oven. When cool, spread with glacé frosting.

GLACÉ FROSTING. Put half a cupful of sugar and three tablespoonfuls of
water in a small saucepan. Stir over the fire until the sugar is nearly
melted. Take the spoon from the pan before the sugar really begins to
boil, because it would spoil the icing if the syrup were stirred after
it begins to boil. After boiling gently for four minutes, add half a
teaspoonful of vanilla extract, but do not stir; then set away to cool.
When the syrup is about blood warm, beat it with a wooden spoon until
thick and white. Now put the saucepan in another with boiling water, and
stir until the icing is thin enough to pour. Spread quickly on the cake.


CHOCOLATE GLACÉ

After making a glacé frosting, dissolve one ounce of Walter Baker &
Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate in a cup, and put it with the frosting,
adding also a tablespoonful of boiling water.


CHOCOLATE BISCUIT

Cover three large baking pans with paper that has been well oiled with
washed butter. Over these dredge powdered sugar. Melt in a cup one ounce
of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate. Separate the whites and
yolks of four eggs. Add to the yolks a generous half cupful of powdered
sugar, and beat until light and firm. Add the melted chocolate, and beat
a few minutes longer. Beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff, dry froth.
Measure out three-fourths of a cupful of sifted flour, and stir it and
the whites into the yolks. The whites and flour must be cut in as
lightly as possible, and with very little stirring. Drop the mixture in
teaspoonfuls on the buttered paper. Sprinkle powdered sugar over the
cakes, and bake in a slow oven for about fourteen or fifteen minutes.
The mixture can be shaped like lady fingers, if preferred.


CHOCOLATE WAFERS

Grate four ounces of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate, and
mix with it two tablespoonfuls of flour and one-fourth of a teaspoonful
each of cinnamon, cloves and baking powder. Separate six eggs. Add one
cupful of powdered sugar to the yolks, and beat until very light; then
add the grated yellow rind and the juice of half a lemon, and beat five
minutes longer. Now add the dry mixture, and with a spoon lightly cut in
the whites, which are first to be beaten to a stiff froth. Pour the
mixture into buttered shallow pans, having it about half an inch thick.
Bake in a moderate oven for half an hour. When the cake is cool, spread
a thin layer of currant jelly over one sheet, and place the other sheet
on this. Ice with vanilla icing; and when this hardens, cut in squares.
It is particularly nice to serve with ice-cream.


CINDERELLA CAKES

Use two eggs, one cupful of sugar, one cupful and a quarter of flour,
one gill of cold water, one tablespoonful of lemon juice, one
teaspoonful of baking powder, one ounce of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium
No. 1 Chocolate, half a tumbler of any kind of jelly, and chocolate
icing the same as for éclairs.

Separate the eggs, and beat the yolks and sugar together until light.
Beat the whites until light, and then beat them with yolks and sugar and
grated chocolate. Next beat in the lemon juice and water, and finally
the flour, in which the baking powder should be mixed. Beat for three
minutes, and then pour the batter into two pans, and bake in a moderate
oven for about eighteen minutes. When done, spread one sheet of cake
with the jelly, and press the other sheet over it; and when cold, cut
into little squares and triangular pieces. Stick a wooden toothpick into
each of these pieces and dip each one into the hot icing, afterwards
removing the toothpick, of course.


CHOCOLATE ÉCLAIRS

Into a granite-ware saucepan put half a pint of milk, two well-rounded
tablespoonfuls of butter, and one tablespoonful of sugar, and place on
the stove. When this boils up, add half a pint of sifted flour, and cook
for two minutes, beating well with a wooden spoon. It will be smooth and
velvety at the end of that time. Set away to cool; and when cool, beat
in four eggs, one at a time. Beat vigorously for about fifteen minutes.
Try a small bit of the paste in the oven; and if it rises in the form of
a hollow ball, the paste is beaten enough; whereas, if it does not, beat
a little longer. Have tin sheets or shallow pans slightly buttered. Have
ready, also, a tapering tin tube, with the smaller opening about
three-quarters of an inch in diameter. Place this in the small end of a
conical cotton pastry bag. Put the mixture in the bag, and press out on
buttered pans, having each éclair nearly three inches long. There should
be eighteen, and they must be at least two inches apart, as they swell
in cooking. Bake in a moderately hot oven for about twenty-five minutes.
Take from the oven, and while they are still warm coat them with
chocolate. When cold, cut open on the side, and fill with either of the
following described preparations:--

FILLING NO. 1.--Mix in a bowl half a pint of rich cream, one teaspoonful
of vanilla, and four tablespoonfuls of sugar. Place the bowl in a pan of
ice-water, and beat the cream until light and firm, using either an
egg-beater or a whisk.

FILLING NO. 2.--Put half a pint of milk into a double-boiler, and place
on the fire. Beat together until very light one level tablespoonful of
flour, half a cupful of sugar, and one egg. When the milk boils, stir in
this mixture. Add one-eighth of a teaspoonful of salt, and cook for
fifteen minutes, stirring often. When cold, flavor with one teaspoonful
of vanilla.

ICING FOR ÉCLAIRS.--Put in a small granite-ware pan half a pint of sugar
and five tablespoonfuls of cold water. Stir until the sugar is
partially melted, and then place on the stove, stirring for half a
minute. Take out the spoon, and watch the sugar closely. As soon as it
boils, take instantly from the fire and pour upon a meat-platter. Let
this stand for eight minutes. Meantime, shave into a cup one ounce of
Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate, and put it on the fire in
a pan of boiling water. At the end of eight minutes stir the sugar with
a wooden spoon until it begins to grow white and to thicken. Add the
melted chocolate quickly, and continue stirring until the mixture is
thick. Put it in a small saucepan, and place on the fire in another pan
of hot water. Stir until so soft that it will pour freely. Stick a
skewer into the side of an éclair, and dip the top in the hot chocolate.
Place on a plate, and continue until all the éclairs are "glacéd." They
will dry quickly. Do not stir the sugar after the first half minute, and
do not scrape the sugar from the saucepan into the platter. All the
directions must be strictly followed.


CHOCOLATE COOKIES

Beat to a cream half a cupful of butter and one tablespoonful of lard.
Gradually beat into this one cupful of sugar; then add one-fourth of a
teaspoonful of salt, one teaspoonful of cinnamon, and two ounces of
Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate, melted. Now add one
well-beaten egg, and half a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in two
tablespoonfuls of milk. Stir in about two cupfuls and a half of flour.
Roll thin, and, cutting in round cakes, bake in a rather quick oven. The
secret of making good cookies is the use of as little flour as will
suffice.


CHOCOLATE GINGERBREAD

Mix in a large bowl one cupful of molasses, half a cupful of sour milk
or cream, one teaspoonful of ginger, one of cinnamon, half a teaspoonful
of salt. Dissolve one teaspoonful of soda in a teaspoonful of cold
water; add this and two tablespoonfuls of melted butter to the mixture.
Now stir in two cupfuls of sifted flour, and finally add two ounces of
Walter Baker & Co.'s Chocolate and one tablespoonful of butter, melted
together. Pour the mixture into three well-buttered, deep tin plates,
and bake in a moderately hot oven for about twenty minutes.


VANILLA ICING

Break the white of one large egg into a bowl, and gradually beat into it
one cupful of confectioners' sugar. Beat for three minutes, add half a
teaspoonful of vanilla extract, and spread thinly on the cakes.


CHOCOLATE ICING

Make a vanilla icing, and add one tablespoonful of cold water to it.
Scrape fine one ounce of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate,
and put it in a small iron or granite-ware saucepan, with two
tablespoonfuls of confectioners' sugar and one tablespoonful of hot
water. Stir over a hot fire until smooth and glossy, then add another
tablespoonful of hot water. Stir the dissolved chocolate into the
vanilla icing.


CHOCOLATE PROFITEROLES

Shave into a cup one ounce of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1
Chocolate, and put the cup into a pan of boiling water. Make a paste the
same as for éclairs, save that instead of one tablespoonful of sugar
three must be used.

As soon as the paste is cooked, beat in the melted chocolate. When cold,
add the eggs, and beat until light. Drop this batter on lightly buttered
pans in round cakes, having about a dessertspoonful in each cake. Bake
for about twenty minutes in a moderately hot oven. Serve either hot or
cold, with whipped cream prepared the same as for Filling No. 1 for
éclairs. Heap the cream in the center of a flat dish, and arrange the
profiteroles around it.


CHOCOLATE ICE-CREAM

For about two quarts and a half of cream use a pint and a half of milk,
a quart of thin cream, two cupfuls of sugar, two ounces of Walter Baker
& Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate, two eggs, and two heaping
tablespoonfuls of flour.

Put the milk on to boil in a double-boiler. Put the flour and one cupful
of the sugar in a bowl; add the eggs, and beat the mixture until light.
Stir this into the boiling milk, and cook for twenty minutes, stirring
often.

Scrape the chocolate, and put it in a small saucepan. Add four
tablespoonfuls of sugar (which should be taken from the second cupful)
and two tablespoonfuls of hot water. Stir over a hot fire until smooth
and glossy. Add this to the cooking mixture.

When the preparation has cooked for twenty minutes, take it from the
fire and add the remainder of the sugar and the cream, which should be
gradually beaten into the hot mixture. Set away to cool, and when cold,
freeze.


CHOCOLATE CREAM PIES

Beat to a cream half a cupful of butter and a cupful and a quarter of
powdered sugar. Add two well-beaten eggs, two tablespoonfuls of wine,
half a cupful of milk, and a cupful and a half of sifted flour, with
which has been mixed a teaspoonful and a half of baking powder. Bake
this in four well-buttered, deep, tin plates for about fifteen minutes
in a moderate oven.

Put half a pint of milk in the double-boiler, and on the fire. Beat
together the yolks of two eggs, three tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar,
and a level tablespoonful of flour. Stir this mixture into the boiling
milk, beating well. Add one-sixth of a teaspoonful of salt, and cook for
fifteen minutes, stirring often. When cooked, flavor with half a
teaspoonful of vanilla extract. Put two of the cakes on two large
plates, spread the cream over them, and lay the other two cakes on top.
Beat the whites of the two eggs to a stiff froth, and then beat into
them one cupful of powdered sugar and one teaspoonful of vanilla. Shave
one ounce of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate, and put it in
a small pan with two tablespoonfuls of sugar and one tablespoonful of
boiling water. Stir over a hot fire until smooth and glossy. Now add
three tablespoonfuls of cream or milk, and stir into the beaten egg and
sugar. Spread on the pies and set away for a few hours.


CHOCOLATE MOUSSE

Put a three-quart mould in a wooden pail, first lining the bottom with
fine ice and a thin layer of coarse salt. Pack the space between the
mould and the pail solidly with fine ice and coarse salt, using two
quarts of salt and ice enough to fill the space. Whip one quart of
cream, and drain it in a sieve. Whip again all the cream that drains
through. Put in a small pan one ounce of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium
No. 1 Chocolate, three tablespoonfuls of sugar and one of boiling water,
and stir over a hot fire until smooth and glossy. Add three
tablespoonfuls of cream. Sprinkle a cupful of powdered sugar over the
whipped cream. Pour the chocolate in a thin stream into the cream, and
stir gently until well mixed. Wipe out the chilled mould, and turn the
cream into it. Cover, and then place a little ice lightly on top. Wet a
piece of carpet in water, and cover the top of the pail. Set away for
three or four hours; then take the mould from the ice, dip it in cold
water, wipe, and then turn the mousse out on a flat dish.


CHOCOLATE CHARLOTTE

Soak a quarter of a package of gelatine in one-third of a cupful of cold
water for two hours. Whip one pint of cream to a froth, and put it in a
bowl, which should be placed in a pan of ice-water. Put half an ounce of
shaved chocolate in a small pan with two tablespoonfuls of sugar and one
of boiling water, and stir over the hot fire until smooth and glossy.
Add to this a gill of hot milk and the soaked gelatine, and stir until
the gelatine is dissolved. Sprinkle a generous half cupful of powdered
sugar over the cream. Now add the chocolate and gelatine mixture, and
stir gently until it begins to thicken. Line a quart charlotte-mould
with lady fingers, and when the cream is so thick that it will just
pour, turn it gently into the mould. Place the charlotte in a cold
place for an hour or more, and, at serving time, turn out on a flat
dish.


CHOCOLATE BAVARIAN CREAM

For one large mould of cream, use half a package of gelatine, one gill
of milk, two quarts of whipped cream, one gill of sugar, and two and a
half ounces of Walter Baker & Co.'s Chocolate.

Soak the gelatine in cold water for two hours. Whip and drain the cream,
scrape the chocolate, and put the milk on to boil. Put the chocolate,
two tablespoonfuls of sugar and one of hot water in a small saucepan,
and stir on a hot fire until smooth and glossy. Stir this into the hot
milk. Now add the soaked gelatine and the remainder of the sugar. Strain
this mixture into a basin that will hold two quarts or more. Place the
basin in a pan of ice-water, and stir until cold, when it will begin to
thicken. Instantly begin to stir in the whipped cream, adding half the
amount at first. When all the cream has been added, dip the mould in
cold water and turn the cream into it. Place in the ice-chest for an
hour or more.

At serving-time dip the mould in tepid water. See that the cream will
come from the sides of the mould, and turn out on a flat dish. Serve
with whipped cream.


CHOCOLATE CREAM

Soak a box of gelatine in half a pint of cold water for two hours. Put
one quart of milk in the double-boiler, and place on the fire. Shave two
ounces of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate, and put it in a
small pan with four tablespoonfuls of sugar and two of boiling water.
Stir over a hot fire until smooth and glossy, and then stir into the hot
milk. Beat the yolks of five eggs with half a cupful of sugar. Add to
the gelatine, and stir the mixture into the hot milk. Cook three minutes
longer, stirring all the while. On taking from the fire, add two
teaspoonfuls of vanilla and half a saltspoonful of salt. Strain, and
pour into moulds that have been rinsed in cold water. Set away to
harden, and serve with sugar and cream.


CHOCOLATE BLANC-MANGE

Put one quart of milk in the double-boiler, and place on the fire.
Sprinkle into it one level tablespoonful of sea-moss farina. Cover, and
cook until the mixture looks white, stirring frequently. It will take
about twenty minutes. While the milk and farina are cooking, shave two
ounces of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate, and put it into
a small pan with four tablespoonfuls of sugar and two of boiling water.
Stir over a hot fire until smooth and glossy, then stir into the cooked
mixture. Add a saltspoonful of salt and a teaspoonful of vanilla.
Strain, and turn into a mould that has been rinsed in cold water. Set
the mould in a cold place, and do not disturb it until the blanc-mange
is cold and firm. Serve with sugar and cream.


CHOCOLATE CREAM RENVERSEE

Use one quart of milk, seven eggs, half a pint of sugar, one ounce of
Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate, half a teaspoonful of
salt. Put the milk on the fire in the double-boiler. Shave the
chocolate, and put it in a small pan with three tablespoonfuls of the
sugar and one of boiling water. Stir over a hot fire until smooth and
glossy; then stir into the hot milk, and take the milk from the fire to
cool.

Put three tablespoonfuls of sugar into a charlotte-mould that will hold
a little more than a quart, and place on the stove. When the sugar melts
and begins to smoke, move the mould round and round, to coat it with the
burnt sugar, then place on the table. Beat together the remainder of the
sugar, the eggs, and the salt. Add the cold milk and chocolate to the
mixture, and after straining into the charlotte-mould, place in a deep
pan, with enough tepid water to come nearly to the top of the mould.
Bake in a moderate oven until firm in the center. Test the cream by
running a knife through the center. If firm and smooth, it is done. It
will take forty or forty-five minutes to cook. When icy-cold, turn on a
flat dish. Serve with whipped cream that has been flavored with sugar
and vanilla.


BAKED CHOCOLATE CUSTARD

For five small custards use one pint of milk, two eggs, one ounce of
Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate, one-fourth of a
teaspoonful of salt, and a piece of stick cinnamon about an inch long.

Put the cinnamon and milk in the double-boiler, place on the fire and
cook for ten minutes. Shave the chocolate, and put it in a small pan
with three tablespoonfuls of sugar and one of boiling water. Stir this
over a hot fire until smooth and glossy, and then stir it into the hot
milk, after which take the liquid mixture from the fire and cool.

Beat together with a spoon the eggs, salt and two tablespoonfuls of the
sugar. Add the cooled milk and strain. Pour the mixture into the cups,
which place in a deep pan. Pour into the pan enough tepid water to come
nearly to the top of the cups. Bake in a moderate oven until firm in the
center. It will take about half an hour. Test by running a knife through
the center. If the custard is milky, it is not done. Serve very cold.


CHOCOLATE SOUFFLÉ

Half a pint of milk, two ounces of Walter Baker & Co.'s Chocolate, three
tablespoonfuls of sugar, one rounding tablespoonful of butter, two
tablespoonfuls of flour, four eggs.

Put the milk in the double-boiler, and place on the fire. Beat the
butter to a soft cream, and beat the flour into it. Gradually pour the
hot milk on this, stirring all the time. Return to the fire and cook for
six minutes. Put the shaved chocolate, sugar, and two tablespoonfuls of
water in a small pan over a hot fire, and stir until smooth and glossy.
Stir this into the mixture in the double-boiler. Take from the fire and
add the yolks of the eggs, well beaten; then set away to cool. When cool
add the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth. Pour the batter
into a well-buttered earthen dish that will hold about a quart, and cook
in a moderate oven for twenty-two minutes. Serve immediately with
vanilla cream sauce.


CHOCOLATE PUDDING

Reserve one gill of milk from a quart, and put the remainder on the fire
in a double-boiler. Mix three tablespoonfuls of cornstarch with the cold
milk. Beat two eggs with half a cupful of powdered sugar and half a
teaspoonful of salt. Add this to the cornstarch and milk, and stir into
the boiling milk, beating well for a minute. Shave fine two ounces of
Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate, and put it into a small
pan with four tablespoonfuls of sugar and two of boiling water. Stir
over a hot fire until smooth and glossy; then beat into the hot pudding.
Cook the pudding in all ten minutes, counting from the time the eggs and
cornstarch are added. Serve cold with powdered sugar and cream. This
pudding can be poured while hot into little cups which have been rinsed
in cold water. At serving time turn out on a flat dish, making a circle,
and fill the center of the dish with whipped cream flavored with sugar
and vanilla.

The eggs may be omitted, in which case use one more tablespoonful of
cornstarch.


CHOCOLATE MERINGUE PUDDING

For a small pudding use one pint of milk, two tablespoonfuls and a half
of cornstarch, one ounce of Walter Baker & Co.'s Chocolate, two eggs,
five tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar, one-fourth of a teaspoonful of
salt, and half a teaspoonful of vanilla extract.

Mix the cornstarch with one gill of the milk. Put the remainder of the
milk on to boil in the double-boiler. Scrape the chocolate. When the
milk boils, add the cornstarch, salt, and chocolate, and cook for ten
minutes. Beat the yolks of the eggs with three tablespoonfuls of sugar.
Pour the hot mixture on this, and beat well. Turn into a pudding-dish
that will hold about a quart, and bake for twenty minutes in a moderate
oven.

Beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff, dry froth, and gradually beat in
the remaining two tablespoonfuls of sugar and the vanilla. Spread this
on the pudding, and return to the oven. Cook for fifteen minutes longer,
but with the oven-door open. Serve either cold or hot.


MILTON PUDDING

Use one pint of stale bread broken in crumbs, one quart of milk, two
eggs, half a teaspoonful of salt, half a teaspoonful of ground cinnamon,
three tablespoonfuls of sugar and two ounces of Walter Baker & Co.'s
Chocolate, grated. Put the bread, milk, cinnamon, and chocolate in a
bowl, and soak for two or three hours. Beat together the eggs, sugar,
and salt. Mash the soaked bread with a spoon, and add the egg mixture to
the bread and milk. Pour into a pudding-dish, and bake in a slow oven
for about forty minutes. Serve with an egg sauce or a vanilla cream
sauce.

EGG SAUCE.--Beat the whites of two eggs to a stiff, dry froth; and beat
into this, a little at a time, one cupful of powdered sugar. When smooth
and light, add one teaspoonful of vanilla and the yolks of two eggs.
Beat the mixture a little longer; then stir in one cupful of whipped
cream or three tablespoonfuls of milk. Serve at once.

VANILLA CREAM SAUCE.--Beat to a cream three tablespoonfuls of butter,
and gradually beat into this two-thirds of a cupful of powdered sugar.
When this is light and creamy, add a teaspoonful of vanilla; then
gradually beat in two cupfuls of whipped cream. Place the bowl in a pan
of boiling water, and stir constantly for three minutes. Pour the sauce
into a warm bowl, and serve.


SNOW PUDDING

Put a pint of milk in the double-boiler and on the fire. Mix three
tablespoonfuls of cornstarch with a gill of milk and one-third of a
teaspoonful of salt. Stir this into the milk when it boils. Beat the
whites of four eggs to a stiff froth, and then gradually beat into them
half a cupful of powdered sugar and one teaspoonful of vanilla. Add this
to the cooking mixture, and beat vigorously for one minute. Rinse a
mould in cold water, and pouring the pudding into it, set away to cool.
At serving-time turn out on a flat dish, and serve with chocolate sauce.


CHOCOLATE SAUCE

Put one pint of milk in the double-boiler, and on the fire. Shave two
ounces of Walter Baker and Co.'s Chocolate, and put it in a small pan
with four tablespoonfuls of sugar and two of boiling water. Stir over
the fire until smooth and glossy, and add to the hot milk. Beat together
for eight minutes the yolks of four eggs, three tablespoonfuls of sugar,
and a saltspoonful of salt, and then add one gill of cold milk.

Pour the boiling milk on this, stirring well. Return to the
double-boiler, and cook for five minutes, stirring all the time. Pour
into a cold bowl and set the bowl in cold water. Stir for a few minutes,
and then occasionally until the sauce is cold.

This sauce is nice for cold or hot cornstarch pudding, bread pudding,
cold cabinet pudding, snow pudding, etc. It will also answer for a
dessert. Fill custard glasses with it, and serve the same as soft
custard; or have the glasses two-thirds full, and heap up with whipped
cream.


CHOCOLATE CANDY

One cupful of molasses, two cupfuls of sugar, one cupful of milk,
one-half pound of chocolate, a piece of butter half the size of an egg.
Boil the milk and molasses together, scrape the chocolate fine, and mix
with just enough of the boiling milk and molasses to moisten; rub it
perfectly smooth, then, with the sugar, stir into the boiling liquid;
add the butter, and boil twenty minutes. Try as molasses candy, and if
it hardens, pour into a buttered dish. Cut the same as nut candy.


CREAM CHOCOLATE CARAMELS

Mix together in a granite-ware saucepan half a pint of sugar, half a
pint of molasses, half a pint of thick cream, one generous tablespoonful
of butter, and four ounces of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1
Chocolate. Place on the fire and stir until the mixture boils. Cook
until a few drops of it will harden if dropped into ice-water; then pour
into well-buttered pans, having the mixture about three-fourths of an
inch deep. When nearly cold, mark into squares. It will take almost an
hour to boil this in a granite-ware pan, but not half so long if cooked
in an iron frying-pan. Stir frequently while boiling. The caramels must
be put in a very cold place to harden.


SUGAR CHOCOLATE CARAMELS

Mix two cupfuls of sugar, three-fourths of a cupful of milk or cream,
one generous tablespoonful of butter, and three ounces of Walter Baker &
Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate. Place on the fire and cook, stirring
often, until a little of the mixture, when dropped in ice-water, will
harden; then stir in one-fourth of a cupful of sugar and one
tablespoonful of vanilla, and pour into a well-buttered pan, having the
mixture about three-fourths of an inch deep. When nearly cold, mark it
off in squares, and put in a cold place to harden. These caramels are
sugary and brittle, and can be made in the hottest weather without
trouble. If a deep granite-ware saucepan be used for the boiling, it
will take nearly an hour to cook the mixture; but if with an iron
frying-pan, twenty or thirty minutes will suffice.


CHOCOLATE CREAMS, No. 1

Beat the whites of two eggs to a stiff froth. Gradually beat into this
two cupfuls of confectioners' sugar. If the eggs be large, it may take a
little more sugar. Flavor with half a teaspoonful of vanilla, and work
well. Now roll into little balls, and drop on a slightly buttered
platter. Let the balls stand for an hour or more. Shave five ounces of
Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate and put into a small bowl,
which place on the fire in a saucepan containing boiling water. When the
chocolate is melted, take the saucepan to the table, and drop the creams
into the chocolate one at a time, taking them out with a fork and
dropping them gently on the buttered dish. It will take half an hour or
more to harden the chocolate.


CHOCOLATE CREAMS, No. 2

For these creams you should make a fondant in this way: put into a
granite-ware saucepan one cupful of water and two of granulated
sugar--or a pound of loaf sugar. Stir until the sugar is nearly melted,
then place on the fire and heat slowly, but do not stir the mixture.
Watch carefully and note when it begins to boil. When the sugar has been
boiling for ten minutes, take up a little of it and drop in ice-water.
If it hardens enough to form a soft ball when rolled between the thumb
and finger, it is cooked enough. Take the saucepan from the fire
instantly, and set in a cool, dry place. When the syrup is so cool that
the finger can be held in it comfortably, pour it into a bowl, and stir
with a wooden spoon until it becomes thick and white. When it begins to
look dry, and a little hard, take out the spoon, and work with the hand
until the cream is soft and smooth. Flavor with a few drops of vanilla,
and, after shaping, cover with chocolate, as directed in the preceding
recipe.

_Caution._--Do not stir the syrup while it is cooking, and be careful
not to jar or shake the saucepan.


CHOCOLATE CONES

Boil the sugar as directed for fondant in the recipe for Chocolate
Creams, No. 2, but not quite so long--say about eleven minutes. The
syrup, when tested, should be too soft to ball. When cold, pour into a
bowl, and beat until thick and creamy. If properly boiled, it will not
become thick enough to work with the hands.

Have six ounces of Walter Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate melted
in a bowl. Pour half of the creamed sugar into another bowl, and, after
flavoring with a few drops of vanilla, add to it about one-third of the
dissolved chocolate. Stir until thick and rather dry; then make into
small cones, and drop on a slightly buttered platter. Put half of the
remaining creamed sugar in a cup, and set in a saucepan containing
boiling water. Flavor with vanilla, and stir over the fire until melted
so much that it will pour from the spoon. Take the saucepan to the table
and dip one-half the cones in, one at a time, just as the Chocolate
Creams, No. 1, were dipped in the melted chocolate. If liked, a second
coating may be given the cones. Now put the remainder of the creamed
sugar on to melt, and add two tablespoonfuls of hot water to it. Stir
the remainder of the melted chocolate into this, and if too thick to dip
the candy in, add hot water, a few drops at a time, until the mixture is
of the right consistency; then dip the rest of the cones in this.


GENESEE BON-BONS

Make the cream chocolate caramels, and get them quite firm by placing
the pan on ice. Make the chocolate coating as directed for chocolate
cones. Dip the caramels in this and put on a buttered dish.


CHOCOLATE SYRUP

Into a granite-ware saucepan put one ounce--three tablespoonfuls--of
Walter Baker & Co.'s Soluble Chocolate, and gradually pour on it half a
pint of boiling water, stirring all the time. Place on the fire, and
stir until all the chocolate is dissolved. Now add one pint of
granulated sugar, and stir until it begins to boil. Cook for three
minutes longer, then strain and cool. When cool, add one tablespoonful
of vanilla extract. Bottle, and keep in a cold place.


REFRESHING DRINKS FOR SUMMER

Put into a tumbler about two tablespoonfuls of broken ice, two
tablespoonfuls of chocolate syrup, three tablespoonfuls of whipped
cream, one gill of milk, and half a gill of soda-water from a syphon
bottle, or Apollinaris water. Stir well before drinking. A tablespoonful
of vanilla ice-cream is a desirable addition. It is a delicious drink,
even if the soda or Apollinaris water and ice-cream be omitted. A
plainer drink is made by combining the syrup, a gill and a half of milk,
and the ice, shaking well.


A FEW SUGGESTIONS IN REGARD TO CHOCOLATE

The best flavor to add to chocolate is vanilla; next to that, cinnamon.
Beyond these two things one should use great caution, as it is very easy
to spoil the fine natural flavor of the bean. Chocolate absorbs odors
readily; therefore it should be kept in a pure, sweet atmosphere. As
about eleven per cent. of the chocolate bean is starch, chocolate and
cocoa are of a much finer flavor if boiled for a few minutes. Long
boiling, however, ruins their flavor and texture.




Recipes Specially Prepared _by_ Miss Elizabeth Kevill Burr

(All measurements should be level.)


FORMULA FOR MAKING THREE GALLONS OF BREAKFAST COCOA

    1/2 a pound of Walter Baker & Co.'s Cocoa,
    1-1/2 gallons of water, hot,
    1-1/2 gallons of milk, hot.

This should not be allowed to boil. Either make it in a large
double-boiler, or a large saucepan or kettle over water. Mix the cocoa
with enough cold water to make a paste, and be sure it is free from
lumps. Heat together the milk and water, and pour in the cocoa; then
cook at least an hour, stirring occasionally.


CRACKED COCOA

To one-third a cup of Baker's Cracked Cocoa (sometimes called "Cocoa
Nibs") use three cups of cold water; cook slowly at least one hour--the
longer the better. Then strain the liquid and add one cup (or more if
desired) of milk, and serve very hot. Do not allow the mixture to boil
after milk has been added.


VANILLA CHOCOLATE WITH WHIPPED CREAM

    One cake (1/2 a pound) of Walter Baker & Co.'s Vanilla Sweet Chocolate,
    4 cups of boiling water,
    Pinch of salt,
    4 cups of hot milk.

This must be made in a double-boiler. Put the chocolate, boiling water
and salt in upper part of the double-boiler. Stir and beat with a wooden
spoon until the chocolate is dissolved and smooth. Add the milk and when
thoroughly hot, strain, and serve with unsweetened whipped cream. More
cooking will improve it.


CHOCOLATE CREAM PIE

Line a pie plate with rich pie crust, putting on an extra edge of crust
the same as for custard pie. Fill with the chocolate filling made after
the following recipe. Bake in a hot oven until crust is done; remove,
and when cool, cover with a meringue and brown very slowly in moderate
oven.


CHOCOLATE FILLING

    1 cup of milk,
    Pinch of salt,
    1-1/2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    2 level tablespoonfuls of flour,
    2 eggs (yolks),
    5 tablespoonfuls of sugar (level),
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

Put milk, salt and chocolate in upper part of the double-boiler, and
when hot and smooth, stir in the flour, which has been mixed with enough
cold milk to be thin enough to pour into the hot milk. Cook, stirring
constantly, until it thickens; then let it cook eight or ten minutes.
Mix the eggs and sugar together and pour the hot mixture over them,
stirring well; put back in double-boiler and cook, stirring constantly
one minute. Remove, and when cool add one teaspoonful of vanilla.


MERINGUE

    2 eggs (whites),
    Pinch of salt,
    4 level tablespoonfuls of sugar,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

Add salt to eggs and beat in a large shallow dish with fork or egg-whip
until stiff and flaky and dish can be turned upside down. Beat in the
sugar slowly, then the vanilla, and beat until the dish can be turned
upside down.


COCOA STICKS

    6 tablespoonfuls of butter,
    3/4 cup of sugar (scant),
    1 egg,
    1 tablespoonful of milk,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla or pinch of cinnamon,
    5 teaspoonfuls of Baker's Cocoa,
    1/8 teaspoonful of baking powder,
    1-1/4 to 1-1/2 cups of sifted pastry flour.

Cream the butter until soft; add the sugar gradually and beat well; add
the beaten egg, milk and vanilla; mix thoroughly. Sift cocoa, baking
powder, and a pinch of salt with about one-half cup of the flour; stir
this into the mixture first, then use the remainder of the flour, and
more if necessary, to make a firm dough that will not stick to the
fingers. Set on the ice to harden. Sprinkle the board with cocoa and a
very little sugar. Use small pieces of the dough at a time, toss it over
the board to prevent sticking, roll out thin, cut in strips about
one-half inch wide and three inches long. Place closely in pan and bake
in moderately hot oven three or four minutes. Great care should be taken
in the baking to prevent burning.

It is advisable to gather the scraps after each rolling, if soft, and
set away to harden, for fear of getting in too much cocoa, thus making
them bitter.

The colder and harder the dough is, the better it can be handled;
therefore it can be made the day before using.


COCOA FROSTING

    4 teaspoonfuls of Baker's Cocoa,
    2 tablespoonfuls of cold water,
    3 tablespoonfuls of hot water,
    1/2 a teaspoonful of vanilla,
    About 1-3/4 cups of confectioners' sugar.

Put the cocoa in a small saucepan; add the cold water and stir until
perfectly smooth; then the hot water, and cook for one or two minutes,
add vanilla and a speck of salt, then stir in enough sugar to make it
stiff enough to spread nicely. Beat until smooth and glossy and free
from lumps.

If too thick, add a little cold water. If not thick enough, add a little
sugar. Never make a frosting so stiff that it will have to be made
smooth with a wet knife. It is better to let it run to the sides of the
cake. For frosting sides of the cake, make a little stiffer.

This frosting never cracks as an egg frosting, but is hard enough to cut
nicely.


COCOA SAUCE

    2 tablespoonfuls of butter,
    1 cup of boiling water,
    2 tablespoonfuls of flour,
    4 tablespoonfuls of sugar,
    4 teaspoonfuls of Baker's Cocoa,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

Melt the butter in the saucepan; mix the flour and cocoa together and
stir into the butter; add gradually the hot water, stirring and beating
each time; cook until it thickens. Just before serving, add the sugar,
vanilla and a pinch of salt, if necessary.

Use more cocoa if liked stronger. This sauce will be found excellent for
cottage puddings, Dutch apple cakes, steamed apple puddings, etc.


COCOA CAKE

    1/2 a cup of butter,
    3/4 a cup of milk,
    1 cup of sugar,
    6 level tablespoonfuls of Baker's Cocoa,
    3 eggs,
    2 level teaspoonfuls of baking powder,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla,
    1-1/2 or 2 cups of sifted pastry flour.

Cream the butter, stir in the sugar gradually, add the unbeaten eggs,
and beat all together until very creamy. Sift together one-half cup of
the flour, the cocoa and baking powder; use this flour first, then
alternate the milk and remaining flour, using enough to make mixture
stiff enough to drop from the spoon; add vanilla and beat until very
smooth; then bake in loaf in moderately hot oven thirty-five or forty
minutes.

Tests for baking cake. It is baked enough when:
1. It shrinks from the pan.
2. Touching it on the top, springs back.
3. No singing sound.


COCOA MERINGUE PUDDING

    1 cup of milk,
    2 eggs (yolks),
    2 tablespoonfuls of flour,
    Pinch of salt,
    4 teaspoonfuls of Baker's Cocoa,
    3 tablespoonfuls of sugar,
    1/2 a teaspoonful of vanilla.

Put the milk in the upper part of the double-boiler, and heat. Mix flour
and cocoa together and soften in a little cold milk; mix until free
from lumps. When the milk is hot, add the flour, and cook, stirring
often, eight or ten minutes. Beat yolks of eggs lightly; add sugar and
salt, and mix well. When mixture in double-boiler has cooked
sufficiently, strain it over the mixture in the bowl. Put back in
double-boiler and allow it to cook one or two minutes (stirring
constantly), just enough to slightly thicken the eggs. Remove from the
stove, and when cool add vanilla and put in the serving-dish. Cover with
a meringue. Place dish on a board, put in the oven with the door open,
and allow it to remain there for ten or fifteen minutes, and when the
meringue will not stick to the fingers, close the door and let it brown
slightly. This pudding can be eaten warm or cold, but is much better
cold. This will serve four persons generously.


CHOCOLATE ALMONDS

Blanch the almonds by pouring boiling water on them, and let them stand
two or three minutes. Roast them in oven. Dip them in the following
recipe for chocolate coating, and drop on paraffine paper.

    1/2 pound cake of Walter Baker's Vanilla Sweet Chocolate,
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter,
    2 tablespoonfuls of boiling water.

Put chocolate in small saucepan over boiling water and when melted stir
in butter and water. Mix well. If found to be too thick, add more water;
if too thin, more chocolate.


HOT CHOCOLATE SAUCE

    1 cup of boiling water,
    Pinch of salt,
    1 square of chocolate,
    1/2 a cup of sugar.

Cook all together slowly until it is the consistency of maple syrup, or
thicker if desired. Just before serving, add one teaspoonful of vanilla.
This will keep indefinitely, and can be reheated.


COCOA SPONGE CAKE

    4 eggs,
    1/4 a cup of sugar,
    Pinch of salt,
    4 tablespoonfuls of Baker's Cocoa,
    1/2 a cup of sifted pastry flour,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

Separate yolks from whites of eggs; beat yolks in a small bowl with the
Dover egg-beater until very thick; add sugar, salt and vanilla, and beat
again until very thick. Sift cocoa and the flour together and stir very
lightly into the mixture; fold in the stiffly beaten whites of the eggs,
and bake in a loaf in a moderate oven until done.

Do not butter the pan, but when cake is baked, invert the pan; and when
cool, remove the cake.


CHOCOLATE FROSTING

    1 square of Baker's Chocolate,
    Pinch of salt,
    5 tablespoonfuls of boiling water,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla,
    About three cups of sifted confectioners' sugar.

Melt chocolate in bowl over tea-kettle, add water, salt and vanilla, and
when smooth add the sugar, and heat until very glossy. Make the frosting
stiff enough to spread without using a wet knife. It will keep
indefinitely.


CHOCOLATE CAKE, OR DEVIL'S FOOD

    5 level tablespoonfuls of butter,
    1-1/4 cups of sugar,
    3-1/2 squares of Baker's Chocolate, (melted),
    3 eggs,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla,
    3/4 a cup of milk,
    3-1/2 level teaspoonfuls of baking powder,
    1-1/2 cups of sifted pastry flour.

Cream the butter, add sugar and chocolate, then the unbeaten eggs and
vanilla, and beat together until very smooth. Sift the baking powder
with one-half a cup of the flour, and use first; then alternate the milk
and the remaining flour, and make the mixture stiff enough to drop from
the spoon. Beat until very smooth and bake in loaf in moderate oven. For
tests see Cocoa Cake recipe on page 25.


CHOCOLATE ICE-CREAM

    1 quart of milk,
    Pinch of salt,
    3 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    3 level tablespoonfuls of flour,
    1 can of sweetened condensed milk,
    3 eggs,
    6 level tablespoonfuls of sugar,
    3 teaspoonfuls of vanilla.

Put milk, salt and chocolate in double-boiler, and when milk is hot and
chocolate has melted, stir in the flour, previously mixed in a little
cold milk. Cook ten minutes, then pour this over the condensed milk,
eggs and sugar mixed together; cook again for four minutes, stirring.
Strain, and when cool add vanilla, and freeze.


CHOCOLATE WHIP

    1 cup of milk,
    1-1/2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    Pinch of salt,
    2 level tablespoonfuls of cornstarch,
    2 eggs (yolks),
    6 level tablespoonfuls of sugar,
    2 teaspoonfuls of vanilla,
    5 eggs (whites).

Put milk, chocolate and salt in double-boiler; mix cornstarch in a small
quantity of cold milk, and stir into the hot milk when the chocolate has
been melted; stir until smooth, then cook twelve minutes. Mix together
the yolks of the eggs and sugar, then pour the hot mixture over it; cook
again one or two minutes, stirring. When very cold, just before serving,
add the vanilla and fold in the stiffly beaten whites of the eggs. Pile
lightly in a glass dish and serve with lady fingers. A meringue can be
made of the whites of the eggs and sugar, then folded in the chocolate
mixture, but it does not stand as long.


COCOA MARBLE CAKE

    6 level tablespoonfuls of butter,
    1 cup of granulated sugar,
    3 eggs,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla,
    3/4 a cup of milk.

Three level teaspoonfuls of baking powder, about one and three-quarter
cups of sifted flour, or flour enough to make mixture stiff enough to
drop from the spoon. Mix in the order given. Reserve one-third of this
mixture and add to it four level tablespoonfuls of Baker's Cocoa and to
the other one cup of shredded cocoanut. Bake thirty-five or forty
minutes according to size and shape of pan.


CHOCOLATE MARBLE CAKE

This is the same as the Cocoa Marble Cake. Add to one-third of the
mixture one and one-half squares of Baker's Chocolate in place of the
cocoa, and one cup of chopped walnuts to the other part in place of the
shredded cocoanut.


CHOCOLATE JELLY

    1 pint of boiling water,
    1/3 a package of gelatine,
    2 pinches of salt,
    2 level tablespoonfuls of sugar,
    1-1/2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

Put the water, salt and chocolate in a saucepan. Cook, stirring until
the chocolate melts, then let it boil for three or five minutes. Soften
the gelatine in a little cold water and pour the boiling mixture over
it. Stir until dissolved, then add sugar and vanilla. Pour into a mould
and set aside to harden, serve with cream and powdered sugar or
sweetened whipped cream.


COTTAGE PUDDING

    4 level tablespoonfuls of butter,
    2 eggs,
    1 cup of sugar,
    3/4 a cup of milk.

Two level teaspoonfuls of baking powder, one and three-quarter cups of
sifted flour or enough to make mixture stiff enough to drop from the
spoon. Bake in buttered gem pans in moderately hot oven twenty-three or
twenty-five minutes. If the cake springs back after pressing a finger on
the top, it shows that it is baked enough. To make a cocoa cottage
pudding add to the above rule six level tablespoonfuls of cocoa. Serve
with a vanilla sauce.


VANILLA SAUCE

    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter,
    1 cup of boiling water,
    2 level tablespoonfuls of flour,
    4 level tablespoonfuls of sugar,
    Pinch of salt,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

Melt butter in saucepan, add flour and salt and mix until smooth; add
slowly the boiling water, stirring and beating well. Add sugar and milk.


COCOANUT SOUFFLÉ

    1 cup of milk,
    1 pinch of salt,
    3 level tablespoonfuls of flour, softened in a little cold milk.
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter,
    4 level tablespoonfuls of sugar,
    Yolks of 4 eggs,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla,
    1 cup of shredded cocoanut,
    Whites of 4 eggs.

Heat milk, add salt and flour and cook ten minutes after it has
thickened. Mix together, butter, sugar and yolks of eggs. Pour hot
mixture over, stirring well and set aside to cool. Add vanilla and
cocoanut. Lastly fold in the stiffly beaten whites of the eggs. Bake in
buttered pan, in moderate oven until firm. Serve hot with Chocolate
Sauce.


CHOCOLATE SAUCE

    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter,
    1 level tablespoonful of flour,
    Pinch of salt,
    1 cup of boiling water,
    1 square of Baker's Chocolate,
    4 level tablespoonfuls of sugar,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

Melt butter in saucepan, add dry flour and salt and mix until smooth,
then add slowly the hot water, beating well. Add the square of chocolate
and sugar and stir until melted. Add vanilla, just before serving.


COCOA BISCUIT

    2 cups or 1 pint of sifted flour,
    3 level teaspoonfuls of baking powder,
    1/2 a teaspoonful of salt,
    2 level tablespoonfuls of sugar,
    4 level tablespoonfuls of Baker's Cocoa,
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter or lard,
    2/3 a cup of milk or enough to make a firm but not a stiff dough.

Sift all the dry ingredients together, rub in the butter with the tips
of the fingers. Stir in the required amount of milk. Turn out on
slightly floured board, roll or pat out the desired thickness, place
close together in pan and bake in very hot oven ten or fifteen minutes.


COCOA FUDGE

[Illustration: COCOA FUDGE.]

    1/2 a cup of milk,
    3 level tablespoonfuls of butter,
    2-1/2 cups of powdered sugar,
    6 tablespoonfuls of Baker's Cocoa,
    Pinch of salt,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

Mix all ingredients together but vanilla; cook, stirring constantly,
until it begins to boil, then cook slowly, stirring occasionally, eight
or ten minutes, or until it makes a firm ball when dropped in cold
water. When cooked enough, add the vanilla and beat until it seems like
very cold molasses in winter. Pour into a buttered pan; when firm, cut
in squares. Great care must be taken not to beat too much, because it
cannot be poured into the pan, and will not have a gloss on top.




Miss M.E. Robinson's Recipes


PLAIN CHOCOLATE

    1 ounce or square of Baker's Premium Chocolate,
    3 tablespoonfuls of sugar,
    1/8 a teaspoonful of salt,
    1 pint of boiling water,
    1 pint of milk.

Place the chocolate, sugar and salt in the agate chocolate-pot or
saucepan, add the boiling water and boil three minutes, stirring once or
twice, as the chocolate is not grated. Add the milk and allow it time to
heat, being careful not to boil the milk, and keep it closely covered,
as this prevents the scum from forming. When ready to serve turn in
chocolate-pitcher and beat with Dover egg-beater until light and foamy.


COCOA DOUGHNUTS

One egg, one-half a cup of sugar, one-half a cup of milk, one-quarter
teaspoonful of salt, one-quarter teaspoonful of cinnamon extract
(Burnett's), two cups of flour, one-quarter cup of Baker's Breakfast
Cocoa, two teaspoonfuls of baking powder. Mix in the order given,
sifting the baking powder and cocoa with the flour. Roll to one-third an
inch in thickness, cut and fry.


COCOA SPONGE CAKE

    3 eggs,
    1-1/2 cups of sugar,
    1/2 a cup of cold water,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla,
    1-3/4 cups of flour,
    1/4 a cup of Baker's Cocoa,
    2 teaspoonfuls of baking powder,
    1 teaspoonful of cinnamon.

Beat yolks of eggs light, add water, vanilla and sugar; beat again
thoroughly; then add the flour, with which the baking powder, cocoa and
cinnamon have been sifted. Fold in the stiffly beaten whites of the
eggs. Bake in a rather quick oven for twenty-five or thirty minutes.


COCOA MARBLE CAKE

    1/3 a cup of butter,
    1 cup of sugar,
    1 egg,
    1/2 a cup of milk,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla,
    2 cups of flour,
    2 teaspoonfuls of baking powder,
    3 tablespoonfuls of Baker's Cocoa.

Cream the butter, add sugar, vanilla and egg; beat thoroughly, then add
flour (in which is mixed the baking powder) and milk, alternately, until
all added. To one-third of the mixture add the cocoa, and drop the white
and brown mixture in spoonfuls into small, deep pans, and bake about
forty minutes in moderate oven.


COCOA BUNS

    2 tablespoonfuls of butter,
    1/3 a cup of sugar,
    1 egg,
    1/4 a teaspoonful of salt,
    1 cup of scalded milk,
    2 compressed yeast cakes softened in 1/2 a cup of warm water,
    1/4 a teaspoonful of extract cinnamon,
    1/2 a cup of Baker's Breakfast Cocoa,
    3-1/2 to 4 cups of flour.

Mix in order given, having dough as soft as can be handled, turn onto
moulding board, roll into a square about an inch in thickness, sprinkle
on one-half cup of currants, fold the sides to meet the centre, then
each end to centre, and fold again. Roll as at first, using another
one-half cup currants, fold, roll and fold again. Place in a bowl which
is set in pan of warm water, let raise forty minutes. Shape, place in
pan, let raise until doubled in size. Bake fifteen to twenty minutes. As
you take from oven, brush the top with white of one egg beaten with
one-half cup confectioners' sugar. Let stand five minutes. Then they are
ready to serve.


MRS. RORER'S CHOCOLATE CAKE

    2 ounces of chocolate,
    4 eggs,
    1/2 a cup of milk,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla,
    1/2 a cup of butter,
    1-1/2 cups of sugar,
    1 heaping teaspoonful of baking powder,
    1-3/4 cups of flour.

Dissolve the chocolate in five tablespoonfuls of boiling water. Beat the
butter to a cream, add the yolks, beat again, then the milk, then the
melted chocolate and flour. Give the whole a vigorous beating. Now beat
the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, and stir them carefully into
the mixture; add the vanilla and baking powder. Mix quickly and lightly,
turn into well-greased cake pan and bake in a moderate oven forty-five
minutes.--_From Mrs. Rorer's Cook Book._


MRS. LINCOLN'S CHOCOLATE CARAMELS

One cup of molasses, half a cup of sugar, one-quarter of a pound of
chocolate cut fine, half a cup of milk, and one heaping tablespoonful of
butter. Boil all together, stirring all the time. When it hardens in
cold water, pour it into shallow pans, and as it cools cut in small
squares.--_From Mrs. Lincoln's Boston Cook Book._


MISS FARMER'S CHOCOLATE NOUGAT CAKE

    1/4 a cup of butter,
    1-1/2 cups of powdered sugar,
    1 egg,
    1 cup of milk,
    2 cups of bread flour,
    3 teaspoonfuls of baking powder,
    1/2 teaspoonful of vanilla,
    2 squares of chocolate, melted,
    1/2 a cup of powdered sugar,
    2/3 a cup of almonds blanched and shredded.

Cream the butter, add gradually one and one-half cups of sugar, and egg
unbeaten; when well mixed, add two-thirds milk, flour mixed and sifted
with baking powder, and vanilla. To melted chocolate add one-third a cup
of powdered sugar, place on range, add gradually remaining milk, and
cook until smooth. Cool slightly and add to cake mixture. Bake fifteen
to twenty minutes in round layer-cake pans. Put between layers and on
top of cake White Mountain Cream sprinkled with almonds.--_From Boston
Cooking School Cook Book--Fannie Merritt Farmer._


MRS. ARMSTRONG'S CHOCOLATE PUDDING

Soften three cups of stale bread in an equal quantity of milk. Melt two
squares of Walter Baker & Co.'s Chocolate over hot water and mix with
half a cup of sugar, a little salt, three beaten eggs and half a
teaspoonful of vanilla. Mix this thoroughly with the bread and place in
well-buttered custard-cups. Steam about half an hour (according to size)
and serve in the cups or turned out on warm plate.--_Mrs. Helen
Armstrong._


MRS. ARMSTRONG'S CHOCOLATE CHARLOTTE

Soak a quarter of a package of gelatine in one-fourth of a cupful of
cold water. Whip one pint of cream to a froth and put it in a bowl,
which should be placed in a pan of ice water. Put an ounce of Walter
Baker & Co.'s Chocolate in a small pan with two tablespoonfuls of sugar
and one of boiling water, and stir over the hot fire until smooth and
glossy. Add to this a gill of hot milk and the soaked gelatine, and stir
until the gelatine is dissolved. Sprinkle a generous half cupful of
powdered sugar over the cream. Now add the chocolate and gelatine
mixture and stir gently until it begins to thicken. Line a quart
charlotte mould with lady fingers, and when the cream is so thick that
it will just pour, turn it gently into the mould. Place the charlotte in
a cold place for an hour or more, and at serving time turn out on a flat
dish.--_Mrs. Helen Armstrong._


CHOCOLATE JELLY WITH CRYSTALLIZED GREEN GAGES

Dissolve in a quart of water three tablespoonfuls of grated chocolate;
let come to a boil; simmer ten minutes; add a cup of sugar and a box of
gelatine (that has been softened in a cup of water) and strain through a
jelly bag or two thicknesses of cheese-cloth. When almost cold, add a
dessertspoonful of vanilla and a tablespoonful of brandy. Then whisk
well; add half a pound of crystallized green gages cut into small
pieces; pour into a pretty mould, and when cold serve with whipped
cream.


MRS. BEDFORD'S CHOCOLATE CRULLERS

Cream two tablespoonfuls of butter and one-half of a cupful of sugar;
gradually add the beaten yolks of three eggs and one and one-half
cupfuls more of sugar, one cupful of sour milk, one teaspoonful of
vanilla, two ounces of chocolate grated and melted over hot water,
one-third of a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in one-half of a
teaspoonful of boiling water, the whites of the eggs whipped to a stiff
froth, and sufficient sifted flour to make a soft dough. Roll out, cut
into oblongs; divide each into three strips, leaving the dough united at
one end. Braid loosely, pinch the ends together and cook until
golden-brown in smoking-hot fat.--_Mrs. Cornelia C. Bedford._


MRS. BEDFORD'S HOT COCOA SAUCE FOR ICE-CREAM

Boil together one and one-half cupfuls of water and one cupful of sugar
for two minutes; add one tablespoonful of arrowroot dissolved in a
little cold water, stir for a moment, then boil until clear. Add two
tablespoonfuls of cocoa which has been dissolved in a little hot water
and a tiny pinch of salt and boil three minutes longer. Take from the
fire and add one teaspoonful of vanilla.--_Mrs. Cornelia C. Bedford._


MRS. BEDFORD'S CHOCOLATE MACAROONS

Grate one-quarter of a pound of chocolate and mix one-quarter of a pound
of sifted powdered sugar and one-quarter of a pound of blanched and
ground almonds. Add a pinch of cinnamon and mix to a soft paste with
eggs beaten until thick. Drop in half-teaspoonfuls on slightly buttered
paper and bake in a moderate oven. Do not take from the paper until
cold; then brush the under side with cold water, and the paper can be
readily stripped off.--_Mrs. Cornelia C. Bedford._


MRS. EWING'S CREAMY COCOA

Stir together in a saucepan half a cup of Walter Baker & Co.'s Breakfast
Cocoa, half a cup of flour, half a cup of granulated sugar and half a
teaspoonful of salt. Add gradually one quart of boiling water and let
the mixture boil five minutes, stirring it constantly. Remove from the
fire, add a quart of boiling milk, and serve. If desired a spoonful of
whipped cream may be put in each cup before filling with the cocoa.

The proportions given will make delicious, creamy cocoa, sufficient to
serve twelve persons. The flour should be sifted before it is
measured.--_By Mrs. Emma P. Ewing, author of "The Art of Cookery."_


MRS. EWING'S CREAMY CHOCOLATE

Mix together half a cup of sifted flour, half a cup of granulated sugar
and half a teaspoonful of salt. Put into a saucepan half a cup of Walter
Baker & Co.'s Premium No. 1 Chocolate, finely shaved. Add one quart of
boiling water, stir until dissolved, add the flour, sugar and salt, and
boil gently, stirring constantly, five minutes. Then stir in a quart of
boiling milk, and serve with or without whipped cream.--_Mrs. Emma P.
Ewing, author of "The Art of Cookery."_


MRS. HILL'S COCOA FRAPPÉ

Mix half a pound of cocoa and three cupfuls of sugar; cook with two
cupfuls of boiling water until smooth; add to three quarts and a half of
milk scalded with cinnamon bark; cook for ten minutes. Beat in the
beaten whites of two eggs mixed with a cupful of sugar and a pint of
whipped cream. Cool, flavor with vanilla extract, and freeze. Serve in
cups. Garnish with whipped cream.--_Janet McKenzie Hill--Ladies' Home
Journal._


MRS. HILL'S CHOCOLATE PUFFS

Stir a cupful of flour into a cupful of water and half a cupful of
butter, boiling together; remove from fire, beat in an ounce of melted
chocolate, and, one at a time, three large eggs. Shape with forcing bag
and rose tube. Bake, cut off the tops and put into each cake a
tablespoonful of strawberry preserves. Cover with whipped cream
sweetened and flavored.--_Janet McKenzie Hill--Ladies' Home Journal._


MISS FARMER'S CHOCOLATE CREAM CANDY

    2 cups of sugar,
    2/3 a cup of milk,
    1 tablespoonful of butter,
    2 squares of chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

Put butter into granite saucepan; when melted add sugar and milk. Heat
to boiling point; then add chocolate, and stir constantly until
chocolate is melted. Boil thirteen minutes, remove from fire, add
vanilla, and beat until creamy and mixture begins to sugar slightly
around edge of saucepan. Pour at once into a buttered pan, cool slightly
and mark in squares. Omit vanilla, and add, while cooking, one-fourth of
a teaspoonful of cinnamon.--_Boston Cooking School Cook Book--Fannie
Merritt Farmer._


MRS. SALZBACHER'S CHOCOLATE HEARTS

Melt, by standing over hot water, three ounces of unsweetened chocolate;
add a pound of sifted powdered sugar and mix thoroughly; work to a stiff
yet pliable paste with the unbeaten whites of three eggs (or less),
adding vanilla to flavor. If the paste seems too soft, add more sugar.
Break off in small pieces and roll out about one-fourth of an inch
thick, sprinkling the board and paste with granulated sugar instead of
flour. Cut with a tiny heart-shaped cake cutter (any other small cake
cutter will do), and place on pans oiled just enough to prevent
sticking. Bake in a very moderate oven. When done, they will feel firm
to the touch, a solid crust having formed over the top. They should be
very light, and will loosen easily from the pan after being allowed to
stand a moment to cool. The success of these cakes depends upon the
oven, which should not be as cool as for meringue, nor quite so hot as
for sponge cake. If properly made, they are very excellent and but
little labor. Use the yolks for chocolate whips.--_From "Good
Housekeeping."_


COCOA CHARLOTTE (Without Cream)

    1 pint of water,
    Whites of 2 eggs,
    1/2 a teaspoonful of vanilla,
    1/2 a cup of sugar,
    2 level tablespoonfuls of cornstarch,
    1/2 a teaspoonful of cinnamon,
    3 tablespoonfuls of cocoa.

Dissolve the cornstarch in a quarter of a cup of cold water, add it to
the pint of boiling water, stir until it thickens, add the sugar and the
cocoa, which have been thoroughly mixed together. Remove from the fire,
add the cinnamon and vanilla, and pour slowly over the stiffly beaten
whites of eggs. Pour at once into a pudding mould, and put away in a
cold place to harden. Serve with plain cream.--_Mabel Richards Dulon._


CHOCOLATE FUDGE WITH FRUIT

Two cups of sugar, one-half cup of milk, one-half cup of molasses,
one-half cup of butter; mix all together and boil seven minutes; add
one-half cup of Baker's Chocolate and boil seven minutes longer. Then
add two tablespoonfuls of figs, two tablespoonfuls of raisins, one-half
a cup of English walnuts and one teaspoonful of vanilla.


CHOCOLATE MACAROONS

Stir to a paste whites of seven eggs, three-fourths a pound of sifted
sugar, one-half a pound of almonds pounded very fine, and two ounces of
grated Baker's Chocolate. Have ready wafer paper cut round, on which lay
pieces of the mixture rolled to fit the wafer. Press one-half a blanched
almond on each macaroon and bake in a moderate oven.


PETITS FOUR

Bake a simple, light sponge cake in a shallow biscuit tin or dripping
pan, and when cold turn out on the moulding board and cut into small
dominoes or diamonds. They should be about an inch in depth. Split each
one and spread jelly or frosting between the layers, then ice tops and
sides with different tinted icings, pale green flavored with pistachio,
pale pink with rose, yellow with orange, white with almond. Little
domino cakes are also pretty. Ice the cakes on top and sides with white
icing, then when hard put on a second layer of chocolate, using _Walter
Baker & Co.'s Unsweetened Chocolate_ and made as for layer cake, dipping
the brush in the melted chocolate to make the spots.

Candied violets, bits of citron cut in fancy shapes, candied cherries
and angelica may all be utilized in making pretty designs in
decoration.--_American Housekeeper._


POTATO CAKE

Two cups of white sugar, one cup of butter, one cup of hot mashed
potatoes, one cup of chopped walnuts, half a cup of sweet milk, two cups
of flour, four eggs well beaten, five teaspoonfuls of melted chocolate,
one tablespoonful each of cloves, cinnamon and nutmeg, two teaspoonfuls
of baking powder. Bake in layers and use marshmallow filling.


SPANISH CHOCOLATE CAKE

One cup of sugar, one-half a cup of butter, one-half a cup of sweet
milk, three cups of flour, two eggs, one teaspoonful of soda dissolved
in hot water. Put on the stove one cup of milk, one-half a cup of
Baker's Chocolate, grated; stir until dissolved; then stir into it one
cup of sugar and the yolk of one egg stirred together; when cool flavor
with vanilla. While this is cooling beat up the first part of the cake
and add the chocolate custard. Bake in layers. Ice on top and between
the layers.




_Home Made Candies_

Recipes Specially Prepared _by_ Mrs. Janet McKenzie Hill


PEPPERMINTS, CHOCOLATE MINTS, Etc.
(Uncooked Fondant)

[Illustration: PEPPERMINTS, CHOCOLATE MINTS, ETC.]

    White of 1 egg,
    2 tablespoonfuls of cold water,
    Sifted confectioner's sugar,
    1/2 teaspoonful of essence of peppermint or a few drops of oil of
        peppermint,
    1 or 2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    Green color paste,
    Pink color paste.

Beat the egg on a plate, add the cold water and gradually work in sugar
enough to make a firm paste. Divide the sugar paste into three parts. To
one part add the peppermint and a very little of the green color paste.
Take the paste from the jar with a wooden tooth pick, add but a little.
Work and knead the mixture until the paste is evenly distributed
throughout. Roll the candy into a sheet one-fourth an inch thick, then
cut out into small rounds or other shape with any utensil that is
convenient. Color the second part a very delicate pink, flavor with rose
extract and cut out in the same manner as the first. To the last part
add one or two squares of Baker's Chocolate, melted over hot water, and
flavor with peppermint. Add also a little water, as the chocolate will
make the mixture thick and crumbly. Begin by adding a tablespoonful of
water, then add more if necessary, knead and cut these as the others.


CHOCOLATE CARAMEL WALNUTS
(Uncooked Fondant)

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE CARAMEL WALNUTS.]

    White of 1 egg,
    3 tablespoonfuls of maple or caramel syrup,
    1 tablespoonful of water,
    Sifted confectioner's sugar,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract,
    2 or more squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    English walnuts.

Beat the white of egg slightly, add the syrup, water, sugar as needed,
the chocolate, melted over hot water, and the vanilla, also more water
if necessary. Work with a silver plated knife and knead until thoroughly
mixed, then break off small pieces of uniform size and roll them into
balls, in the hollow of the hand, flatten the balls a little, set the
half of an English walnut upon each, pressing the nut into the candy and
thus flattening it still more. The caramel gives the chocolate a
particularly nice flavor.


HOW TO COAT CANDIES, &c., WITH BAKER'S "DOT" CHOCOLATE

Half a pound of "Dot" Chocolate will coat quite a number of candy or
other "centers," but as depth of chocolate and an even temperature
during the whole time one is at work are essential, it is well, when
convenient, to melt a larger quantity of chocolate. When cold, the
unused chocolate may be cut from the dish and set aside for use at a
future time. If the chocolate be at the proper temperature when the
centers are dipped in it, it will give a rich, glossy coating free from
spots, and the candies will not have a spreading base. After a few
centers have been dipped set them in a cool place to harden. The
necessary utensils are a wire fork and a very small double boiler. The
inner dish of the boiler should be of such size that the melted
chocolate will come nearly to the top of it. Break the chocolate in
small pieces and surround with warm water, stir occasionally while
melting. When the melted chocolate has cooled to about 80° F. it is
ready to use. Drop whatever is to be coated into the chocolate, with the
fork push it below the chocolate, lift out, draw across the edge of the
dish and drop onto a piece of table oil cloth or onto waxed paper. Do
not let a drop of water get into the chocolate.


CHOCOLATE DIPPED PEPPERMINTS
(Uncooked Fondant)

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE DIPPED PEPPERMINTS.]

Prepare green, white, pink and chocolate colored mints by the first
recipe. After they have dried off a little run a spatula under each and
turn to dry the other side. Coat with Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.


GINGER, CHERRY, APRICOT and NUT CHOCOLATES

[Illustration: GINGER, CHERRY, APRICOT AND NUT CHOCOLATES.]

    White of 1 egg,
    2 tablespoonfuls of cold water,
    Sifted confectioner's sugar,
    Almond or rose extract,
    Preserved ginger,
    Candied cherries,
    Candied apricots,
    Halves of almond,
    Halves of pecan nuts,
    1/2 a pound of Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Use the first four ingredients in making uncooked fondant. (Caramel
syrup is a great addition to this fondant, especially if nuts are to be
used. Use three tablespoonfuls of syrup and one tablespoonful of water
with one egg white instead of the two tablespoonfuls of water indicated
in the recipe). Work the fondant for some time, then break off little
bits and wrap around small pieces of the fruit, then roll in the hollow
of the hand into balls or oblongs. For other candies, roll a piece of
the fondant into a ball, flatten it with the fingers and use to cover a
whole pecan or English walnut meat. Set each shape on a plate as it is
finished. They will harden very quickly. Dip these, one by one, in
Baker's "Dot" Chocolate and set on an oil cloth.


CHOCOLATE PEANUT CLUSTERS

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE PEANUT CLUSTERS.]

Shell a quart of freshly-roasted peanuts and remove the skins. Drop the
peanuts, one by one, into the center of a dish of "Dot" Chocolate made
ready for use; lift out onto oil cloth with a dipping fork (a wire fork
comes for the purpose, but a silver oyster fork answers nicely) to make
groups of three nuts,--two below, side by side, and one above and
between the others.


CHOCOLATE COATED ALMONDS

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE COATED ALMONDS.]

Select nuts that are plump at the ends. Use them without blanching.
Brush, to remove dust. Melt "Dot" Chocolate and when cooled properly
drop the nuts, one at a time, into the center of it; push the nuts under
with the fork, then drop onto waxed paper or oil cloth. In removing the
fork make a design on the top of each nut. These are easily prepared and
are particularly good.


PLAIN AND CHOCOLATE DIPPED PARISIAN SWEETS

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE DIPPED PARISIAN SWEETS.]

    1/2 a cup of Sultana raisins,
    5 figs,
    1 cup of dates,
    2 ounces citron,
    2/3 a cup of nut meats, (almonds, filberts, pecans or walnuts, one
        variety or a mixture),
    1-1/2 ounces of Baker's Chocolate,
    1/3 a cup of confectioner's sugar,
    1/4 a teaspoonful of salt,
    Chocolate Fondant or
    Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Pour boiling water over the figs and dates, let boil up once, then drain
as dry as possible; remove stones from the dates, the stem ends from the
figs; chop the fruit and nut meats (almonds should be blanched) in a
food chopper; add the salt; and the sugar and work the whole to a smooth
paste; add the chocolate, melted, and work it evenly through the mass.
Add more sugar if it is needed and roll the mixture into a sheet
one-fourth an inch thick. Cut into strips an inch wide. Cut the strips
into diamond-shaped pieces (or squares); roll these in confectioner's
sugar or dip them in chocolate fondant or in Baker's "Dot" Chocolate,
and sprinkle a little fine-chopped pistachio nut meats on the top of the
dipped pieces. When rolling the mixture use confectioner's sugar on
board and rolling pin.


STUFFED DATES, CHOCOLATE DIPPED

[Illustration: STUFFED DATES, CHOCOLATE DIPPED.]

Cut choice dates open on one side and remove the seeds. Fill the open
space in the dates with a strip of preserved ginger or pineapple,
chopped nuts or chopped nuts mixed with white or chocolate fondant;
press the dates into a compact form to keep in the filling, then dip
them, one by one, in "Dot" Chocolate.


CHOCOLATE OYSTERETTES, PLAIN AND WITH CHOPPED FIGS

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE OYSTERETTES.]

    Oyster crackers, salted preferred, fine-chopped, roasted peanuts or
        raisins or 3 or 4 basket figs or a little French fruit cut in
        very small bits,
    1/2 a pound or more of Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Select fresh-baked crackers free from crumbs. Dip in "Dot" Chocolate,
made ready as in previous recipes, and dispose on oil cloth or waxed
paper. For a change add figs or other fruit, cut very fine, or chopped
nuts to the chocolate ready for dipping.


TURKISH PASTE WITH FRENCH FRUIT, CHOCOLATE FLAVORED

[Illustration: TURKISH PASTE WITH FRENCH FRUIT.]

    3 level tablespoonfuls of granulated gelatine,
    1/2 a cup of cold water,
    2 cups of sugar,
    2/3 a cup of cold water,
    1 teaspoonful of ground cinnamon,
    2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract,
    1 cup of French candied fruit, cherries, angelica, citron, etc.,
      chopped fine.

Let the gelatine stand in the half cup of cold water until it has taken
up all of the water. Stir the sugar and the two-thirds a cup of cold
water over the fire until the sugar is dissolved and the syrup is
boiling, then add the gelatine and let cook twenty minutes; add the
cinnamon, the chocolate, melted over hot water, and beat all together,
then add the vanilla and the fruit; let stand in a cool place for a
time, then when it thickens a little turn into an _un_buttered bread pan
and set aside until the next day. To unmold separate the paste from the
pan--at the edge--with a sharp-pointed knife. Sift confectioner's sugar
over the top, then with the tips of the fingers gently pull the paste
from the pan to a board dredged with confectioner's sugar; cut into
strips, then into small squares. Roll each square in confectioner's
sugar. In cutting keep sugar between the knife and the paste.


CHOICE CHOCOLATE PECAN PRALINES

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE PECAN PRALINES.]

    3 cups of granulated sugar,
    1 cup of cream,
    1 cup of sugar cooked to caramel,
    2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    3 cups of pecan nut meats.

Stir the sugar and cream over the fire until the sugar is melted, then
let boil to the soft ball degree, or to 236° F. Add the chocolate,
melted or shaved fine, and beat it in, then pour the mixture onto the
cup of sugar cooked to caramel; let the mixture boil up once, then
remove from the fire; add the nut meats and beat until the mass begins
to thicken. When cold enough to hold its shape drop onto an oil cloth or
marble, a teaspoonful in a place, and at once set a half nut meat on
each. Two persons are needed to make these pralines, one to drop the
mixture, the other to decorate with the halves of the nuts. The mixture
becomes smooth and firm almost instantly. Maple or brown sugar may be
used in place of all or a part of the quantity of granulated sugar
designated.


VASSAR FUDGE

[Illustration: VASSAR FUDGE.]

    2 cups of white granulated sugar,
    1 cup of cream,
    1 tablespoonful of butter,
    1/4 a cake of Baker's Premium No. 1 Chocolate.

Put in the sugar and cream, and when this becomes hot put in the
chocolate, broken up into fine pieces. Stir vigorously and constantly.
Put in butter when it begins to boil. Stir until it creams when beaten
on a saucer. Then remove and beat until quite cool and pour into
buttered tins. When cold cut in diamond-shaped pieces.


SMITH COLLEGE FUDGE

[Illustration: SMITH COLLEGE FUDGE.]

Melt one-quarter cup of butter. Mix together in a separate dish one cup
of white sugar, one cup of brown sugar, one-quarter cup of molasses and
one-half cup of cream. Add this to the butter, and after it has been
brought to a boil continue boiling for two and one-half minutes,
stirring rapidly. Then add two squares of Baker's Premium No. 1
Chocolate, scraped fine. Boil this five minutes, stirring it first
rapidly, and then more slowly towards the end. After it has been taken
from the fire, add one and one-half teaspoonfuls of vanilla. Then stir
constantly until the mass thickens. Pour into buttered pan and set in a
cool place.


WELLESLEY MARSHMALLOW FUDGE

[Illustration: WELLESLEY MARSHMALLOW FUDGE.]

Heat two cups of granulated sugar and one cup of rich milk (cream is
better). Add two squares of Baker's Chocolate, and boil until it hardens
in cold water. Just before it is done add a small piece of butter, then
begin to stir in marshmallows, crushing and beating them with a spoon.
Continue to stir in marshmallows, after the fudge has been taken from
the fire, until half a pound has been stirred into the fudge. Cool in
sheets three-quarters of an inch thick, and cut in cubes.


DOUBLE FUDGE

[Illustration: DOUBLE FUDGE.]

    2 cups of granulated sugar,
    2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    1/2 a cup of cream,
    1 tablespoonful of butter.

Boil seven minutes; then beat and spread in buttered tin to cool.

    2 cups of brown sugar,
    1/2 a cup of cream,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract,
    1 cup of walnut meats, chopped fine,
    Butter size of a walnut.

Boil ten minutes; then beat and pour on top of fudge already in pan.
When cool, cut in squares.


MARBLED FUDGE

[Illustration: MARBLED FUDGE.]

    2 cups of granulated sugar,
    1/4 a cup of glucose (pure corn syrup),
    1-1/2 cups of cream,
    1 tablespoonful of butter,
    2 squares of Baker's Chocolate, scraped fine or melted,
    2 teaspoonfuls of vanilla.

Stir the sugar, glucose and cream over a slack fire until the sugar is
melted; move the saucepan to a hotter part of the range and continue
stirring until the mixture boils, then let boil, stirring every three or
four minutes very gently, until the thermometer registers 236° F., or,
till a soft ball can be formed in cold water. Remove from the fire and
pour one-half of the mixture over the chocolate. Set both dishes on a
cake rack, or on something that will allow the air to circulate below
the dishes. When the mixture cools a little, get some one to beat one
dish of the fudge; add a teaspoonful of vanilla to each dish, and beat
until thick and slightly grainy, then put the mixture in a pan, lined
with waxed paper, first a little of one and then of the other, to give a
marbled effect. When nearly cold turn from the pan, peel off the paper
and cut into cubes.


FUDGE HEARTS OR ROUNDS

[Illustration: FUDGE HEARTS OR ROUNDS.]

    2 cups of granulated sugar,
    1/3 a cup of condensed milk,
    1/3 a cup of water,
    1/4 a cup of butter,
    1-1/2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract.

Boil the sugar, milk and water to 236° F., or to the "soft ball" degree;
stir gently every few minutes; add the butter and let boil up
vigorously, then remove from the fire and add the chocolate; let stand
undisturbed until cool, then add the vanilla and beat the candy until it
thickens and begins to sugar. Pour into a pan lined with paper to stand
until cooled somewhat; turn from the mold and with a French cutter or a
sharp edged tube cut into symmetrical shapes.


MARSHMALLOW FUDGE

[Illustration: MARSHMALLOW FUDGE.]

    1st BATCH

    2 cups of granulated sugar,
    1 cup of cream,
    1/4 a teaspoonful of salt,
    1 tablespoonful of butter,
    2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla,
    Nearly half a pound of marshmallows, split in halves.

    2nd BATCH

    2 cups of granulated sugar,
    1 cup of cream,
    1/4 a teaspoonful of salt,
    1 tablespoonful of butter,
    2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

Start with the first batch and when this is nearly boiled enough, set
the second batch to cook, preparing it in the same manner as the first.
Stir the sugar and cream, over a rather slack fire, until the sugar is
melted, when the sugar boils wash down the sides of the pan as in making
fondant, set in the thermometer and cook over a quick fire, without
stirring, to the soft ball degree, 236° F.; add the butter, salt and
chocolate, melted or shaved fine, and let boil up vigorously, then
remove to a cake cooler (or two spoon handles to allow a circulation of
air below the pan). In the meantime the second batch should be cooking
and the marshmallows be gotten ready. When the first batch is about cold
add the vanilla and beat the candy vigorously until it begins to
thicken, then turn it into a pan lined with waxed paper. At once dispose
the halves of marshmallows close together upon the top of the fudge.
Soon the other dish of fudge will be ready; set it into cold water and
when nearly cold, add the vanilla and beat as in the first batch, then
pour it over the marshmallows. When the whole is about cold turn it onto
a marble, or hardwood board, pull off the paper and cut into cubes. If
one is able to work very quickly, but one batch need be prepared, half
of it being spread over the marshmallows.


CHOCOLATE DIPPED FRUIT FUDGE

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE DIPPED FRUIT FUDGE.]

    FRUIT FUDGE

    1-1/2 cups of granulated sugar,
    1 cup of Maple Syrup,
    1-1/2 cups of glucose (pure corn syrup),
    1/2 a cup of thick cream, or
    1/3 a cup of milk and 1/4 a cup of butter,
    3/4 a cup of fruit, figs, and candied cherries and apricots, cut in
        small pieces.

    CHOCOLATE FOR DIPPING

    1/2 a cake or more of Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Stir the sugar, syrup, glucose and cream until the sugar is melted,
cover and let boil three or four minutes, then uncover and let boil
stirring often but very gently until a soft ball may be formed in cold
water, or, until the thermometer registers 236° F. Set the saucepan on a
cake cooler and when the mixture becomes cool, add the fruit and beat
until it becomes thick, then turn into pans lined with waxed paper. In
about fifteen minutes cut into squares. Coat these with the "Dot"
Chocolate.


CHOCOLATE COCOANUT CAKES

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE COCOANUT CAKES.]

    2/3 a cup of granulated sugar,
    1/4 a cup scant measure of water,
    One cup, less one tablespoonful, of glucose,
    1/2 a pound of dessicated cocoanut,
    1/2 a pound or Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Heat the sugar, water and glucose to the boiling point, add the cocoanut
and stir constantly while cooking to the soft ball degree, or, until a
little of the candy dropped on a cold marble may be rolled into a ball.
Drop, by small teaspoonfuls, onto a marble or waxed paper, to make
small, thick, rather uneven rounds. When cold coat with "Dot" Chocolate
melted over hot water and cooled properly. These cakes are very easily
coated.


BAKER'S CHOCOLATE "DIVINITY"

[Illustration: BAKER'S CHOCOLATE "DIVINITY."]

    1-1/2 cups of brown sugar,
    1 cup of maple syrup,
    1/2 a cup of glucose pure corn syrup,
    1/2 a cup of water,
    1/4 a teaspoonful of salt,
    The whites of 2 eggs,
    1 cup of nut meats, chopped fine,
    2 squares of Baker's Chocolate, broken in pieces.

Let the sugar, syrup, glucose and water stand on the back of the range,
stirring occasionally, until the sugar is melted, then cover and let
boil five minutes. Remove the cover and let boil to soft crack, 287° F.,
or, until when tested in water a ball that rattles in the cup will be
formed. Add the salt and chocolate and beat over the fire, until the
chocolate is melted, then pour in a fine stream onto the whites of eggs,
beaten dry, beating constantly meanwhile; add the nuts and pour into a
pan lined with waxed paper. In about fifteen minutes lift the candy from
the pan (by the ends of the paper left for the purpose) and cut it into
small oblongs or squares. The candy must be stirred constantly during
the last of the cooking. In cooking without a thermometer one is liable
to remove the candy from the fire too soon--if this happens, return, egg
whites and all, to the saucepan, set this into a dish of boiling water
and stir constantly until the mixture thickens, then pour into the pan
lined with paper. On no account let even a few drops of water boil into
the candy.


CHOCOLATE NOUGATINES

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE NOUGATINES.]

    1 cup of granulated sugar,
    1/2 a cup of glucose,
    1/2 a cup of honey (strained),
    Piece of paraffine size of a pea,
    1/4 a cup of water,
    1/4 a teaspoonful of salt,
    The whites of 2 eggs, beaten dry,
    1 cup of almond or English walnut meats, chopped fine,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla,
    About 1/2 a pound of Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Put the sugar, glucose, honey, paraffine and water over the fire, stir
occasionally and let boil to the hard ball degree, about 248° F. Add the
salt to the eggs before beating them, and gradually pour on part of the
syrup, beating constantly meanwhile with the egg beater; return the rest
of the syrup to the fire and let boil until it is brittle when tested in
cold water or to 290° F. Then turn this gradually onto the eggs, beating
constantly meanwhile. Return the whole to the saucepan, set over the
fire on an asbestos mat and beat constantly until it becomes crisp when
tested in cold water. Pour into a buttered pan a little larger than an
ordinary bread pan and set aside to become cold. When cold cut into
pieces about an inch and a quarter long and three-eighths of an inch
wide and thick. Coat these with "Dot" Chocolate.


PLAIN CHOCOLATE CARAMELS

[Illustration: PLAIN CHOCOLATE CARAMELS.]

    2-1/2 cups of sugar,
    3/4 cup of glucose, (pure corn syrup),
    1/2 a cup of butter,
    1/8 a teaspoonful of cream of tartar,
    2-1/2 cups of whole milk, (not skimmed),
    2-1/2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract.

Put the sugar, glucose, butter, cream of tartar and one cup of the milk
over the fire, stir constantly, and when the mass has boiled a few
moments, gradually stir in the rest of the milk. Do not let the mixture
stop boiling while the milk is being added. Stir every few moments and
cook to 248° F., or, until when tested in cold water, a hard ball may be
formed; add the chocolate and vanilla and beat them thoroughly through
the candy, then turn it into two bread pans. When nearly cold cut into
squares.


CHOCOLATE NUT CARAMELS

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE NUT CARAMELS.]

    2 cups of granulated sugar,
    1-1/2 cups of glucose (pure corn syrup),
    2 cups of cream,
    1 cup of butter,
    3 or 4 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    1-1/2 cups of English walnut meats,
    2 teaspoonfuls of vanilla extract.

Put the sugar, glucose, _one_ cup of the cream and the butter over the
fire; stir and cook until the mixture boils vigorously, then gradually
add the other cup of cream. Do not allow the mixture to stop boiling
while the cream is being added. Cook until the thermometer registers
250° F., stirring gently--move the thermometer, to stir beneath
it--every four or five minutes. Without a thermometer boil until--when
tested by dropping a little in cold water--a hard ball may be formed in
the water. Remove from the fire, add the chocolate and nuts and beat
until the chocolate is melted; beat in the vanilla and turn into a
biscuit pan, nicely oiled or buttered, to make a sheet three-fourths an
inch thick. When nearly cold turn from the pan and cut into cubes.


RIBBON CARAMELS

[Illustration: RIBBON CARAMELS.]

    CHOCOLATE LAYERS

    1-1/4 cups of granulated sugar,
    1/2 cup of glucose (pure corn syrup) _scant_ measure,
    1/4 a cup of butter,
    1/16 a teaspoonful of cream of tartar,
    1-1/4 cups of rich milk,
    1-1/4 squares of Baker's Premium Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract.

    WHITE LAYER

    2/3 a cup of granulated sugar,
    1/4 (scant) a cup of water,
    1 cup, less one tablespoonful, of glucose (pure corn syrup),
    1/3 a pound of dessicated cocoanut.

Put the sugar, glucose, butter, cream of tartar and the fourth a cup of
milk over the fire, stir until the mixture boils, then very gradually
stir in the rest of the milk. Let cook, stirring occasionally, to 248°
F., or until, when tested in water or on a cold marble, a pretty firm
ball may be formed. Add the chocolate and vanilla, mix thoroughly and
turn into two well-buttered shallow pans. For the white layer, put the
sugar, water and glucose over the fire, stir until boiling, then add the
cocoanut and stir occasionally until a soft ball may be formed when a
little of the mixture is dropped upon a cold marble. Put this mixture
over the fire, to dissolve the sugar, but do not let it begin to boil
until the chocolate layers are turned into the pans. When the white
mixture is ready, turn enough of it onto one of the chocolate layers to
make a layer about one-third an inch thick. Have the other chocolate
layer cooled, by standing in cold water; remove it from the pan and
dispose above the cocoanut layer. Let stand until cold and firm, then
cut in cubes; wrap each cube in waxed paper.


FONDANT

    4 cups of granulated sugar,
    1-1/2 cups of cold water,
    1/4 a teaspoonful of cream of tartar, or 3 drops of acetic acid.

Stir the sugar and water in a saucepan, set on the back part of the
range, until the sugar is melted, then draw the saucepan to a hotter
part of the range, and stir until the boiling point is reached; add the
cream of tartar or acid and, with the hand or a cloth wet repeatedly in
cold water, wash down the sides of the saucepan, to remove any grains of
sugar that have been thrown there. Cover the saucepan and let boil
rapidly three or four minutes. Remove the cover, set in the
thermometer--if one is to be used--and let cook very rapidly to 240° F.,
or the soft ball degree. Wet the hand in cold water and with it dampen a
marble slab or a large platter, then without jarring the syrup turn it
onto the marble or platter. Do not scrape out the saucepan or allow the
last of the syrup to drip from it, as sugary portions will spoil the
fondant by making it grainy. When the syrup is cold, with a metal
scraper or a wooden spatula, turn the edges of the mass towards the
center, and continue turning the edges in until the mass begins to
thicken and grow white, then work it up into a ball, scraping all the
sugar from the marble onto the mass; knead slightly, then cover closely
with a heavy piece of cotton cloth wrung out of cold water. Let the
sugar stand for an hour or longer to ripen, then remove the damp cloth
and cut the mass into pieces; press these closely into a kitchen bowl,
cover with a cloth wrung out of water (this cloth must not touch the
fondant) and then with heavy paper. The fondant may be used the next
day, but is in better condition after several days, and may be kept
almost indefinitely, if the cloth covering it be wrung out of cold water
and replaced once in five or six days. Fondant may be used, white or
delicately colored with vegetable color-pastes or with chocolate, as
frosting for small cakes, or éclairs or for making candy "centers," to
be coated with chocolate or with some of the same fondant tinted and
flavored appropriately.


ALMOND CHOCOLATE CREAMS

    CENTERS

    1/4 a cup of blanched almonds, chopped fine,
    1/2 a cup of fondant,
    1/4 a teaspoonful of vanilla,
    Confectioner's sugar for kneading and shaping.

    CHOCOLATE COATING

    About 1 cup of fondant,
    2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract,
    Few drops of water, as needed,
    Halves of blanched almonds.

Mix the chopped almonds with the fondant and vanilla; add confectioner's
sugar, a little at a time, and knead the mass thoroughly, on a marble or
large platter; shape into a long roll, then cut into small pieces of the
same size. Shape these into balls a generous half inch in diameter and
leave them about an hour to harden on the outside. Put the fondant for
the coating and the chocolate (shaved or broken in pieces) in a double
boiler (with hot water in the lower receptacle); add the vanilla and the
water and heat until melted; take out the spoon and put in a dipping
fork (a wire fork costing about ten cents) beat the fondant, to keep it
from crusting and drop in a "center;" with the fork cover it with
fondant; put the fork under it and lift it out, scrape the fork lightly
on the edge of the dish, to remove superfluous candy, turn the fork over
and drop the bon-bon onto waxed paper. Make a design with the fork in
taking it from the candy. At once press half of a blanched almond on the
top of the candy, or the design made with the fork will suffice. If at
any time the coating be too thick, add a few drops of water. If any be
left over, use it to coat whole nuts or cherries.

[Illustration: ALMOND AND CHERRY CHOCOLATE CREAMS.]


CHERRY CHOCOLATE CREAMS

    CENTERS

    1/4 a cup of candied cherries, chopped fine,
    1/2 a cup of fondant.

    CHOCOLATE COATING

    About one cup of fondant,
    2 squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract,
    Bits of cherry.

Prepare the centers and coat in the same manner as the almond creams.


CHOCOLATE PEPPERMINTS

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE PEPPERMINTS.]

Melt a little fondant and flavor it to taste with essence of peppermint;
leave the mixture white or tint very delicately with green or pink
color-paste. With a teaspoon drop the mixture onto waxed paper to make
rounds of the same size--about one inch and a quarter in diameter--let
these stand in a cool place about one hour. Put about a cup of fondant
in a double boiler, add two ounces of chocolate and a teaspoonful of
boiling water, then stir (over hot water) until the fondant and
chocolate are melted and evenly mixed together; then drop the
peppermints, one by one, into the chocolate mixture, and remove them
with the fork to a piece of oil cloth; let stand until the chocolate is
set, when they are ready to use.


FIG-AND-NUT CHOCOLATES

[Illustration: FIG AND NUT CHOCOLATES.]

    5 figs,
    3 or 4 tablespoonfuls of water or sherry wine,
    1/2 a cup of English walnut meats,
    Powdered sugar,
    Fondant,
    3 or 4 ounces of Baker's Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

Remove the stem and hard place around the blossom end of the figs, and
let steam, with the water or wine, in a double boiler until softened,
then add the nuts and chop very fine. Add powdered sugar as is needed to
shape the mixture into balls. Melt the chocolate, using enough to secure
the shade of brown desired in the coating and add to the fondant with
the vanilla. Coat the fig-and-nut balls and drop them with the fork onto
a piece of oil cloth or waxed paper in the same manner as the cherry
bon-bons. These may be dipped in "Dot" Chocolate instead of fondant.


CHOCOLATE MARSHMALLOWS

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE MARSHMALLOWS.]

Cut the marshmallows in halves, and put them, one by one, cut side down,
in chocolate fondant (as prepared for almond and cherry chocolate
creams), melted over hot water and flavored to taste with vanilla. Beat
the chocolate with the fork, that it may not crust over, lift out the
marshmallow, turn it and, in removing the fork, leave its imprint in the
chocolate; sprinkle at once with a little fine-chopped pistachio nut
meat. To prepare the nuts, set them over the fire in tepid water to
cover, heat to the boiling point, drain, cover with cold water, then
take them up, one by one, and with the thumb and finger push the meat
from the skin.


MAPLE FONDANT ACORNS

[Illustration: MAPLE FONDANT ACORNS.]

    2 cups of maple syrup,
    1-3/4 cups of granulated sugar,
    3/4 a cup of cold water,
    Confectioner's sugar,
    2 or more squares of Baker's Chocolate,
    1 teaspoon of vanilla,
    About 1/4 a cup of fine-chopped almonds, browned in the oven.

Make fondant of the syrup, granulated sugar and cold water, following
the directions given for fondant made of granulated sugar (cream of
tartar or other acid is not required in maple fondant). Work some of the
fondant, adding confectioner's sugar as needed, into cone shapes; let
these stand an hour or longer to harden upon the outside. Put a little
of the fondant in a dish over hot water; add Baker's Chocolate and
vanilla as desired and beat till the chocolate is evenly mixed through
the fondant, then dip the cones in the chocolate and set them on a piece
of oil cloth or waxed paper. When all are dipped, lift the first one
dipped from the paper and dip the base again in the chocolate, and then
in the chopped-and-browned almonds. Continue until all have been dipped.


CHOCOLATE ALMOND BARS

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE ALMOND BARS.]

    1/2 a cup of sugar,
    3/4 a cup of glucose,
    1/2 a cup of water,
    (1/4 an ounce of paraffine at discretion),
    1/2 a cup of blanched almonds, chopped fine,
    1/3 the recipe for fondant,
    3 or 4 ozs. of Baker's Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla.

Melt the sugar in the water and glucose and let boil to about 252° F.,
or between a soft and a hard ball. Without the paraffine cook a little
higher than with it. Add the almonds and the vanilla, mix thoroughly and
turn onto a marble or platter over which powdered sugar has been sifted.
Turn out the candy in such a way that it will take a rectangular shape
on the marble. When cool enough score it in strips about an inch and a
quarter wide, and, as it grows cooler, lift the strips, one by one, to a
board and cut them in pieces half or three-quarters of an inch wide.
When cold, drop them, sugar side down, in chocolate fondant prepared for
"dipping." With the fork push them below the fondant, lift out, drain as
much as possible, and set onto oil cloth. These improve upon keeping.


ALMOND FONDANT STICKS

[Illustration: ALMOND FONDANT STICKS.]

    2-1/2 cups of coffee A or granulated sugar,
    1/4 a cup of glucose,
    1/2 a cup of water,
    1/4 a pound of almond paste,
    1/4 a pound of Baker's Premium Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract,
    1/2 a pound of Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Put the sugar, glucose and water over the fire. Stir until the sugar is
dissolved. Wash down the sides of the kettle as in making fondant. Let
boil to the soft ball degree or to 238° F. Add the almond paste, cut
into small, thin pieces, let boil up vigorously, then turn onto a damp
marble. When nearly cold turn to a cream with a wooden spatula. It will
take considerable time to turn this mixture to fondant. Cover and let
stand half an hour. Add the Baker's Premium Chocolate, melted over hot
water, and knead it in thoroughly. Add at the same time the vanilla. The
chocolate must be added warm. At once cut off a portion of the fondant
and knead it into a round ball; then roll it lightly under the fingers
into a long strip the shape and size of a lead pencil; form as many of
these strips as desired; cut the strips into two-inch lengths and let
stand to become firm. Have ready the "Dot" Chocolate melted over hot
water and in this coat the prepared sticks leaving the surface a little
rough.


ALMOND FONDANT BALLS

[Illustration: ALMOND FONDANT BALLS.]

Roll part of the almond fondant into small balls. Some of the "Dot"
Chocolate will be left after dipping the almond chocolate sticks. Remelt
this over hot water, and in it coat the balls lightly. As each ball is
coated with the chocolate drop it onto a plate of chopped pistachio nut
meats or of chopped cocoanut (fresh or dessicated). With a spoon
sprinkle the chopped material over the balls.


WALNUT CREAM-CHOCOLATES

[Illustration: WALNUT CREAM CHOCOLATES.]

    2-1/2 cups of granulated sugar,
    1/2 a cup of condensed milk,
    1/2 a cup of water,
    3 or 4 tablespoonfuls of thick caramel syrup,
    A little water,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla,
    1/2 a pound of Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Put the sugar, condensed milk and water over the fire to boil, stir
gently but often, and let cook to the soft ball stage, or to 238°F. Pour
on a damp marble and let stand undisturbed until cold; turn to a cream,
then gather into a compact mass; cover with a bowl and let stand for
thirty minutes; then knead the cream; put it into a double boiler; add
the caramel syrup and the vanilla; stir constantly while the mixture
becomes warm and thin; add a tablespoonful or two of water, if
necessary, and drop the cream mixture into impressions made in
cornstarch. Use two teaspoons to drop the cream. When the candy is cold,
pick it from the starch. With a small brush remove the starch that
sticks to the candy shapes. Coat each piece with "Dot" Chocolate. As
each piece is coated and dropped onto the oil cloth, set half an English
walnut meat upon the top.


TO MOLD CANDY IN STARCH IMPRESSIONS

Many candies, especially such as are of some variety of fondant, are
thin when warm and solidify on the outside when cold, so that they may
be "dipped" or coated with chocolate. To shape candy of this sort, fill
a low pan with cornstarch, making it smooth upon the top. Have ready
molds made of plaster paris, glued to a thin strip of wood, press these
into the cornstarch; lift from the starch and repeat the impressions as
many times as the space allows. If molds are not available a thimble,
round piece of wood, or the stopper of an oil or vinegar cruet will
answer the purpose, though the impressions must be made one at a time.


CHOCOLATE BUTTER CREAMS

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE BUTTER CREAMS.]

    2-1/2 cups of sugar,
    1/2 a cup of water,
    1/4 a cup of glucose,
    1/4 a cup of butter,
    2-1/2 ozs of Baker's Premium Chocolate,
    2 teaspoonfuls of vanilla,
    1/2 a pound of Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Put the sugar, water, glucose and butter over the fire; stir until the
sugar is melted, then cook to the soft ball degree, or 236° F.; pour on
a damp marble and leave until cold; then pour on the Premium Chocolate,
melted over hot water, and with a spatula turn to a cream. This process
is longer than with the ordinary fondant. Cover the chocolate fondant
with a bowl and let stand for thirty minutes; knead well and set over
the fire in a double boiler; add the vanilla and stir until melted. The
mixture is now ready to be dropped into small impressions in starch;
when cold and brushed free of starch dip in "Dot" Chocolate. When
dropping the chocolate mixture into the starch it should be just soft
enough to run level on the top. If too soft it will not hold its shape
in coating.


FONDANT FOR SOFT CHOCOLATE CREAMS

    2-1/2 cups of sugar,
    1/3 a cup of glucose (pure corn syrup),
    1 cup of water.

Put the sugar, glucose and water over the fire and stir until boiling,
then wash down the sides of the saucepan, cover and finish cooking as in
making ordinary fondant. Let cook to 238° F. Turn the syrup onto a damp
marble or platter and _before it becomes cold_ turn to a cream with a
wooden spatula. When the fondant begins to stiffen, scrape at once into
a bowl and cover with a damp cloth, but do not let the cloth touch the
fondant. Use this fondant in the following recipes.


ROSE CHOCOLATE CREAMS

    Fondant,
    Damask rose color-paste,
    1/2 to 1 whole teaspoonful of rose extract,
    1/2 a pound of Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Put a part or the whole of the fondant into a double boiler over boiling
water. With the point of a toothpick take up a little of the color-paste
and add to the fondant; add the extract and stir until the mixture is
hot, thin and evenly tinted. With two teaspoons drop the mixture into
impressions made in starch; it should be hot and thin enough to run
level on top. When the shapes are cold, remove from the starch, brush
carefully and coat with "Dot" Chocolate.

[Illustration: ROSE AND PISTACHIO CHOCOLATE CREAMS.]


PISTACHIO CHOCOLATE CREAMS

    Fondant,
    Green color-paste,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract,
    1/8 a teaspoonful of almond extract,
    Pistachio nuts in slices and halves,
    1/2 a pound of Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Using green color-paste, vanilla and almond extract mold the fondant in
long shapes. Put a bit of nut in each impression, before filling it with
fondant. When firm coat with "Dot" Chocolate and set half a pistachio
nut on top.


SURPRISE CHOCOLATE CREAMS

[Illustration: SURPRISE CHOCOLATE CREAMS.]

    Fondant,
    Candied or Maraschino cherries,
    Flavoring of almond or vanilla,
    Chopped peanuts,
    1/2 a pound of Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Melt the fondant over hot water and add the flavoring. Put a bit of
cherry in the bottom of each starch impression, then turn in the melted
fondant, to fill the impressions and have them level on the top. Let the
chocolate, broken in bits, be melted over warm water, then add as many
chopped peanuts as can be well stirred into it; let cool to about 80° F.
and in it drop the creams, one at a time; as coated dispose them on
table oil cloth or waxed paper.


CHOCOLATE PEANUT BRITTLE

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE PEANUT BRITTLE.]

    1-1/2 cups of sugar,
    2/3 a cup of water,
    1/2 a cup of glucose (pure corn syrup),
    2 level tablespoonfuls of butter,
    1/2 a pound of _raw_ shelled peanuts,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract,
    1 level teaspoonful of soda,
    1 tablespoonful of cold water,
    1/2 a pound or more of Baker's "Dot" Chocolate.

Put the sugar, water and glucose over the fire; stir till the sugar is
dissolved; wash down the sides of the saucepan with a cloth or the
fingers dipped in cold water, cover and let boil three or four minutes,
then uncover and let cook to 275° F. (when a little is cooled and chewed
it clings but does not stick to the teeth) add the butter and peanuts
and _stir constantly_ until the peanuts are nicely browned (or are of
the color of well roasted peanuts). Dissolve the soda in the cold water,
add the vanilla and the soda and stir vigorously. When the candy is
through foaming, turn it onto a warm and well-oiled marble or platter.
As soon as it has cooled a little on the edges, take hold of it at the
edge and pull out as thin as possible. Loosen it from the receptacle at
the center by running a spatula under it, then turn the whole sheet
upside down, and again pull as thin as possible. Break into small pieces
and when cold coat with "Dot" Chocolate prepared as in previous recipes.
Half of a roasted peanut may be set upon each piece as coated. Note that
the peanuts used in the brittle are raw. The small Spanish peanuts are
the best for this purpose. After the peanuts are shelled, cover them
with boiling water, let boil up once, then skim out and push off the
skin, when they are ready to use.


CHOCOLATE POP CORN BALLS

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE POP CORN BALLS.]

    1-1/2 cups of sugar,
    1/3 a cup of glucose,
    2/3 a cup of water,
    1/3 a cup of molasses,
    3 tablespoonfuls of butter,
    3 squares of Baker's Premium Chocolate,
    1 teaspoonful of vanilla extract,
    About 4 quarts of popped corn, well salted.

Set the sugar, glucose and water over the fire, stir until the sugar is
melted, then wash down the sides of the saucepan, cover and let boil
three or four minutes, then remove the cover and let cook without
stirring to the hard ball degree; add the molasses and butter and stir
constantly until brittle in cold water; remove from the fire and, as
soon as the bubbling ceases, add the chocolate, melted over hot water,
and the vanilla; stir, to mix the chocolate evenly through the candy,
then pour onto the popped corn, mixing the two together meanwhile. With
buttered hands lightly roll the mixture into small balls. Press the
mixture together only just enough to hold it in shape. Discard all the
hard kernels in the corn. Have the corn warm and in a warm bowl.


CHOCOLATE MOLASSES KISSES

[Illustration: CHOCOLATE MOLASSES KISSES.]

    2 cups of coffee A sugar,
    1/3 a cup of glucose, (pure corn syrup),
    2/3 a cup of water,
    1 cup of molasses,
    2 tablespoonfuls of butter,
    1/4 a teaspoonful of salt,
    4 ounces of Baker's Premium Chocolate,
    1 tablespoonful of vanilla extract, or
    1 teaspoonful of essence of peppermint.

Put all the ingredients, save the salt, chocolate and flavoring, over
the fire; let boil rapidly to 260°F., or until brittle when tested in
cold water. During the last of the cooking the candy must be stirred
constantly. Pour onto an oiled platter or marble; pour the chocolate,
melted over hot water, above the candy; as the candy cools on the edges,
with a spatula or the fingers, turn the edges towards the center;
continue this until the candy is cold enough to pull; pull over a hook
until cold; add the flavoring, a little at a time, during the pulling,
cut in short lengths and wrap in waxed paper.




WALTER BAKER & CO., Ltd.

ESTABLISHED 1780


This House has grown to be the largest of its kind in the world and it
has achieved that result by always maintaining the highest standard in
the quality of its cocoa and chocolate preparations and selling them at
the lowest price for which unadulterated articles of high grade can be
put upon the market. Under cover of a similarity in name, trade-mark,
label or wrapper, a number of unscrupulous concerns have, within recent
years, made attempts to get possession of the great market won by this
House, by trading on its good name--selling to unsuspecting consumers
goods of distinctly inferior quality by representing them to be the
products of the genuine "Baker's." The quantity of goods sold in this
way is not so much of an injury to us as the discredit cast upon our
manufactures by leading some consumers to believe that these fraudulent
articles are of our manufacture and that we have lowered the high
standard maintained for so many years. It is difficult to bring the
fraud home to all consumers, as those who are making use of it seek
out-of-the-way places where deception will the more easily pass.

We have letters from housekeepers who have used the genuine Baker goods
for years, expressing their indignation at the attempts of unscrupulous
dealers to foist upon them inferior and adulterated articles by
fraudulently representing them to be of our manufacture.

Statements in the press and in the reports of the Pure Food
Commissioners show that there are on the market at this time many cocoas
and chocolates which have been treated with adulterants, more or less
injurious to health, for the purpose of cheapening the cost and giving a
fictitious appearance of richness and strength. The safest course for
consumers, therefore, is to buy goods bearing the name and trade-mark of
a well-known and reputable manufacturer, and to make sure by a careful
examination that they are getting what they order.

     Our Cocoa and Chocolate Preparations are ABSOLUTELY PURE--free
     from coloring matter, chemical solvents, or adulterants of any
     kind, and are therefore in full conformity to the requirements of
     all National and State Pure Food Laws.

We have behind us one hundred and twenty-nine years of successful
manufacture, and fifty-two highest awards from the great industrial
exhibitions in Europe and America.

We ask the cooperation of all consumers who want to get what they order
and what they pay for to help us--as much in their own interest as
ours--in checking these frauds.

WALTER BAKER & CO., Ltd.



Our registered guarantee under National Pure Food Laws is Serial No.
90.




WALTER BAKER & Co.'s Cocoa and Chocolate Preparations

       *       *       *       *       *

BAKER'S BREAKFAST COCOA

[Illustration: Walker Baker & Co's. BREAKFAST COCOA
               FAC-SIMILE OF 1/2 LB. CAN.]

In 1-5 lb., 1-4 lb., 1-2 lb., 1 lb. and 5 lb. tins

This admirable preparation is made from selected cocoa, from which the
excess of oil has been removed. It is _absolutely pure_, and it is
_soluble_. It has _more than three times the strength_ of cocoa mixed
with starch, arrowroot or sugar, and is, therefore, far more economical,
_costing less than one cent a cup_. It is delicious, nourishing,
strengthening, _easily digested_, and admirably adapted for invalids as
well as for persons in health.

_No alkalies or other chemicals or dyes are used in its preparation._

Trade-Mark on every package

       *       *       *       *       *

BAKER'S CHOCOLATE

[Illustration: WALTER BAKER & CO'S. PREMIUM NO. 1
               FAC-SIMILE OF 1/2 LB. PACKAGE.]

In 1-4 and 1-2 lb. cakes, 1 lb. packages, blue wrapper, yellow label

It is the pure product of carefully selected cocoa beans, to which
nothing has been added and from which nothing has been taken away.
Unequalled for smoothness, delicacy and natural flavor. Celebrated for
more than a century as a nutritious, delicious and flesh-forming
beverage. The high reputation and constantly increasing sales of this
article have led to imitations on a very extensive scale. To distinguish
their product from these imitations Walter Baker & Co., Ltd., have
enclosed their cakes and pound packages in a new envelope or case of
stiff paper, different from any other package. The color of the case is
the same shade of deep blue heretofore used on the Baker packages, and
no change has been made in the color (yellow) and design of the label.
On the outside of the case, the name of the manufacturer is prominently
printed in white letters. On the back of every package a colored
lithograph of the trade-mark, "La Belle Chocolatière" sometimes called
the Chocolate Girl, is printed. Vigorous proceedings will be taken
against anyone imitating the package.

Trade-mark on every package

       *       *       *       *       *

BAKER'S VANILLA CHOCOLATE

In 1-2 lb. and 1-6 lb. cakes and 5c and 10c packages,

is guaranteed to consist solely of choice cocoa and sugar, flavored with
pure vanilla beans. Particular care is taken in its preparation, and a
trial will convince one that it is really a delicious article for eating
or drinking. It is the best sweet chocolate in the market. Used at
receptions and evening parties in place of tea or coffee. The small
cakes form the most convenient, palatable and healthful article of food
that can be carried by bicyclists, tourists and students.

Trade-mark on every package

       *       *       *       *       *

CARACAS CHOCOLATE

[Illustration: WALTER BAKER & CO'S. CARACAS SWEET CHOCOLATE
               FAC-SIMILE 1/4 LB. PACKAGE.]

In 1-8 and 1-4 lb. packages

A delicious article. Good to eat and good to drink. It is one of the
finest and most popular sweet chocolates on the market, and has a
constantly increasing sale in all parts of the country. If you do not
find it at your grocer's, we will send a quarter-pound cake by mail,
prepaid, on receipt of 10 cents in stamps or money.

Trade-mark on every package

       *       *       *       *       *

CENTURY CHOCOLATE

In 1-4 lb. packages

A fine vanilla chocolate for eating or drinking. Put up in very artistic
wrappers.

Trade-mark on every package

       *       *       *       *       *

AUTO-SWEET CHOCOLATE

In 1-6 lb. packages

A fine eating chocolate, enclosed in an attractive wrapper with an
embossed representation of an automobile in colors.

Trade-mark on every package

       *       *       *       *       *

GERMAN SWEET CHOCOLATE

[Illustration: WALTER BAKER & CO'S. GERMAN SWEET CHOCOLATE
               FAC-SIMILE 1/4 LB. PACKAGE.]

In 1-4 lb. and 1-8 lb. packages

is one of the most popular sweet chocolates sold anywhere. It is
palatable, nutritious and healthful and is a great favorite with
children.

_Beware of imitations. The genuine is stamped: "S. German, Dorchester,
Mass."_

Trade-mark (La Belle Chocolatière) on every package

       *       *       *       *       *

DOT CHOCOLATE

In 1-2 lb. cakes; 12 lb. boxes

A high grade chocolate specially prepared for home-made candies, and for
sportsmen's use. If you do not find it at your grocer's write to us and
we will put you in the way of getting it.

In "The Way of the Woods--A Manual for Sportsmen" Edward Breck, the
author, says:

"Chocolate is now regarded as a very high-class food on account of its
nutritive qualities. * * * * * A half cake will keep a man's strength up
for a day without any other food. I never strike off from camp by myself
without a piece of chocolate in my pocket. Do not, however, have
anything to do with the mawkishly sweet chocolates of the candy shops or
the imported milk chocolate, which are not suited for the purpose. We
have something better here in America in Walter Baker & Co.'s "Dot"
brand, which is slightly sweetened."

       *       *       *       *       *

CRACKED COCOA OR COCOA NIBS

In 1-2 lb. and 1 lb. packages, and in 6 lb. and 10 lb. bags

This is the freshly roasted bean cracked into small pieces. It contains
no admixture, and presents the full flavor of the cocoa-bean in all its
natural fragrance and purity. When properly prepared, it is one of the
most economical drinks. Dr. Lankester says cocoa contains as much
flesh-forming matter as beef.

Trade-mark on every package

       *       *       *       *       *

SOLUBLE COCOA

This is a preparation for the special use of druggists and others in
making hot or cold soda. It forms the basis for a delicious, refreshing,
nourishing and strengthening drink.

It is perfectly soluble. It is absolutely pure. It is easily made. It
possesses the full strength and natural flavor of the cocoa-bean. No
chemicals are used in its preparation.

_The directions for making one gallon of syrup are as follows:_

    8 ounces of soluble cocoa,
    8-1/2 pounds of white sugar,
    2-1/2 quarts of water.

Thoroughly dissolve the cocoa in hot water, then add the sugar, and heat
until the mixture boils. Strain while hot. After it has become cool,
sugar may be added if desired.

The Trade is supplied with 1, 4 or 10 lb. decorated canisters.

Trade-mark on every package

       *       *       *       *       *

CHOCOLATE FOR CONFECTIONERS' USE

_Liquid Chocolates_--plain, sweet, light, medium and dark.

_Soluble Cocoa_--for hot or cold soda.

_Absolutely Pure--free from coloring matter, chemical solvents, or
adulterants of any kind, and therefore in full conformity to the
requirements of all National and State Pure Food Laws._

       *       *       *       *       *

VANILLA TABLETS

These are small pieces of chocolate, made from the finest beans, and
done up in fancy foil. The packages are tied with colored ribbons, and
are very attractive in form and delicious in substance. They are much
used for desserts and collations, and at picnics and entertainments for
young people. They are strongly recommended by physicians as a healthy
and nutritious confection for children.

Trade-mark on every package

       *       *       *       *       *

COCOA-BUTTER

In 1-2 lb. and 1-5 lb. cakes, and in metal boxes for toilet uses

One-half the weight of the cocoa-bean consists of a fat called
"cocoa-butter," from its resemblance to ordinary butter. It is
considered of great value as a nutritious, strengthening tonic, being
preferred to cod-liver oil and other nauseous fats so often used in
pulmonary complaints. As a soothing application to chapped hands and
lips, and all irritated surfaces, cocoa-butter has no equal, making the
skin remarkably soft and smooth. Many who have used it say they would
not for any consideration be without it. It is almost a necessary
article for every household.

Trade-mark on every package

       *       *       *       *       *

COCOA-SHELLS

In 1 lb. and 1-2 lb. packages

Cocoa-shells are the thin outer covering of the beans. They have a
flavor similar to but milder than cocoa. Their very low price places
them within the reach of all; and as furnishing a pleasant and healthy
drink, they are considered superior to tea and coffee.

Packed _only_ in 1 lb. and 1/2 lb. papers, with our label and name on
them.

Trade-mark on every package

       *       *       *       *       *

CACAO DES AZTÈQUES

In boxes, 6 lbs. each; 1-2 lb. bottles

A compound formerly known as _Racabout des Arabes_; a most nutritious
preparation; indispensable as an article of diet for children,
convalescents, ladies, and delicate or aged persons. It is composed of
the best nutritive and restoring substances, suitable for the most
delicate system. It is now a _favorite breakfast beverage for ladies and
young persons_, to whom it gives freshness and _embonpoint_. It has
solved the problem of medicine by imparting something which is easily
digestible and at the same time _free from the exciting qualities_ of
coffee and tea, thus making it especially desirable for nervous persons
or those afflicted with weak stomachs.

It has a very agreeable flavor, is easily prepared, and has received the
_commendation of eminent physicians_ as being the best article known for
convalescents and all persons desiring a _light, digestible, nourishing
and strengthening food_.

[Illustration]



INDEX TO RECIPES


MISS PARLOA'S:

Plain Chocolate (For Drinking)
Chocolate, Vienna Style
Breakfast Cocoa
Chocolate Layer Cake
    "     Cake
    "     Marble Cake
    "     Glacé Cake
    "     Glacé
    "     Biscuit
    "     Wafers
Cinderella Cakes
Chocolate Éclairs
    "     Cookies
    "     Gingerbread
Vanilla Icing
Chocolate Icing
    "     Profiteroles
    "     Ice-cream
    "     Cream Pies
    "     Mousse
    "     Charlotte
    "     Bavarian Cream
    "     Cream
    "     Blanc-mange
    "     Cream Renversee
Baked Chocolate Custard
Chocolate Soufflé
    "     Pudding
    "     Meringue Pudding
Milton Pudding
Snow Pudding
Chocolate Sauce
    "     Candy
Cream Chocolate Caramels
Sugar     "        "
Chocolate Creams, No. 1
    "       "     No. 2
    "     Cones
Genesee Bonbons
Chocolate Syrup
Refreshing Drinks for Summer

       *       *       *       *       *

MISS BURR'S:

Cracked Cocoa
For Three Gallons Breakfast Cocoa
Vanilla Chocolate with Whipped Cream
Chocolate Cream Pie
    "     Filling
Meringue
Cocoa Sticks
  "   Frosting
  "   Sauce
  "   Cake
  "   Meringue Pudding
Chocolate Almonds
    "     Coatings
Hot Chocolate Sauce
Cocoa Sponge Cake
Chocolate Frosting
    "     Cake; or, Devil's Food
    "     Ice-cream
    "     Whip
Cocoa Marble Cake
Chocolate Marble Cake
    "     Jelly
Cottage Pudding
Vanilla Sauce
Cocoanut Soufflé
Chocolate Sauce
Cocoa Biscuit
  "   Fudge

       *       *       *       *       *

MISS ROBINSON'S:

Plain Chocolate 1 quart
Cocoa Sponge Cake
  "   Marble  "
  "   Doughnuts
  "   Buns

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. RORER'S:

Chocolate Cake

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. LINCOLN'S:

Chocolate Caramels

       *       *       *       *       *

MISS FARMER'S:

Chocolate Nougat Cake
    "     Cream Candy

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. ARMSTRONG'S:

Chocolate Pudding
    "     Charlotte
Chocolate Jelly with Crystallized Green Gages

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. BEDFORD'S:

Chocolate Crullers
Hot Cocoa Sauce for Ice-cream
Chocolate Macaroons

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. EWING'S:

Creamy Cocoa
   "   Chocolate

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. HILL'S:

Cocoa Frappé
Chocolate Puffs

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. SALZBACHER'S:

Chocolate Hearts

       *       *       *       *       *

Cocoa Charlotte
Chocolate Fudge with Fruit
    "     Macaroons

       *       *       *       *       *

Petits Four
Potato Cake
Spanish Chocolate Cake

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. HILL'S CANDY RECIPES:

Peppermints, Chocolate Mints, etc.
Chocolate Caramel Walnuts
"Dot" Chocolate Coatings
Chocolate Dipped Peppermints
Ginger, Cherry, Apricot and Nut Chocolates
Chocolate Peanut Clusters
    "     Coated Almonds
    "     Dipped Parisian Sweets
Stuffed Dates, Chocolate Dipped
Chocolate Oysterettes
Turkish Paste with French Fruit
Chocolate Pecan Pralines
Vassar Fudge
Smith College Fudge
Wellesley Marshmallow Fudge
Double Fudge
Marbled Fudge
Fudge Hearts or Rounds
Marshmallow Fudge
Chocolate Dipped Fruit Fudge
Chocolate Cocoanut Cakes
Baker's Chocolate "Divinity"
Chocolate Nougatines
Plain Chocolate Caramels
Chocolate Nut Caramels
Ribbon Caramels
Fondant
Almond Chocolate Creams
Cherry Chocolate Creams
Chocolate Peppermints
Fig and Nut Chocolates
Chocolate Marshmallows
Maple Fondant Acorns
Chocolate Almond Bars
Almond Fondant Sticks
Almond Fondant Balls
Walnut Cream Chocolates
To Mold Candy for Dipping
Chocolate Butter Creams
Fondant for Soft Chocolate Creams
Rose Chocolate Creams
Pistachio Chocolate Creams
Surprise Chocolate Creams
Chocolate Peanut Brittle
Chocolate Pop Corn Balls
Chocolate Molasses Kisses

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]



NO OTHER FOOD PRODUCT HAS A LIKE RECORD.

[Illustration]

WALTER BAKER & CO. LTD.

ESTABLISHED 1780.

52 HIGHEST AWARDS.














End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Chocolate and Cocoa Recipes and Home
Made Candy Recipes, by Miss Parloa

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHOCOLATE ***

***** This file should be named 13177-8.txt or 13177-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/1/7/13177/

Produced by Paul Murray, Annika and PG Distributed Proofreaders.
This book was produced from images from Feeding America: The Historic
American Cookbook Project at Michigan State University


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
