Project Gutenberg's Tom Swift and his Electric Locomotive, by Victor Appleton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Tom Swift and his Electric Locomotive
       or, Two Miles a Minute on the Rails

Author: Victor Appleton

Posting Date: July 17, 2008 [EBook #1364]
Release Date: June, 1998

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOM SWIFT AND ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE ***




Produced by Anthony Matonac








TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE

or

Two Miles a Minute on the Rails


By

VICTOR APPLETON




CONTENTS

CHAPTER

     I  A TEMPTING OFFER
    II  TROUBLE STARTS
   III  TOM SWIFT'S FRIENDS
    IV  MUCH TO THINK ABOUT
     V  BARBED WIRE ENTANGLEMENTS
    VI  THE CONTRACT SIGNED
   VII  THE MAN WITH BIG FEET
  VIII  AN ENEMY IN THE DARK
    IX  WHERE WAS KOKU?
     X  A STRANGE CONVERSATION
    XI  TOUCH AND GO
   XII  THE TRY-OUT DAY ARRIVES
  XIII  HOPES AND FEARS
   XIV  SPEED
    XV  THE ENEMY STILL ACTIVE
   XVI  OFF FOR THE WEST
  XVII  THE WRECK OF FORTY-EIGHT
 XVIII  ON THE HENDRICKTON & PAS ALOS
   XIX  PERIL, THE MOTHER OF INVENTION
    XX  THE RESULT
   XXI  THE OPEN SWITCH
  XXII  A DESPERATE CHASE
 XXIII  MR. DAMON AT BAT
  XXIV  PUTTING THE ENEMY TO FLIGHT
   XXV  SPEED AND SUCCESS




TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE


Chapter I

A Tempting Offer


"An electric locomotive that can make two miles a minute over a
properly ballasted roadbed might not be an impossibility," said Mr.
Barton Swift ruminatively. "It is one of those things that are coming,"
and he flashed his son, Tom Swift, a knowing smile.  It had been a
topic of conversation between them before the visitor from the West had
been seated before the library fire and had sampled one of the elder
Swift's good cigars.

"It is not only a future possibility," said the latter gentleman,
shrugging his shoulders. "As far as the Hendrickton and Pas Alos
Railroad Company goes, a two mile a minute gait--not alone on a level
track but through the Pas Alos Range--is an immediate necessity. It's
got to be done now, or our stock will be selling on the curb for about
two cents a share."

"You do not mean just that, do you, Mr. Bartholomew?" asked Tom Swift
earnestly, and staring at the big-little man before the fire.

Mr. Richard Bartholomew was just that--a "big-little man." In the
railroad world, both in construction and management, he had made an
enviable name for himself.

He had actually built up the Hendrickton and Pas Alos from a
narrow-gauge, "jerkwater" road into a part of a great cross-continent
system that tapped a wonderfully rich territory on both sides of the
Pas Alos Range.

For some years the H. & P. A. had a monopoly of that territory.  Now,
as Mr. Bartholomew intimated, it was threatened with such rivalry from
another railroad and other capitalists, that the H. & P. A. was being
looked upon in the financial market as a shaky investment.

But Tom Swift repeated:

"You do not mean just that, do you, Mr. Bartholomew?"

Mr. Bartholomew, who was a little man physically, rolled around in his
chair to face the young fellow more directly. His own eyes sparkled in
the firelight. His olive face was flushed.

"That is much nearer the truth, young man," he said, somewhat harshly
because of his suppressed emotion, "than I want people at large to
suspect. As I have told your father, I came here to put all my cards on
the table; but I expect the Swift Construction Company to take anything
I may say as said in confidence."

"We quite understand that, Mr. Bartholomew," said the elder Swift,
softly. "You can speak freely. Whether we do business or not, these
walls are soundproof, and Tom and I can forget, or remember, as we
wish. Of course if we take up any work for you, we must confide to a
certain extent in our close associates and trusted mechanics."

"Humph!" grunted the visitor, turning restlessly again in his chair.
Then he said: "I agree as the necessity of that last statement; but I
can only hope that these walls are soundproof."

"What's that?" demanded Tom, rather sharply. He was a bright looking
young fellow with an alert air and a rather humorous smile. His father
was a semi-invalid; but Tom possessed all the mental vigor and muscular
energy that a young man should have. He had not neglected his Athletic
development while he made the best use of his mental powers.

"Believe me," said the visitor, quite as harshly as before, "I begin to
doubt the solidity of all walls. I know that I have been watched, and
spied upon, and that eavesdroppers have played hob with our affairs.

"Of late, there has been little planned in the directors' room of the
H. & P. A. that has not seeped out and aided the enemy in foreseeing
our moves."

"The enemy?" repeated Mr. Swift, with mild surprise.

"That's it exactly! The enemy!" replied Mr. Bartholomew shortly. "The
H. & P. A. has got the fight of its life on its hands. We had a hard
enough time fighting nature and the elements when we laid the first
iron for the road a score of years ago.  Now I am facing a fight that
must grow fiercer and fiercer as time goes on until either the H. & P.
A. smashes the opposition, or the enemy smashes it."

"What enemy is this you speak of?" asked Tom, much interested.

"The proposed Hendrickton & Western. A new road, backed by new capital,
and to be officered and built by new men in the construction and
railroad game.

"Montagne Lewis--you've heard of him, I presume--is at the head of the
crowd that have bought the little old Hendrickton & Western, lock,
stock and barrel.

"They have franchises for extending the road. In the old days the
legislatures granted blanket franchises that allowed any group of
moneyed men to engage in any kind of business as side issues to
railroading. Montagne Lewis and his crowd have got a 'plenty-big'
franchise.

"They have begun laying iron. It parallels, to a certain extent, our
own line. Their surveyors were smarter than the men who laid out the H.
& P. A. I admit it. Besides, the country out there is developed more
than it was a score of years ago when I took hold.

"All this enters into the fight between Montagne Lewis and me.  But
there is something deeper," said the little man, with almost a snarl,
as he thrashed about again in his chair. "I beat Montagne Lewis at one
big game years ago. He is a man who never forgets--and who never
hesitates to play dirty politics if he has to, to bring about his own
ends.

"I know that I have been watched. I know that I was followed on this
trip East. He has private detectives on my track continually. And
worse. All the gunmen of the old and wilder West are not dead. There's
a fellow named Andy O'Malley--well, never mind him. The game at present
is to keep anybody in Lewis's employ from getting wise to why I came to
see you."

"What you say is interesting," Mr. Swift here broke in quietly.  "But I
have already been puzzled by what you first said. Just why have you
come to us--to Tom and me--in reference to your railroad difficulties?"

"And this suggestion you have made," added Tom, "about a possible
electric locomotive of a faster type than has, ever yet been put on the
rails?"

"That is it, exactly," replied Bartholomew, sitting suddenly upright in
his chair. "We want faster electric motor power than has ever yet been
invented. We have got to have it, or the H. & P. A. might as well be
scrapped and the whole territory out there handed over to Montagne
Lewis and his H. & W. That is the sum total of the matter, gentlemen.
If the Swift Construction Company cannot help us, my railroad is going
to be junk in about three years from this beautiful evening."

His emphasis could not fail to impress both the elder and the younger
Swift. They looked at each other, and the interest displayed upon the
father's countenance was reflected upon the features of the son.

If there was anything Tom Swift liked it was a good fight. The clash of
diverse interests was the breath of life to the young fellow. And for
some years now, always connected in some way with the development of
his inventive genius, he had been entangled in battles both of wits and
physical powers. Here was the suggestion of something that would entail
a struggle of both brain and brawn.

"Sounds good," muttered Tom, gazing at the railroad magnate with
considerable admiration.

"Let us hear all about it," Mr. Swift said to Bartholomew.  "Whether we
can help you or not, we're interested."

"All right," replied the visitor again. "Whether I was followed East,
and here to Shopton, or not doesn't much matter. I will put my
proposition up to you, and then I'll ask, if you don't want to go into
it, that you keep the business absolutely secret. I have got to put
something over on Montagne Lewis and his crowd, or throw up the sponge.
That's that!"

"Go ahead, Mr. Bartholomew," observed Tom's father, encouragingly.

"To begin with, four hundred miles of our road is already electrified.
We have big power stations and supply heat and light and power to
several of the small cities tapped by the H. & P. A.  It is a paying
proposition as it stands. But it is only paying because we carry the
freight traffic--all the freight traffic--of that region.

"If the H. & W. breaks in on our monopoly of that, we shall soon be so
cut down that our invested capital will not earn two per cent.--No, by
glory! not one-and-a-half per cent.--and our stock will be dished. But
I have worked out a scheme, Gentlemen, by which we can counter-balance
any dig Lewis can give us in the ribs.

"If we can extend our electrified line into and through the Pas Alos
Range our freight traffic can be handled so cheaply and so effectively
that nothing the Hendrickton & Western can do for years to come will
hurt us. Get that?"

"I get your statement, Mr. Bartholomew," said Mr. Swift. "But it is
merely a statement as yet."

"Sure. Now I will give you the particulars. We are using the Jandel
locomotives on our electrified stretch of road. You know that patent?"

"I know something about it, Mr. Bartholomew," said the younger
inventor. "I have felt some interest in the electric locomotive, though
I have done nothing practical in the matter. But I know the Jandel
patent."

"It is about the best there is--and the most recent; but it does not
fill the bill. Not for the H. & P. A., anyway," said Mr. Bartholomew,
shortly.

"What does it lack?" asked Mr. Swift.

"Speed. It's got the power for heavy hauls. It could handle the freight
through the Pas Alos Range. But it would slow up our traffic so that
the shippers would at once turn to the Hendrickton & Western. You
understand that their rails do not begin to engage the grades that our
engineers thought necessary when the old H. & P. A. was built."

"I get that," said Tom briskly. "You have come here, then, to interest
us in the development of a faster but quite as powerful type of
electric locomotive as the Jandel."

"Stated to the line!" exclaimed Mr. Bartholomew, smiting the arm of his
chair with his clenched fist. "That is it, young man.  You get me
exactly. And now I will go on to put my proposition to you."

"Do so, Mr. Bartholomew," murmured the old inventor, quite as much
interested as his son.

"I want you to make a study of electric motive power as applied to
track locomotives, with the idea of utilizing our power plants and
others like them, and even with the possibility in mind of the
continued use of the Jandel locomotives on our more level stretches of
road.

"But I want your investigation to result in the building of locomotives
that will make a speed of two miles a minute, or as near that as
possible, on level rails, and be powerful enough to snake our heavy
freight trains through the hills and over the steep grades so rapidly
that even two engines, a pusher and a hauler, cannot beat the electric
power."

"Some job, that, I'll say," murmured Tom Swift.

"Exactly. Some job. And it is the only thing that will save the H. & P.
A.," said Mr. Bartholomew decidedly. "I put it up to you Swifts. I have
heard of some of your marvelous inventions. Here is something that is
already invented. But it needs development."

"I see," said Mr. Swift, and nodded.

"It interests me," admitted Tom. "As I say, I have given some thought
to the electric locomotive."

"This is the age of speed," said Mr. Bartholomew earnestly.  "Rapidity
in handling freight and kindred things will be the salvation, and the
only salvation, of many railroads. Tapping a rich territory is not
enough. The road that can offer the quickest and cheapest service is
the road that is going to keep out of a receivership. Believe me, I
know!"

"You should," said Mr. Swift mildly. "Your experience should have
taught you a great deal about the railroad business."

"It has. But that knowledge is worth just nothing at all without swift
power and cheap traffic. Those are the problems today. Now, I am going
to take a chance. If it doesn't work, my road is dished in any case. So
I feel that the desperate chance is the only chance."

"What is that?" asked Tom Swift, sitting forward in his chair.  "I, for
one, feel so much interested that I will do anything in reason to find
the answer to your traffic problem."

"That's the boy!" ejaculated Richard Bartholomew. "I will give it to
you in a few words. If you will experiment with the electric locomotive
idea, to develop speed and power over and above the Jandel patent, and
will give me the first call on the use of any patents you may contrive,
I will put up twenty-five thousand dollars in cash which shall be yours
whether I can make use of a thing you invent or not."

"Any time limit in this agreement, Mr. Bartholomew?" asked Tom, making
a few notes on a scratch pad before him on the library table.

"What do you say to three months?"

"Make it six, if you can," Tom said with continued briskness.  "It
interests me. I'll do my best. And I want you to get your money's
worth."

"All right. Make it six," said Mr. Bartholomew. "But the quicker you
dig something up, the better for me. Now, that is the first part of my
proposition."

"All right, sir. And the second?"

"If you succeed in showing me that you can build and operate an
electric locomotive that will speed two miles a minute on a level track
and will get a heavy drag over the mountain grades, as I said, as
surely as two engines of the coal-burning or oil-burning type, I will
pay you a hundred thousand dollars bonus, besides buying all the
engines you can build of this new type for the first two years. I've
got to have first call; but the hundred thousand will be yours free and
clear, and the price of the locomotives you build can be adjusted by
any court of agreement that you may suggest."

Tom Swift's face glowed. He realized that this offer was not only
generous, but that it made it worth his while dropping everything else
he had in hand and devoting his entire time and thought for even six
months to the proposition of developing the electric locomotive.

He looked at his father and nodded. Mr. Swift said, calmly:

"We take you on that offer, Mr. Bartholomew. Tom has the facts on
paper, and we will hand it to Mr. Newton, our financial manager, in the
morning. If you will remain in town for twenty-four hours, the contract
can be signed."

"Suits me," declared. Richard Bartholomew, rising quickly from his
chair. "I confess I hoped you would take me up quite as promptly as you
have. I want to get back West again.

"We will see you in the office of the company at two o'clock tomorrow,"
said Tom Swift confidently.

"Better than good! And now, if that trailer that I am pretty sure
Montagne Lewis sent after me does not get wise to the subject of our
talk, it may be a slick job we have done and will do. I admit I am
rather afraid of the enemy. You Swifts must keep your plans in utter
darkness."

After a little talk on more ordinary affairs, Mr. Bartholomew took his
departure. It was getting late in the evening, and Tom Swift had an
engagement. While old Rad, their colored servant, was helping him on
with his coat preparatory to Tom's leaving the house, his father called
from the library:

"Got those notes in a safe place, Tom?"

"Safest in the world, Dad," his son replied. But he did not go into
details. Tom considered the "safest place in the world" just then was
his own wallet, which was tucked into an inside pocket of his vest "I'm
going to see Mary Nestor, Father," said Tom, as he went to the front
door and opened it.

He halted a moment with the knob of the door in his hand. The porch was
deep in shadows, but he thought he had seen something move there.

"That you, Koku?" asked Tom in an ordinary voice. Sometimes his
gigantic servant wandered about the house at night. He was a strange
person, and he had a good many thoughts in his savage brain that even
his young master did not understand.

There was no reply to Tom's question, so he walked down the steps and
out at the gate. It was not a long distance to the Nestor house, and
the air was brisk and keen, in spite of the fact that threatening
clouds masked the stars.

Two blocks from the house he came to a high wall which separated the
street from the grounds of an old dwelling. Tom suddenly noticed that
the usual street lights on this block had been extinguished--blown out
by the wind, perhaps.

Involuntarily he quickened his steps. He reached the archway in the
wall. Here was the gate dividing the private grounds from the street.
As he strode into the shadow of this place a voice suddenly halted Tom
Swift.

"Hands up! Put 'em up and don't be slow about it!" A bulky figure
loomed in the dark. Tom saw the highwayman's club poised threateningly
over his head.




Chapter II

Trouble Starts


The fact that he was stopped by a footpad smote Tom Swift's mind as not
a particularly surprising adventure. He had heard that several of that
gentry had been plying their trade about the outskirts of the town. To
a degree he was prepared for this sudden event.

Then there flashed into Tom's mind the thought of what Mr. Richard
Bartholomew had said regarding the spy he believed had followed him
from the West. Could it be possible that some hired thug sent by
Montagne Lewis and his crooked crowd of financiers considered that Tom
Swift had obtained information from the president of the H. & P. A.
that might do his employers signal service?

Tom Swift had fallen in with many adventures--and some quite thrilling
ones--since, as a youth, he was first introduced to the reader in the
initial volume of this series, entitled "Tom Swift and His Motor
Cycle." His first experiences as an inventor, coached by his father,
who had spent his life in the experimental laboratory and workshop, was
made possible by his purchase from Mr. Wakefield Damon, now one of his
closest friends, of a broken-down motor cycle.

Through a series of inventions, some of them of a marvelous kind, Tom
Swift, aided by his father, had forged ahead, building motor boats,
airships, submarines, monoplanes, motion picture cameras, searchlights,
cannons, photo-telephones, war tanks. Of late, as related in "Tom Swift
Among the Fire Fighters," he had engaged in the invention of an
explosive bomb carrying flame-quenching chemicals that would, in time,
revolutionize fire-fighting in tall buildings.

The matter that Mr. Richard Bartholomew, the railroad magnate, had
brought to Tom's and his father's attention had deeply interested the
young inventor. Thought of the electric locomotive, the development of
which the railroad president stated was the only salvation of the
finances of the H. & P. A., had so held Tom's attention as he walked
along the street that being stopped in this sudden way was even more
startling than such an incident might ordinarily have been.

Tom was a muscular young fellow; but a club held over one's head by a
burly thug would have shaken the courage of anybody.  Dark as it was
under the archway the young fellow saw that the bulk of the man was
much greater than his own.

"That's right, sonny," said the stranger, in a sneering tone.  "You got
just the right idea. When I say 'Stick 'em up' I mean it. Never take a
chance. Ah--ah!"

The fellow ripped open Tom's overcoat, almost tearing the buttons off.
Another masterful jerk and his victim's jacket was likewise parted
widely. He did not lower the club for an instant.  He thrust his left
hand into the V-shaped parting of the young fellow's vest.

It was then that Tom was convinced of what the fellow was after. He
remembered the notes he had made regarding the contract that was to be
signed on the morrow between the Swift Construction Company and
President Richard Bartholomew of the H. & P. A. Railroad. He
remembered, too, the figure he thought he had seen in the dark porch of
the house as he so recently left it.

Mr. Bartholomew had considered it very possible that he was being spied
upon. This was one of the spies--a Westerner, as his speech betrayed.
But Tom was suddenly less fearful than he had been when first attacked.

It did not seem possible to him that Mr. Bartholomew's enemies would
allow their henchman to go too far to obtain information of the
railroad president's intentions. This fellow was merely attempting to
frighten him.

A sense of relief came to Tom Swift's assistance. He opened his lips to
speak and could the thug have seen his face more clearly in the dark he
would have been aware of the fact that the young inventor smiled.

The fellow's groping hand entered between Tom's vest and his shirt. The
coarse fingers seized upon Tom's wallet. Nobody likes to be robbed, no
matter whether the loss is great or small. There was not much money in
the wallet, nor anything that could be turned into money by a thief.

These facts enabled Tom, perhaps, to bear his loss with some fortitude.
The highwayman drew forth the wallet and thrust it into his own coat
pocket. He made no attempt to take anything else from the young
inventor.

"Now, beat it!" commanded the fellow. "Don't look back and don't run or
holler. Just keep moving--in the way you were headed before. Vamoose."

More than ever was Tom assured that the man was from the West.  His
speech savored of Mexican phrases and slang terms used mainly by
Western citizens. And his abrupt and masterly manner and speech aided
in this supposition. Tom Swift stayed not to utter a word. It was true
he was not so frightened as he had at first been. But he was quite sure
that this man was no person to contend with under present conditions.

He strode away along the sidewalk toward the far corner of the wall
that surrounded this estate. Shopton had not many of such important
dwellings as this behind the wall. Its residential section was made up
for the most part of mechanics' homes and such plain but substantial
houses as his father's.

Prospering as the Swifts had during the last few years, neither Tom nor
his father had thought their plain old house too poor or humble for a
continued residence. Tom was glad to make money, but the inventions he
had made it by were vastly more important to his mind than what he
might obtain by any lavish expenditure of his growing fortune.

This matter of the electric locomotive that had been brought to his
attention by the Western railroad magnate had instantly interested the
young inventor. The possibility of there being a clash of interests in
the matter, and the point Mr. Bartholomew made of his enemies seeking
to thwart his hope of keeping the H.  & P. A. upon a solid financial
footing, were phases of the affair that likewise concerned the young
fellow's thought.

Now he was sure that Mr. Bartholomew was right. The enemies of the H. &
P. A. were determined to know all that the railroad president was
planning to do. They would naturally suspect that his trip East to
visit the Swift Construction Company was no idle jaunt.

Tom had turned so many fortunate and important problems of invention
into certainties that the name of the Swift Construction Company was
broadly known, not alone throughout the United States but in several
foreign countries. Montagne Lewis, whom Tom knew to be both a powerful
and an unscrupulous financier, might be sure that Mr. Bartholomew's
visit to Shopton and to the young inventor and his father was of such
importance that he would do well through his henchmen to learn the
particulars of the interview.

Tom remembered Mr. Bartholomew's mention of a name like Andy O'Malley.
This was probably the man who had done all that he could, and that
promptly, to set about the discovery of Mr. Bartholomew's reason for
visiting the Swifts.

Without doubt the man had slunk about the Swift house and had peered
into one of the library windows while the interview was proceeding. He
had observed Tom making notes on the scratch pad and judged correctly
that those notes dealt with the subject under discussion between the
visitor from the West and the Swifts.

He had likewise seen Tom thrust the paper into his wallet and the
wallet into his inside vest pocket. Instead of dogging Mr.
Bartholomew's footsteps after that gentleman left the Swift house, the
man had waited for the appearance of Tom. When he was sure that the
young fellow was preparing to walk out, and the direction he was to
stroll, the thug had run ahead and ensconced himself in the archway on
this dark block.

All these things were plain enough. The notes Tom had taken regarding
the offer Mr. Bartholomew had made for the development of the electric
locomotive might, under some circumstances, be very important. At
least, the highwayman evidently thought them such. But Tom had another
thought about that.

One thing the young inventor was convinced about, as he strode briskly
away from the scene of the hold-up: There was going to be trouble. It
had already begun.




Chapter III

Tom Swift's Friends


Tom was still walking swiftly when he arrived in sight of Mary Nestor's
home. He was so filled with excitement both because of the hold-up and
the new scheme that Mr. Richard Bartholomew had brought to him from the
West, that he could keep neither to himself. He just had to tell Mary!

Mary Nestor was a very pretty girl, and Tom thought she was just about
right in every particular. Although he had been about a good deal for a
young fellow and had seen girls everywhere, none of them came up to
Mary. None of them held Tom's interest for a minute but this girl whom
he had been around with for years and whom he had always confided in.

As for the girl herself, she considered Tom Swift the very nicest young
man she had ever seen. He was her beau-ideal of what a young man should
be. And she entered enthusiastically into the plans for everything that
Tom Swift was interested in.

Mary was excited by the story Tom told her in the Nestor sitting room.
The idea of the electric locomotive she saw, of course, was something
that might add to Tom's laurels as an inventor. But the other phase of
the evening's adventure--"Tom, dear!" she murmured with no little
disturbance of mind. "That man who stopped you! He is a thief, and a
dangerous man! I hate to think of your going home alone."

"He's got what he was after," chuckled Tom. "Is it likely he will
bother me again?"

"And you do not seem much worried about it," she cried, in wonder.

"Not much, I confess, Mary," said Tom, and grinned.

"But if, as you suppose, that man was working for Mr. Bartholomew's
enemies--"

"I am convinced that he was, for he did not rob me of my watch and
chain or loose money. And he could have done so easily. I don't mind
about the old wallet. There was only five dollars in it."

"But those notes you said you took of Mr. Bartholomew's offer?"

"Oh, yes," chuckled Tom again. "Those notes. Well, I may as well
explain to you, Mary, and not try to puzzle you any longer.  But that
highwayman is sure going to be puzzled a long, long time."

"What do you mean, Tom?"

"Those notes were jotted down in my own brand of shorthand.  Such
stenographic notes would scarcely be readable by anybody else. Ho, ho!
When that bold, bad hold-up gent turns the notes over to Montagne
Lewis, or whoever his principal is, there will be a sweet time."

"Oh, Tom! isn't that fun?" cried Mary, likewise much amused.

"I can remember everything we said there in the library," Tom
continued. "I'll see Ned tonight on my way home from here, and he will
draw a contract the first thing in the morning."

"You are a smart fellow, Tom!" said Mary, her laughter trilling sweetly.

"Many thanks, Ma'am! Hope I prove your compliment true. This
two-mile-a-minute stunt--"

"It seems wonderful," breathed Mary.

"It sure will be wonderful if we can build a locomotive that will do
such fancy lacework as that," observed Tom eagerly. "It will be a great
stunt!"

"A wonderful invention, Tom."

"More wonderful than Mr. Bartholomew knows," agreed the young fellow.
"An electric locomotive with both great speed and great hauling power
is what more than one inventor has been aiming at for two or three
decades. Ever since Edison and Westinghouse began their experiments, in
truth."

"Is the locomotive they are using out there a very marvelous machine?"
asked the girl, with added interest.

"No more marvelous than the big electric motors that drag the trains
into New York City, for instance, through the tunnels.  Steam engines
cannot be used in those tunnels for obvious, as well as legal, reasons.
They are all wonderful machines, using third-rail power.

"But that Jandel patent that Mr. Bartholomew is using out there on the
H. & P. A. is probably the highest type of such motors. It is up to us
to beat that. Fortunately I got a pass into the Jandel shops a few
months ago and I studied at first hand the machine Mr. Bartholomew is
using."

"Isn't that great!" cried Mary.

"Well, it helps some. I at least know in a general way the 'how' of the
construction of the Jandel locomotive. It is simple enough. Too simple
by far, I should say, to get both speed and power. We'll see," and he
nodded his head thoughtfully.

Tom did not stay long with the girl, for it was already late in the
evening when he had arrived at her house. As he got up to depart Mary's
anxiety for his safety revived.

"I wish you would take care now, Tom. Those men may hound you."

"What for?" chuckled the young inventor. "They have the notes they
wanted."

"But that very thing--the fact that you fooled them--will make them
more angry. Take care."

"I have a means of looking out for myself, after all," said Tom
quietly, seeing that he must relieve her mind. "I let that fellow get
away with my wallet; but I won't let him hurt me. Don't fear."

She had opened the door. The lamplight fell across porch and steps, and
in a broad white band even to the gate and sidewalk.  There was a
motor-car slowing down right before the open gate.

"Who's this?" queried Tom, puzzled.

A sharp voice suddenly was raised in an exclamatory explosion.

"Bless my breakshoes! is that Tom Swift? Just the chap I was looking
for. Bless my mileage-book! this saves me time and money."

"Why, it's Mr. Wakefield Damon," Mary cried, with something like relief
in her tones. "You can ride home in his car, Tom."

"All right, Mary. Don't be afraid for me," replied Tom Swift, and ran
down the walk to the waiting car.

"Bless my vest buttons! Tom Swift, my heart swells when I see you--"

"And is like to burst off the said vest buttons?" chuckled the young
fellow, stepping in beside his eccentric friend who blessed everything
inanimate in his florid speech.

"I am delighted to catch you--although, of course," and Tom knew the
gentleman's eyes twinkled, "I could have no idea that you were over
here at Mary's, Tom."

"Of course not," rejoined the young inventor calmly. "Seeing that I
only come to see her just as often as I get a chance."

"Bless my memory tablets! is that the fact?" chuckled Mr. Damon.
"Anyway, I wanted to see you so particularly that I drove over in my
car tonight--"

"Wait a minute," said Tom, hastily. "Is this important?"

"I think so, Tom."

"Let me get something else off of my mind first, then, Mr. Damon," Tom
Swift said quickly. "Drive around by Ned's house, will you, please? Ned
Newton's. After I speak a minute with him I will be at your service.

"Surely, Tom; surely," agreed the gentleman.

The automobile had been running slowly. Mr. Damon knew the streets of
Shopton very well, and he headed around the next corner. As the car
turned, a figure bounded out of the shadow near the house line. Two
long strides, and the man was on the running board of the car upon the
side where Tom Swift sat. Again an ugly club was raised above the young
fellow's head.

"You're the smart guy!" croaked the coarse voice Tom had heard before.
"Think you can bamboozle me, do you? Up with 'em!"

"Bless my spark-plug!" gasped Mr. Wakefield Damon.

Either from nervousness or intention, he jerked the steering wheel so
that the car made a sudden leap away from the curb. The figure of the
stranger swayed.

Instantly Tom Swift struck the man's arm up higher and from under his
own coat appeared something that bulked like a pistol in his right
hand. He had intimated to Mary Nestor that he carried something with
which to defend himself from highwaymen if he chose to. This invention,
his ammonia gun, now came into play.

"Bless my failing eyesight!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, as he shot the
motor-car ahead again in a straight line.

The man who had accosted Tom so fiercely fell off the running board and
rolled into the gutter, screaming and choking from the fumes from Tom's
gun.

"Drive on!" commanded the young inventor. "If he keeps bellowing like
that the police will pick him up. I guess he will let us alone
here-after."

"Bless my short hairs and long ones!" chuckled Mr. Damon. "You are the
coolest young fellow, Tom, that I ever saw. That man must have been a
highwayman. And it is of some of those gentry that I drove over to
Shopton this evening to talk to you about."




Chapter IV

Much to Think About


Although it was now nearing ten o'clock on this eventful evening, Tom
knew that he would find Ned Newton at home. When Mr. Damon's car
stopped before the house there was a light in Ned's room and the front
door opened almost as soon as Tom rang. Mr. Damon left the car and
entered with the young inventor at his invitation.

"What's up?" was Ned's greeting, looking at the two curiously as he
ushered them in. "I see this isn't entirely a social call," and he
laughed as he shook the older man's hand.

"Bless my particular star!" exclaimed the latter excitedly. "Of all the
thrilling adventures that anybody ever got into, it is this Tom Swift
who cooks them up! Why, Newton! do you know that we have been held up
by a highwayman within two blocks of this very house?"

"And that of course was Tom's fault?" suggested Ned, still smiling.

"It wouldn't have happened if he had not been with me," said Mr. Damon.

"I am curious," said Ned, as they seated themselves. "Who was the
footpad? What drew his attention to you two? Tell me about it."

"Bless my suspender buckles!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "You tell him, Tom.
I don't understand it myself, yet."

"I think I can explain. But whatever I tell you both, you must hold in
secret. Father and I have been entrusted with some private information
tonight and I am going to take you, Ned, and Mr. Damon, into the
business in a confidential way."

"Let's have it," begged Newton. "Anything to do with the works?"

"It is," answered Tom gravely. "We are going to take up a proposition
that promises big things for the Swift Construction Company."

"A big thing financially?"

"I'll say so. And it looks as though we were mixing into a conspiracy
that may breed trouble in more ways than one."

Tom went on to sketch briefly the situation of the Hendrickton & Pas
Alos Railroad as brought to the attention of the Swifts by the
railroad's president. First of all his two listeners were deeply
interested in the proposition Mr. Richard Bartholomew had made the
inventors. Ned Newton jotted down briefly the agreement to be
incorporated in the contract to be drawn and signed, by the Swift
Construction Company and the president of the H. & P. A.  road.

"This looks like a big thing for the company, Tom," the young manager
said with enthusiasm, while Mr. Damon listened to it all with mouth and
eyes open.

"Bless my watch-charm!" murmured the latter. "An electric locomotive
that can travel two miles a minute? Whew!"

"Sounds like a big order, Tom," added Ned, seriously.

"It is a big order. I am not at all sure it can be done," agreed Tom,
thoughtfully. "But under the terms Mr. Bartholomew offers it is worth
trying, don't you think?"

"That twenty-five thousand dollars is as good as yours anyway,"
declared his chum with finality. "I'll see there is no loophole in the
contract and the money must be placed in escrow so that there can be no
possibility of our losing that. The promise of a hundred thousand
dollars must be made binding as well."

"I know you will look out for those details, Ned," Tom said with a wave
of his hand.

"That is what I am here for," agreed the financial manager.  "Now, what
else? I fancy the building of such a locomotive looks feasible to you
and your father or you would not go into it."

"But two miles a minute!" murmured Mr. Damon again. "Bless my prize
pumpkins!"

"The idea of speed enters into it, yes," said Tom thoughtfully.  "In
fact electric motor power has always been based on speed, and on
cheapness of moving all kinds of traffic.

"Look here!" he exclaimed earnestly, "what do you suppose the first
people to dabble in electrically driven vehicles were aiming at? The
motor-car? The motor boat? Trolley cars? All those single motor sort of
things? Not much they weren't!"

"Bless my glove buttons!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, dragging off his
gauntlets as he spoke. "I don't get you at all, Tom! What do you mean?"

"I mean to say that the first experiments in the use of electricity as
a motive power were along the electrification of the steam locomotive.
Everybody realized that if a motor could be built powerful enough and
speedy enough to drag a heavy freight or passenger train over the
ordinary railroad right of way, the cost of railroad operation would be
enormously decreased.

"Coal costs money--heaps of money now. Oil costs even more. But even
with a third-rail patent, a locomotive successfully built to do the
work of the great Moguls and mountain climbers of the last two decades,
and electrically driven, will make a great difference on the credit
side of any railroad's books."

"Right-o!" exclaimed Ned. "I can see that."

"That was the object of the first experiments in electric motive
power," repeated Tom. "And it continues to be the big problem in
electricity. The Jandel locomotive is undoubtedly the last word so far
as the construction of an electric locomotive is concerned. But it
falls down in speed and power. I thought so myself when I saw that
locomotive and looked over the results of its work. And this Mr.
Bartholomew has assured father and me this evening that it is a fact.

"It has a record of a mile a minute on a level or easy grade; but it
can't show goods when climbing a real hill. It slows up both freight
and passenger traffic on the Hendrickton & Pas Alos road. That range of
hills is too much for it.

"So the Swift Construction Company is going to step in," concluded the
young inventor eagerly. "I believe we can do it.  I've the nucleus of
an idea in my head. I never had a problem put up to me, Ned and Mr.
Damon, that interested me more. So why shouldn't I go at it? Besides, I
have dad to advise me."

"That's right," agreed Ned. "Why shouldn't you? And with such a
contract as you have been offered--"

"Bless my bootsoles!" ejaculated Mr. Damon, getting up and tramping
about the room in his excitement. "I thought the trolley cars that run
between Shopton and Waterfield were about the fastest things on rails."

"Not much. The trolley car is a narrow and prescribed manner of using
electricity for motive power. The motor runs but one car--or one and a
trailer, at most," said Tom. "As I have pointed out, the problem is to
build a machine that will transmit power enough to draw the enormous
weight of a loaded freight train, and that over steep grades.

"A motor for each car is a costly matter. That is why trolley car
companies, no matter how many passengers their cars carry, are so often
on the verge of financial disaster. The margin of profit is too narrow.

"But if you can get a locomotive built that will drag a hundred cars!
Ah! how does that sound?" demanded Tom. "See the difference?"

"Bless my volts and amperes!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "I should say I do!
Why, Tom, you make the problem as plain as plain can be."

"In theory," supplemented Ned Newton, although he meant to suggest no
doubt of his chum's ability to solve almost any problem.

"You've hit it," said Tom promptly. "I only have a theory so far
regarding such a locomotive. But to the inventor the theory always must
come first. You understand that, Ned?"

"I not only appreciate that fact," said his chum warmly; "but I believe
that you are the fellow to show something definite along the line of an
improved electric locomotive. But, whether you can reach the high mark
set by the president of that railroad--"

"Two miles a minute!" breathed Mr. Damon in agreement. "Bless my
wind-gauge! It doesn't seem possible!"

Tom Swift shrugged his shoulders. "It is the impossible that inventors
have to overcome. If we experimenters believed in the impossible little
would be done in this world, to advance mechanical science at least.
Every invention was impossible until the chap who put it through built
his first working model."

"That's understood, old boy," said Ned, already busily scratching off
the form of the contract he proposed to show the company's legal
advisers early in the morning.

When he had read over the notes he had made Tom O.K.'d them.  "That is
about as I had the items set down myself on the sheet that fellow stole
from me."

"Wait!" exclaimed Ned, as Tom arose from his chair. "Do you know what
strikes me after your telling me about your second hold-up?"

"What's that?" asked his chum.

"Are you sure that was the same fellow who stole your wallet?"

"Quite sure."

"Then his second attack on you proves that he got wise to the fact that
your notes were in shorthand. He had a chance to study them while you
visited with Mary Nestor."

"Like enough."

"I wonder if it doesn't prove that the fellow has somebody in cahoots
with him right here in Shopton?" ruminated Ned.

"Bless my spare tire!" ejaculated Mr. Damon, who had already started
for the door but now turned back.

"That's an idea, Ned," agreed Tom Swift. "It would seem that he had
consulted with some superior," said the young manager of the Swift
Construction Company. "This hold-up man may be from the West; but
perhaps he did not follow Bartholomew alone."

"I'd like to know who the other fellow is," said Tom thoughtfully. "I
would know the man who attacked me, both by his bulk and his voice.

"Me, too," put in Mr. Damon. "Bless my indicator! I'd know the
scoundrel if I met him again."

"The thing to do," said Ned Newton confidently, "is to identify the man
who robbed you tonight as soon as possible and then, if he hangs around
Shopton, to mark well anybody he associates with."

"Perhaps they will not bother me any more," said Tom, rather carelessly.

"And perhaps they will," grumbled Mr. Damon. "Bless my self-starter!
they may try something mean again this very night. Come on, Tom. I want
to run you home. And on the way, I tell you, I've got something to put
up to you myself. It may not promise a small fortune like this electric
locomotive business; but bless my barbed wire fence! my trouble has
more than a little to do with footpads, too."

He led the way out of the house and to the motor car again. In a minute
he had started his engine, and Tom, jumping in beside him, was borne
away toward his own home.




Chapter V

Barbed Wire Entanglements


"This gets us to your particular trouble, Mr. Damon," Tom Swift said,
while the motor car was rolling along. "You intimated that you had
something to consult me about."

"Bless my windshield! I should say I had," exclaimed the eccentric
gentleman, swinging around a corner at rather a fast clip.

"And has it to do with highwaymen?" asked Tom, much amused.

"Some of the same gentry, Tom," declared Mr. Damon. "I haven't any
peace of my life, I really haven't!"

"Who is troubling you, sir?"

"Why, what nonsense that is, to ask that!" ejaculated the gentleman.
"If I knew who they were I wouldn't ask odds of anybody. I'd go after
them. As it is, I've left my servant with a gun loaded with rock-salt
watching for them now."

"Burglars?" exclaimed Tom, with real interest.

"Chicken-house burglars! That's the kind of burglars they are," growled
Mr. Damon. "Two or three times they have tried to get my prize buff
Orpingtons. Last night they got me out of bed twice fooling around the
chicken house and yard. Other neighbors have lost their hens already. I
don't mean to lose mine. Want you to help me, Tom."

"Is that all that is worrying you, Mr. Damon?" laughed the young fellow.

"Bless my radiator! isn't that enough?"

"I know you set your clock by those buff Orpingtons," agreed Tom.

"That's right. That ten-months cockerel, Blue Ribbon Junior, never
fails to crow at three-thirty-three to the minute. Bless my combs and
spurs; a wonderful bird!"

"But let's see how I can help you regarding the chicken thieves," Tom
said, as they sighted the lights of the Swift house beyond the long
stockade fence that surrounded the Construction Company's premises.

"You know I have a barbed wire entanglement around the whole yard and
hen-house. I don't take any more chances than I can help. Those prize
buff Orpingtons are a great temptation to chicken lovers--both blond
and brunette," and in spite of his anxiety, Mr. Damon could chuckle at
his own joke. "Even your old Eradicate's friend fell for chickens, you
know."

"And Rad promptly cured him of the disease," laughed Tom.

"And I'm trying to cure these others. I've charged my shotgun with
rock-salt--as he did. My servant has orders to shoot anybody who
tampers with my chicken house tonight.

"But bless my shirt!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, "I'll never be able to sleep
comfortably until I know that no thief can get at my buff Orpingtons. I
want you to fix it so I can sleep in peace, Tom."

He slowed to a stop in front of the Swift's door. Tom stared at his
eccentric friend questioningly.

"Bless my gaiters!" ejaculated Mr. Damon, "don't you see what I want?
And your head already full of this electrified locomotive you are going
to build?"

"Hush!" murmured Tom, with his hand upon his companion's arm.  "But
what do you want me to do?"

"I want you to fix it so that I can turn a current of electricity into
that barbed wire chicken fence at night that will shock any thief that
touches the wires. Not kill 'em--though they ought to be killed!"
declared the eccentric man. "But shock 'em aplenty. Can't you do it for
me, Tom Swift?"

"Of course it can be done," said the young fellow. "You use electricity
in your house. There is a feed cable in the street.  We will have to
change your lighting switch for another. Fix it with the Electric
Supply Company. It will cost you more--"

"Bless my pocketbook! I don't care how much it costs. It will be ample
satisfaction to see just one low-down chicken thief squirming on those
wires."

Tom laughed again. He meant to help his friend; but he did not propose
to rig the wires so that anybody, even a chicken thief, would be
seriously injured by the electric current passing through the strands.

"I'll come down to Waterfield tomorrow in the electric runabout and fix
things up for you. Get a permit from the Electric Supply Company early
in the morning. Tell them I will rig the thing myself. They can send
their inspector afterward."

"That's fine, Tom! What--Ugh! what's this? Another footpad?"

Out of the darkness beside the fence a bulky figure started.  For a
moment Tom thought it was the same man who had attacked him twice. Then
the very size of this new assailant proved that suspicion to be
unfounded.

"Koku!" exclaimed Tom. "What's the matter with you, Koku?"

The huge and only half-tamed giant gained the side of the car in
seemingly a single stride. In the dark they could not see his face, but
his voice distinctly showed excitement.

"Master come good. 'Cause there be enemy. Koku find--Koku kill!"

"Bless my magnifying glass!" ejaculated Mr. Damon. "That fellow is the
most bloodthirsty individual that I ever saw."

"All in his bringing up," chuckled Tom who knew, as the saying is, that
Koku's bark was a deal worse than his bite. "Killing and maiming his
enemies used to be Koku's principal job. But he has his orders now. He
doesn't kill anybody without consulting me first."

"Bless my buttons!" murmured Mr. Damon. "That is certainly a good thing
too. What's the matter with him now?"

That is exactly what Tom himself wanted to know. He had dropped a hand
upon the arm of the giant as he stood beside the car.

"Who is the enemy, Koku?" he asked.

"Not know, Master. See him footmarks. Follow him footmarks. Not find.
When do find--kill!"

"That is, after first obtaining my permission," said Tom dryly.

"It is so," agreed the imperturbable Koku. "See! Show Master footmarks.
Him look in at window. See! Koku have got the wonder lamp."

He flashed the electric torch in his hand. He left the car and strode
into the yard. Tom followed him, and Mr. Damon's curiosity brought him
along.

The giant pointed the ray of the flashlight at the ground below the
porch. Several footprints--the marks of boots at least number twelve in
size--were imbedded in the soil. Koku went around the house to the
other side, following repeated marks of the same boots.

"How came you to find them, Koku?" asked Tom softly.

"Me look. All around stockade," and he waved a generous gesture with
his free hand including the fence about the works. "Enemy may come.
Anytime he come. Now he come."

"Bless my slippery shoes!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, who had hard work to
keep up both physically and mentally with the giant.  "What does he
mean?"

"Koku has always had it in his head," explained Tom, "that we built
that fence about the works to keep out enemies. And, to tell the truth,
we did! But all that is over--"

"Is it?" asked Mr. Damon pointedly. "Enemy here," added Koku, flashing
the lamplight upon the footprints on the ground.

"Those bootmarks," added Mr. Damon, "are doubtless those of that fellow
who jumped upon the running board of the car."

"Humph! And who robbed me of my wallet," added Tom musingly.  "Well, it
might be. And, if so, Koku is right. The enemy has come."

"Me kill!" exclaimed the giant, stretching himself to his full height.

"We'll consider the killing later," said Tom, who well knew his
influence with this big fellow. "You are forbidden to kill anybody, or
chase anybody away from here, until I have a talk with them. Enemy or
not--understand?"

"Me understand," said Koku in his deep voice. "Master say--me do."

"Just the same," Tom said, aside to Mr. Damon, "there has been somebody
around here. I guess Mr. Bartholomew was right. He is being spied upon.
And now that we Swifts are going to try to do something for him, we are
likely to be spied upon too."

"Bless my statue of Nathan Hale!" murmured the eccentric gentleman. "I
believe you. And you've been already attacked twice by some thug! You
are positively in danger, Tom."

"I don't know about that. Save that the fellow who robbed me was sore
because I fooled him. Naturally he might like to get square about those
shorthand notes. He knows no more now about Mr. Bartholomew's business
with us than he did before he held me up."

"That is a fact," agreed Mr. Damon.

"And that brings me to another warning, Mr. Damon," added Tom
earnestly, as his friend climbed into the motor car again. "Keep all
that has happened, and all that I told you and Ned about the H. & P. A.
railroad, to yourself."

"Surely! Surely!"

"If Mr. Bartholomew's rivals continue to keep their spies hanging
around the works here, we'll handle them properly. Trust Koku for
that," and Tom chuckled.

"And don't forget my barbed wire entanglements," put in Mr. Damon,
starting his engine. "I want to fix those chicken thieves.''

"All right. I'll be over tomorrow," promised Tom Swift.

Then he stood a minute on the curb and looked after the disappearing
lights of Mr. Damon's car. The latter's problem dovetailed, after all,
into this discovery of possible marauders lurking about the Swift
premises. Koku had made no mistake in bringing his attention to the
matter of the footprints. Tom had seen somebody dodging into the
darkness outside the house when he had come out on his way to visit
Mary Nestor.

"And sure as taxes," muttered Tom, as he finally turned toward the
front door again, "the fellow who twice attacked me this evening wore
the boots the prints of which Koku found.

"Those fellows, whoever they are, whether Montagne Lewis and his
associates, or not, have bitten off several mouthfuls that they may be
unable to chew. Anyhow, before they get through they may learn
something about the Swifts that they never knew before."




Chapter VI

The Contract Signed


Tom Swift went to bed that night without the least fear that the man
who had twice attacked him in the streets of Shopton would be able to
trouble him unless he went abroad again. Koku was on guard.

The giant whom Tom had brought home from one of his distant wanderings
was wholly devoted to his master. Koku never had, and he never would,
become entirely civilized.

He was naturally a born tracker of men. For generations his people had
lived amid the alarms of threat and attack. He could not be made to
understand how so many "tribes," as he called them, of civilized men
could live in anything like harmony.

That somebody should prowl about the Swift house at night with a desire
to rob his young master or injure him, did not surprise Koku in the
least. He accepted the fact of the marauder's presence as quite the
expected thing.

But the man who had robbed Tom and later tried to repay him for playing
what appeared to be a practical joke on the robber, did not trouble the
Swift premises with his presence before morning.  Koku, thrusting
Eradicate Sampson aside and striding to his bedroom to report this
fact, was what awoke Tom at eight o'clock.

"Hey! What you want, tromping in here for, man?" demanded old Rad
angrily. "An' totin' that spear, too. Where you t'ink yo' is?  In de
jungle again? Go 'way, chile!"

Both Rad and Koku were rapidly outliving the sudden friendship of Rad's
sick days, when it was thought he might be blind for life, and were
dropping back into their old ways of bickering and rivalry for Tom's
attention.

"I report to the Master," declared the giant, in his deep voice.

"You tell me, I tell him," Rad said pompously. "No need yo' 'sturbing
Massa Tom at dis hour."

"Koku go in!" declared the giant sternly.

"Jes' stay out dere on de stair an' res' yo'self," said Rad.

Koku lost his temper with old Rad. There was a feud between them,
although deep in their hearts they really were fond of each other. But
the two were jealous of each other's services to young Tom Swift.

Suddenly Tom heard the old negro utter a frightened squeal. The door
which had been only ajar, burst inward and banged against the door-stop
with a mighty smash.

Rad went through the big bedroom like a chocolate-colored streak,
entered Tom's bathroom, and the next moment there was the sound of
crashing glass as Eradicate Sampson went through the lower sash of the
window, headfirst, out upon the roof of the porch!

"What do you mean by this?" shouted Tom, sitting up in bed.

Koku paused in the doorway, bulking almost to the top of the door. His
right arm was drawn back, displaying his mighty biceps, and he poised a
ten foot spear with a copper head that he had seized from a nest of
such implements which was a decoration of the lower hall.

Had the giant ever flung that spear at poor Rad's back, half the length
of the staff might have passed through his body.  Little wonder that
the colored man, having roused the giant's rage to such a pitch, had
given small consideration to the order of his going, but had gone at
once!

"You want to scare Rad out of half a year's growth?" Tom pursued
sternly, slipping out of bed and reaching for his robe and slippers.
"And he's broken that window to smithereens."

"Koku come make report, Master," said the giant.

"You go put that spear back where you found it and come up properly,"
commanded the young fellow, with difficulty hiding his amusement. "Go
on now!"

He shuffled into the bathroom while the giant disappeared. He peered
out of the broken window. It was a wonder Rad had not carried the sash
with him! The broken glass was scattered all about the roof of the
porch and the old colored man lay groaning there.

"What did you do this for, Eradicate?" demanded Tom. "You act worse
than a ten-year-old boy."

"I's done killed, Massa Tom!" groaned Rad with confidence. "I's blood
from haid to foot!"

There was a scratch on his bald crown from which a few drops of blood
flowed. But with all his terror, Eradicate had put both arms over his
head when he made his dive through the window, and he really was very
little injured.

"Come in here," repeated Tom. "Fix something over this broken window so
that I can take my bath. And then go and put something on that scratch.
Don't you know better yet, than to cross Koku when he is excited?"

"Dat crazy ol' cannibal!" spat out Rad viciously. "I'll fix him yet.
I'll pizen his rations, dat's what I'll do."

"You wouldn't be so bad as that, Rad!"

"Well, mebbe not," said the colored man, crawling in through the
bathroom window. "It would take too much pizen, anyway, to kill that
giant. Take as much as dey has to give an el'phant to kill it. Anyways,
I's bound to fix him proper some time, yet."

These quarrels between Eradicate and Koku were intermittent.  They
almost always arose, too, because of the desire of the two servants to
wait upon Tom or his father. They were very jealous of each other, and
their clashes afforded Tom and his friends a good deal of amusement.

While the young inventor was in his bath the giant strode back into the
bedroom, out of which Rad had scurried by another door, and proceeded
to report the result of his night watch about the premises.

He had not much to tell. In fact, after Tom had gone into the house
Koku had seen nobody lurking about at all. The fact remained that,
earlier in the evening, somebody had made a close surveillance of the
Swift house, but the mysterious marauder had not come back.

"All right, Koku. Keep your eyes open. I expect that enemy may return
sometime. Too bad," he added to himself, "that I didn't get a better
look at him."

"Koku know him next time," declared the giant.

"Why! you didn't even see him this time," cried Tom.

"See him boots. See marks him boots make. Know him boots.  Waugh!"

"'Waugh!' yourself," returned Tom, shaking his head. "You are
altogether too sure, Koku. You couldn't tell a man from his bootprints
in the mud."

"Koku know," said the giant, just as confidently. "Wait. Him
catch--see--show Master."

"Don't you go to grabbing every stranger who comes around the house or
the works for a spy, and make me trouble. Remember now."

Koku nodded gravely and went away. When he met Rad suddenly in the hall
with Mr. Swift's breakfast tray, the giant said "boo!" and almost cost
the old colored man the loss of the tray.

"Dat big el'phant ought to be livin' in a barn," declared Rad.  "Look
at dat spear he come near runnin' me t'rough wid! If he had, yo' could
ha' driv a tipcart full o' rubbish in after it.  Lawsy me!"

But an hour later when Tom and his father started for the offices of
the Swift Construction Company down the street, Rad and Koku were
sitting before an enormous breakfast in the back kitchen and chatting
together as companionably as ever.

The old inventor and his son arrived at the offices of the Swift
Construction Company not long ahead of Mr. Richard Bartholomew. Tom had
merely found time to read over the contract that had been jointly
prepared by Ned Newton and the firm's legal advisers, before the
railroad man came.

"No getting out of the provisions of that paper, Tom," Ned had
whispered, when he saw Mr. Bartholomew coming into the outer office.
"Is this your man?"

"Yes."

"A sharp looking little fellow," commented Ned. "But even if he were
bent on tricking us, this contract would hold him. He is solvent and so
is his road--as yet. If it has a bad name in the market that is more
because of slander by the Montagne Lewis crowd than from any real
cause. I've found that out this morning."

"Faithful Nero!" chuckled Tom. "Aren't going to let the Swifts get
done, are you?"

"Not if I can help it," declared Ned Newton emphatically.

A clerk brought Mr. Bartholomew into the private office and he was
introduced to Newton. If he considered the financial manager of the
Swift Construction Company very young for his responsible position,
after he had read the contract he felt considerable respect for Ned
Newton.

"You've got me here, young man, hard and fast," Mr. Bartholomew said.
"If I was inclined to want to wriggle out, I see no chance of it. But I
don't. You have set forth here exactly my meaning and intent. I want
your best efforts in this matter, Mr. Swift, and if you give them to me
I'll foot the bill as agreed."

"You've got me interested, I confess," said Tom. "By the way, were your
friends following you when you came here this morning?"

"My friends?" repeated Mr. Bartholomew, for a moment puzzled.

"The spy that you mentioned," said Tom, smiling.

"That Andy O'Malley?" exclaimed Bartholomew. "Haven't spotted him
today."

"He spotted me last night," said Tom grimly, and proceeded to relate
what had happened.

"You fooled 'em that time, young man!" exclaimed the railroad
president, with satisfaction. "I am convinced that Montagne Lewis is
behind it. Look out for these fellows when you get to work, Mr. Swift.
They will stop at nothing. I tell you that the fight is on between the
Hendrickton & Pas Alos and the Hendrickton & Western. I have either got
to break them or they will break me."

"You seem very sure that there is a conspiracy against you, Mr.
Bartholomew," said the senior Swift reflectively.

"I am sure," was the reply. "And I am likewise sure that this scheme of
electrification of my road through the Pas Alos Range is the only
salvation for my railroad."

"I should call it a big contract," Ned Newton said, thoughtfully.

"You have said it! But it is not a visionary scheme I have in mind. You
must know--you Swifts--how successful such an electrification through
the Rockies has been made by the Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul Railway."

"I've looked that up," confessed Tom, with enthusiasm. "That was a
great piece of work."

"It is. It is. But I hope for even a greater outcome of your
experiments, Mr. Swift. Of course, I do not expect to compete with that
great road. They had millions to spend, and they spent them. Those
Baldwin-Westinghouse locomotives the Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul
built in nineteen hundred and nineteen are wonderful machines. They
have got forty-two freight locomotives, fifteen passenger locomotives
and four switchers of that new type.

"The Jandel patent that my road uses is, in some degree, the equal of
those Baldwin-Westinghouse locomotives. At least, our machines equal
the C., M. & St. P. on our level road. They can reach a mile-a-minute
gait. But when it comes to speed and pull on steep grades--Ah! that is
where they fail."

"You will have to get power in the hills for your stations," suggested
Tom, thoughtfully.

"I know that. I know where the power is coming from. I gathered those
waterfalls in years ago. Lewis and his crowd can't shut me off from
them. But I have got to have a speedier and more powerful type of
electric locomotive than has ever yet been built to protect the
Hendrickton & Pas Alos Railroad from any rivalry.

"I am looking to you Swifts to give me that. I am risking this
twenty-five thousand dollars upon your succeeding. And I am offering
you the hundred thousand dollars bonus for the right to purchase the
first successful locomotives that can be built covered by your patents.
Is it plain?"

"It is eminently satisfactory," said Mr. Swift, quietly.

"I will do my very best," agreed Tom, warmly. "There isn't a thing the
matter with the agreement," declared Ned Newton, with confidence.
"Gentlemen, sign on the dotted line."

Five minutes later the twin contracts were in force. One went into the
safe of the Swift Construction Company. The other, Mr. Richard
Bartholomew bore away with him.




Chapter VII

The Man with Big Feet


The consultation in the private office of the Swift Construction
Company after the departure of Mr. Richard Bartholomew between the two
Swifts and Ned Newton had more to do with a vision of the future than
with mere present finances.

"I expect you know just about how you are going to work on this new
invention, Tom?" suggested the financial manager, and Tom's chum.

"Haven't the first idea," rejoined the young inventor, promptly.

"What do you mean?" ejaculated Ned. "You talked just now as though you
knew all about electric locomotives."

"I know a good deal about those that have been built, both under the
Jandel patent and those built for the Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul in
the great Philadelphia shops.

"But when you ask me if I know how I am going to improve on those
patents so as to make my locomotive twice as speedy and quite as
powerful as those other locomotives--well, I've got to tell you flat
that I have not as yet got the first idea."

"Humph!" grumbled Ned. "You say it coolly enough."

"No use getting all heated up about it," returned his friend.  "I have
got to consider the situation first. I must look over the field of
electrical invention as applied to motive power. I must study things
out."

"I don't just see myself," Ned Newton remarked thoughtfully, "why there
should be such a great need for the electrification of locomotives,
anyway. Those great mountain-hogs that draw most of the mountain
railroad trains are very powerful, aren't they? And they are speedy."

"Locomotives that use coal or oil have been developed about as far as
they can be," said Mr. Swift, quietly. "A successful electric
locomotive has many advantages over the old-time engine."

"What are those advantages?" asked the business manager, quickly. "I
confess, I do not understand the matter, Mr. Swift."

"For instance," proceeded the old gentleman, "there is the coal
question alone. Coal is rising in price. It is bulky. Using electricity
as motive power for railroads will do away with fuel trains, tenders,
coal handling, water, and all that. Of course, Mr. Bartholomew will
generate his electricity from water power--the cheapest power on earth."

"Humph! I've got my answer right now," said Ned Newton. "If there is no
other good reason, this is sufficient."

"There are plenty of others," drawled Tom, smiling. "Good ones.  For
instance, heat or cold has nothing to do with the even running of an
electric locomotive. It can bore right through a snowbank--a thing a
steam engine can't do. It runs at an even speed. Really, grade should
have nothing to do with its speed.  There is a fault somewhere in the
construction of the Jandel machine or the H. & P. A. would have little
trouble with those locomotives on its grades.

"Then, all you have to do to start an electrified locomotive is to turn
a handswitch. No stoking or water-boiling. Does away with the fireboy.
One man runs it!"

"Why!" cried Ned, "I never stopped to think of all these things."

"No ashes to dump," went on Tom. "No flues to clean, no boilers to
inspect, and none to wear out. And they say that on the Chicago,
Milwaukee & St. Paul, at least, their freight locomotives handle twice
the load of a steam locomotive at a greatly reduced cost."

"Sounds fine. Don't wonder Mr. Bartholomew is eager to electrify his
entire tine."

"On the side of passenger traffic," continued Tom Swift, "the electric
locomotive is smokeless, noiseless, dirtless, and doesn't jerk the
coaches in either stopping or starting. And in addition, the electric
locomotive is much easier on track and roadbed than the old 'iron
horse' driven by steam generated either from coal or oil."

"It is a great field for your talents, Tom!" cried Ned, warmly.

"It is a big job," admitted Tom, and he said this with modesty.  "I
don't know what I may be able to do--if anything. I would not feel
right in taking Mr. Bartholomew's twenty-five thousand dollars for
nothing."

"Quite right, my boy," said Mr. Swift, approvingly.

"Never mind that," said the financial manager, rather grimly.  "It was
his own offer and his risk. That twenty-five thousand comes to our
account."

Tom laughed. "All business, Ned, aren't you? But there is more than
business for the Swift Construction Company in this. Our reputation for
fair dealing as well as for inventive powers is linked up with this
contract.

"I want to show the Jandel people--to say nothing of the bigger
firms--that the Swifts are to be reckoned with when it comes to
electric invention. Other roads will be electrifying their lines as
fast as it is proved that the electric-driven locomotive has the bulge
on the steam-driven.

"In the case of the Hendrickton & Pas Alos there are very steep grades
to overcome. Supposedly an electric motor-drive should achieve the same
speed on a hill as on the level. But there is the weight of the train
to be counted on.

"The H. & P. A. has a two per cent. grade in more than one place. Mr.
Bartholomew confessed as much to me last night. The electric-driven
locomotive of the powerful freight type, which the Jandel people built
for Mr. Bartholomew, can make about sixteen miles an hour on those
grades, although they can hit it up to thirty miles an hour on level
track.

"His passenger locomotives turn off a mile a minute and more, on the
level road; but they can not climb those steep grades at a much
livelier pace than the freight engines. That is why he is talking about
two-mile-a-minute locomotives. He must get a mighty speedy locomotive,
for both freight and passenger service, to keep ahead of Montagne
Lewis's rival road, the Hendrickton & Western."

"You don't suppose it can be done, do you?" demanded Ned. "The
two-mile-a-minute locomotive, I mean, Tom."

"That is the target I am to aim for," returned his friend, soberly. "At
any rate, I hope to improve on the type of locomotive Mr. Bartholomew
is now using, so that the hundred thousand dollars bonus will come our
way as well as this first twenty-five thousand."

"That wouldn't pay for one engine, would it?" cried Ned.

"Nor is it expected to. The bonus has nothing to do with payment for
any model, or patent, or anything of the kind. To tell you the truth,
Ned, I understand those big locomotives used by the Chicago, Milwaukee
& St. Paul cost them about one hundred and twelve thousand dollars
each."

"Whew! Some price, I'll tell the world!" murmured the youthful
financial manager of the Swift Construction Company.

When the conference was over, and Tom had been through the workshop to
overlook several little jobs that were in process of completion by his
trusted mechanics, it was lunch time. He left word that he would not be
back that day, for this new task he was to attack was not to be
approached with any haphazard thought.

Tom knew quite as well as his father knew that the idea of improving
the Jandel patent on electric locomotives was no small thing. The
Jandel people had claimed that their patent was the very last word in
electric motor-power. And Tom was quite willing to acknowledge that in
some ways this claim was true.

But in invention, especially in the field of electric invention, what
is the last word today may be ancient history tomorrow.

It was because this field is so broad and the possibility of
improvement in every branch of electrical science so exciting, that Tom
had accepted Mr. Bartholomew's challenge with such eagerness.

Tom went back to the house for lunch, and as he joined his father in
the dining room he remarked to Eradicate:

"I want the electric runabout brought around after lunch. I am going to
Waterfield. Tell Koku, will you, Rad?"

"Tell that crazy fellow?" demanded the old colored man heatedly. "Why
should I tell him, Massa Tom? Ain't I able to bring dat runabout out o'
de garbarge? Shore I is!"

"You can't do everything, Rad," said Tom, soberly. "That is humanly
impossible."

"But dat Koku can't do nothin' right. Dat's inhumanly possible, Massa
Tom."

"Give him a chance, Rad. I have to take Koku with me this afternoon.
You must give your attention to the house and to father."

"Huh! Umm!" grunted Eradicate.

 Rad was jealous of anybody who waited on Tom besides himself.
Yet he was proud of responsibility, too. He teetered between the pride
of being in charge at home and accompanying his young master, and
finally replied:

"Well, in course, you ain't going to be gone long, Massa Tom.  And yo'
father does like to get his nap undisturbed. And he'll want his pot o'
tea afterwards. So I'll let dat irresponsible Koku go wid yo'. But yo'
got to watch him, Massa Tom. Dat giant don't know what he's about half
de time."

As Koku was not within hearing to challenge that statement, things went
all right. When Tom came out of the house after eating, he found his
very fast car waiting for him, with the giant standing beside it at the
curb.

"Get in at the back, Koku," said Tom. "I am going to take you with me."

"Master is much wise," said Koku. "That man with big feet will not hurt
Master while Koku is with him."

To tell the truth Tom had quite forgotten the supposed spy that had
attacked him the night before. He needed Koku for a purpose other than
that of bodyguard. But he made no comment upon the giant's remark.

They stopped at one of the gates of the works, and Tom instructed Koku
to bring out and put into the car certain boxes and tools that he
wished to take with him. Then he drove on, taking the road to
Waterfield.

This way led through farmlands and patches of woods, a rough country in
part. A mile out of the limits of Shopton the road edged a deep valley,
the sidehill sparsely wooded.

Almost at once, and where there was not a dwelling in sight, they saw a
figure tramping in the road ahead, a big man, roughly dressed, and
wearing a broad-brimmed hat. Somehow, his appearance made Tom reduce
speed and he hesitated to pass the pedestrian.

The man did not hear the runabout at first; or, at least, he did not
look over his shoulder. He strode on heavily, but rapidly. Suddenly the
young inventor heard the giant behind him emit a hissing breath.

"Master!" whispered the giant.

"What's up now?" demanded Tom, but without glancing around.

"The big feet!" exclaimed Koku.

The giant's own feet were shod with difficulty in civilized footgear,
but compared with his other physical dimensions his feet did not seem
large. The man ahead wore coarse boots which actually looked too big
for him! Koku started up in the back of the car as the latter drew
nearer to the stranger.

The man looked back at last and Tom gained a clear view of his
features--roughly carved, dark as an Indian's, and holding a grim
expression in repose that of itself was far from breeding confidence.
In a moment, too, the expression changed into one of active emotion.
The man glared at the young inventor with unmistakable malevolence.

"Master!" hissed Koku again. "The big feet!" The fellow must have seen
Koku's face and understood the giant's expression. In a flash he turned
and leaped out of the roadway. The sidehill was steep and broken here,
but he went down the slope in great strides and with every appearance
of wishing to evade the two in the motor-car.

The giant's savage war cry followed the fugitive. Koku leaped from the
moving car. Tom yelled:

"Stop it, Koku! You don't know that that is the man."

"The big feet!" repeated the giant. "Master see the red mud dried on
Big Feet's boots? That mud from Master's garden."

Again Koku uttered his savage cry, and in strides twice the length of
those of the running man, started on the latter's trail.




Chapter VIII

An Enemy in the Dark


The situation offered suggestions of trouble that stung Tom to
immediate action. The impetuousness of his giant often resulted in
difficulties which the young inventor would have been glad to escape.

Now Koku was following just the wrong path. Tom Swift knew it.

"Koku, you madman!" he shouted after the huge native. "Come back here!
Hear me? Back!"

Koku hesitated. He shot a wondering look over his shoulder, but his
long legs continued to carry him down the slope after the dark-faced
stranger.

"Come back, I say!" shouted Tom again. "Have I got to come after you?
Koku! If you don't mind what you're told I'll send you back to your own
country and you'll have to eat snakes and lizards, as you used to. Come
here!"

Whether it was because of this threat of a change of diet, which Koku
now abhorred, or the fact that he had really become somewhat
disciplined and that he fairly worshiped Tom, the giant stopped. The
man with the big shoes disappeared behind a hedge of low trees.

"Get back up here!" ejaculated Tom sternly. "I'll never take you away
from the house with me again if you don't obey me."

"Master!" ejaculated the giant, slowly approaching. "That Big Feet--"

"I don't care if he made those footprints in the yard last night or
not. I don't want him touched. I didn't even want him to know that we
guessed he had been sneaking about the house.  Understand?"

"Of a courseness," grumbled Koku. "Koku understand everything Master
say."

"Well, you don't act as though you did. Next time when I want any help
I may have to bring Rad with me."

"Oh, no, Master! Not that old man. He don't know how to help Master.
Koku do just what Master say."

"Like fun you do," said Tom, still apparently very angry with the
simple-minded giant. "Get back into the car and sit still, if you can,
until we get to Mr. Damon's house." Then to himself he added: "I don't
blame that fellow, whoever he is, for lighting out. I bet he's running
yet!"

He knew that Koku would say nothing regarding the incident. The giant
had wonderful powers of silence! He sometimes went days without
speaking even to Rad. And that was one of the sources of irritation
between the voluble colored man and the giant.

"'Tain't human," Rad often said, "for nobody to say nothin' as much as
dat Koku does. Why, lawsy me! if he was tongue-tied an' speechless, an'
a deaf an' dumb mute, he couldn't say nothin' more obstreperously dan
he does--no sir! 'Tain't human."

So Tom had not to warn the giant not to chatter about meeting the
stranger on the road to Waterfield. If that person with dried red mud
on his boots was the spy who had followed Mr. Richard Bartholomew East
and was engaged by Montagne Lewis to interfere with any attempt the
president of the H. & P. A. might make to pull his railroad out of the
financial quagmire into which it was rapidly sinking, Tom would have
preferred to have the spy not suspect that he had been identified after
his fiasco of the previous evening.

For if this Western looking fellow was Andy O'Malley, whose name had
been mentioned by the railroad man, he was the person who had robbed
Tom of his wallet and had afterward attempted reprisal upon the young
inventor because the robbery had resulted in no gain to the robber.

Of course, the fellow had been unable to read Tom's shorthand notes of
the agreement that he had discussed with Mr. Bartholomew. Just what the
nature of that agreement was, would be a matter of interest to the
spy's employer.

Having failed in this attempt to learn something which was not his
business, the spy might make other and more serious attempts to learn
the particulars of the agreement between the railroad president and the
Swifts. Tom was sorry that the fellow had now been forewarned that his
identity as the spy and footpad was known to Tom and his friends.

Koku had made a bad mess of it. But Tom determined to say nothing to
his father regarding the discovery he had made. He did not want to
worry Mr. Swift. He meant, however, to redouble precautions at the
Swift Construction Company against any stranger getting past the
stockade gates.

Arrived at Mr. Damon's home in Waterfield, Tom got quickly to work on
the little job he had come to do for his old friend. Of course, Tom
might have sent two of his mechanics from the works down here to
electrify the barbed wire entanglements that Mr. Damon had erected
around his chicken run. But the young inventor knew that his eccentric
friend would not consider the job done right unless Tom attended to it
personally.

"Bless my cracked corn and ground bone mixture!" ejaculated the chicken
fancier. "We'll show these night-prowlers what's what, I guess. One of
my neighbors was robbed last night. And I would have been if I hadn't
set a watch while I drove over to see you, Tom. Bless my spurs and
hackles! but these thieves are getting bold."

"We'll fix 'em," said Tom, cheerfully, while Koku brought the tools and
wire to the hen run. "After we link up your supply of the current with
this wire fence it will be an unhappy chicken burglar who interferes
with it."

"That was an unhappy fellow who got your charge of ammonia last
evening," whispered Mr. Damon. "Heard anything more of him?"

"I think I have seen him. But Koku spoiled everything by trying to eat
him up," and Tom laughingly related what had occurred on the way from
Shopton.

"Bless my boots!" said Mr. Damon. "You'd better see the police, Tom."

"What for?"

"Why, they ought to know about such a fellow lurking about Shopton. If
he followed that Western railroad president here--"

"We'll hope that he will follow Mr. Bartholomew away again," chuckled
Tom. "Mr. Bartholomew won't stay over today. When that chap finds he
has gone he probably will consider that there is no use in his
bothering me any further."

Whether Tom believed this statement or not, he was destined to realize
his mistake within a very short time. At least, the fact that he was
being spied upon and that the enemy meant him anything but good, seemed
proved beyond a doubt that very week.

Having done the little job for Mr. Damon, Tom allowed no other outside
matter to take up his attention. He shut himself into his private
experimental workshop and laboratory at the works each day. He did not
even come out for lunch, letting Rad bring him down some sandwiches and
a thermos bottle of cool milk.

"The young boss is milling over something new," the men said, and
grinned at each other. They were proud of Tom and faithful to his
interests.

Time was when there had been traitors in the works; but unfaithful
hands had been weeded out. There was not a man who drew a pay envelope
from the Swift Construction Company who would not have done his best to
save Tom and his father trouble. Such a thing as a strike, or labor
troubles of any kind, was not thought of there.

So Tom knew that whatever he did, or whatever plans he drew, in his
private room, he was safely guarded. Yet he always took a portfolio
home with him at night, for after dinner he frequently continued his
work of the day. Naturally during this first week he did not get far in
any problem connected with the proposed electric locomotive. There
were, however, rough drafts and certain schedules that had to do with
the matter jotted down.

It was almost twelve at night. Tom had sat up in his own room after his
father had retired, and after the household was still.

Eradicate was in bed and snoring under the roof, Tom knew. Just where
Koku was, it would have been hard to tell. Although a fine and
penetrating rain was falling, the giant might be roaming about the
waste land surrounding the stockade of the works. The elements had no
terrors for him.

Tom locked his portfolio and stepped into his bathroom to wash his
hands before retiring. Before he snapped on the electric light over the
basin he chanced to glance through the newly set windowpane which had
replaced the one Rad had shattered in escaping threatened impalement on
Koku's spear.

Although the clouds were thick and the rain was falling, there was a
certain humid radiance upon the roof of the porch under the bathroom
window. At least, the wet roof glistened so that any moving figure on
or beyond it was visible.

"What's that?" muttered Tom, and he sank down lower than the sill and
crept slowly to the window. He merely raised himself until his eyes
were on a level with the sill.

Coming up over the edge of the porch roof was a bulky figure.  It was
so dimly outlined at first that Tom could scarcely be sure that it was
that of a man.

However, it was not possible that any creature but a man would be able
to mount the lattice supporting the honeysuckle vines and so creep out
upon the porch roof. Once making secure his footing, the enemy in the
dark approached directly the bathroom window at which Tom crouched.




Chapter IX

Where was Koku?


Tom reached up swiftly and pushed over the lever that locked the two
window sashes. In doing this he set his own patent burglar alarm. If
that lever was turned back again, or broken, the buzzers would be set
ringing all over the house, and in Koku's room over the garage.

He did not believe that the marauder on the roof of the porch could
have seen the flash of his shirt-sleeved arm. But he took no chance of
being observed from outside by rising to his feet.

On his hands and knees he crept away from the window, and out of the
bathroom. Once there, he stood up, grabbed the portfolio, and without
coat or vest and as he was, dashed out of the bedroom. He had been
positive that nobody but himself was astir in the big house, and he was
right.

He did not punch the light button when he entered the library.  He knew
where to put his hand upon an electric torch in the table drawer, and
he gained possession of this.

Then he went to the safe and twirled the knob and watched the indicator
find the four numbers which were the "open sesame" to the burglar and
fire-proof door.

He flung the portfolio into the inner compartment, closed both doors,
and twirled the combination-knob. Then Tom tiptoed to the foot of the
front stairs to listen. He could hear no sound from above.

He did not want his father to be startled, if the enemy did break in;
and he knew that old Rad, awakened out of a sound sleep, would be worse
than useless at such a time.

After all, the giant, Koku, was his main dependence under these
circumstances. Tom crept to the outer door, opened it carefully, and
slipped out, letting the spring lock click behind him. For the first
time he realized that he was in his shirt and trousers and wore only
felt slippers on his feet.

But he was locked out now. He had no key. He must run the risk of the
fine rain and the chill of the night air.

He stepped off the end of the porch and ran around the house.  It was
to the roof of the rear porch that the marauder had climbed. But peer
as he might from down in the yard, Tom could see no moving figure up
there near the bathroom window. It was pitch dark against the wall of
the house.

He turned to glance up at the window of the sleeping room over the
garage where Koku was supposed to spend the night. But Tom knew the
giant was seldom there during the dark hours. He was as much of a
night-prowler as a wildcat or an owl.

There was no light there in any case. But Koku did not use a light
much. He could see in the dark, like a wild animal. Tom did not want to
call him. If he must have Koku's help, he would have to climb the
stairs to his bedside. The giant always aroused as wide awake as at
noonday.

But while the young inventor hesitated a sudden, but muffled, snap--the
breaking of metal--sounded. Tom knew instantly the direction from which
the sound came.

Although he could see nothing up there at the bathroom window because
of the rain and the deep shadow, he knew that the snapping sound meant
the severing of the window lock that he had so recently closed. Some
instrument had been forced under the bottom of the lower sash and
pressure enough been brought to bear to break the thin steel lever.

On the heels of this sound came another. A muffled buzzing somewhere in
the house--again! again! And then, startlingly clear from the room over
the garage, the burglar alarm went off in Koku's chamber.

"It's all off now!" gasped Tom, and he ran to the foot of the
honeysuckle ladder up which he knew the enemy had climbed to get to the
roof of the porch. "If he comes down I'll have him!" muttered Tom,
staring up into the mist and gloom.

"Fo' de lawsy's sake! 'Tain't mawnin', is it?" Rad's sleepy voice was
heard to announce. "No, it's da'k as--" And the voice trailed off into
silence.

"Tom! Tom!" the young fellow heard his aroused father shouting.

Tom knew that his father was in no danger. In fact Mr. Swift's voice
did not even betray apprehension. It was to the garage Tom looked for
an explosion. But none came.

If Koku was up there the prolonged buzzing of the alarm did not awake
him. Therefore he could not be there. Tom realized that if the burglar
was to be taken the whole affair fell upon his shoulders.

"And I've got my hands full, if it is the fellow with the big feet that
we saw on the Waterfield Road the other day," muttered the young
inventor.

Nothing stirred on the porch roof. Moment after moment slipped by. Tom
began to grow more than amazed. He was worried. What would happen next?

His father had not cried out again. Stepping around to the end of the
roofed porch, Tom saw a light in Mr. Swift's room. Rad had evidently
gone to sleep again. It would take more than an intermittent buzzer to
rouse fully that colored man.

"When old Morpheus has a strangle hold on Rad, Gabriel's trump would
scarcely awaken him," Tom muttered.

What had become of the enemy? If it was an ordinary burglar he would
have feared the electric alarm instantly. The buzzers were still
working. But there was no sign of the man who had set them off at the
bathroom window.

Suddenly Tom heard a door slam. It was from the front of the house. Had
his father come downstairs to look around and see what the matter was?

The young fellow started around the house on a run. He heard heavy
bootsoles spurning the gravel of the path to the front gate. He arrived
at the far corner of the house in time to see a man dash through the
gateway and run down the street, disappearing finally into the
fast-driving rain.

"Fooled me! He went in and right through and down the stairs!  Out the
front door!" gasped Tom. "Did he get anything? I wonder!"

He sprang up to the front porch and tried the door. It was locked
again, of course. Should he ring the bell and get Rad or his father
down to the door?

And then, of a sudden, the principal mystery of all this affair bit
into Tom Swift's mind. The burglar had made his escape. He could
relieve his father's anxiety later. It was his own puzzlement of mind
that he first wished to ease.

Where was Koku?

Even had the giant been circling the stockade around the shops he
surely must have come up to the home premises by this time.  His keen
ears could not fail to hear the buzzers. They were still going and
would go until the switch was turned.

If the giant was in his room--Tom turned suddenly and started on a run
for the rear premises. He still carried the hand-lamp and it lit his
way into the garage door and up the narrow stairway. He shot the round
beam of the lamp into Koku's room.

He had been obliged to have an iron bedstead made to order for the
giant. It stood against one wall of the room. The buzzer was snarling
like a  huge bumblebee above the head of the couch.  Below it sprawled
the giant, eyes tightly closed and mouth slightly ajar. From the lips
of Koku were emitted sounds worthy of Rad Sampson in his deepest
slumbers!

"Asleep?" gasped Tom, stepping cat-like into the room.

And then he was suddenly aware of a sickish, heavy odor in the chamber.
The window had been closed. But it was something more than stale air
that Tom smelled.

A folded cloth lay on the floor beside the couch. The young fellow saw
at once that it had been originally placed over the giant's face, but
had slid off. And lucky for Koku that it had been dislodged!

"Chloroform!" muttered Tom. "He's drugged. It is no wonder he did not
hear the burglar alarm."

In any event, the incident made one deep impression on Tom's mind. The
spies who he believed were working for the Hendrickton & Western
Railroad and its owner, Montagne Lewis, were desperate men. Tom could
not believe that the fellow with the big feet was alone in Shopton and
was unaided in his attempts to find out what Tom was doing.

This attempt to burglarize the house betrayed the caliber of the enemy.
In chloroforming Koku he had taken the risk of murdering the giant.
Only the fact that the pad of saturated cloth had fallen off Koku's
face had, perhaps, saved the man from suffocation.

Tom did not tell the giant when he aroused what the matter with him
was. Koku was ill enough! He was wrenched by interior spasms that
seemed almost to tear his huge body to pieces.

"What done got into dat big lump o' bone an' grizzle?" demanded
Eradicate. "He looks like, he swallowed a volcano, and it just got to
wo'kin' right. My lawsy!"

"He is a sick man, all right," admitted Tom. "Looks like he wouldn't
try to stab me to deaf wid no spear no mo'," went on Rad, inclined to
approve of Koku's sufferings.

"If he died you'd be mighty sorry, old man," declared Tom, sternly.

"Sho' would. Be a mighty hard job to bury him," was the callous
response.

Just the same, the crotchety old colored man began to hop around in
lively fashion with hot water, and later with coffee and other
stimulants; and he nursed Koku all day as though he were a big baby.

Koku, who had never been ill before in his life, was inclined to lay
the trouble to an evil genius of some kind. Perhaps, in spite of his
half-civilized state, he was still a devil-worshiper.  At any rate, he
had a vital respect for the forces of evil.

Naturally he considered this unknown and unexpected misery he suffered
the result of malignant influences of some kind. Tom did not want him
to suspect that the man with the big feet had any possible part in the
mystery. Had Koku suspected this, and had he got his hands on the spy,
the latter could never have been successfully used in that sort of work
again. In all probability he would have said that he had had enough.

Meanwhile Tom made a point of considering each step he took alone
thereafter with particular care. He had a bodyguard--usually the giant
after the latter had recovered--between the works and the house. He did
not bring home any more the schedules or drawings connected with the
electric locomotive that he proposed to have built and to test inside
the stockade of the Swift Construction Company.

He even put a private detective to work on the matter of finding a man
named Andy O'Malley who might be lurking around Shopton. He had a
pretty clear description of the fellow, for he had not only seen him
once, face to face by daylight, but Tom had written to the president of
the H. & P. A. and had got from that gentleman a clear picture in words
of the spy whom Mr. Bartholomew believed was working in the interests
of Montagne Lewis.

"If O'Malley appears in Shopton, look out. He is a bad character. He is
not only a notorious gunman, with several warrants out for him in these
parts, but he is a cruel and desperate man in any event. The minute you
mark him, have him arrested and telegraph me. We'll get him extradited
and put him through for ten years or more right in this county." The
private investigator, however, as the weeks went by, could not find any
man who filled O'Malley's description.

Meanwhile Tom Swift had got what he called "a lead" and was working day
and night upon the invention that he believed might make even the
Jandel people respectful, if not a bit envious.

First of all Tom had arranged to have built all around inside the
stockade a track of rails heavy enough to stand the wear and tear of
the heaviest locomotive built. Meanwhile the various parts of his
locomotive were being built in several shops, but would be shipped to
the Swift Construction Company and assembled in Tom's try-out shed.

Great secrecy was of course maintained. Aside from the fact that the
new invention had something to do with electric motive power, nobody
about the shops could say what the new industry portended. Save, of
course, the Swifts themselves, Ned Newton, and Mr. Damon, who was the
Swifts' closest friend and sometimes had furnished additional capital
for Tom's experiments.

There was a thing that Mr. Damon furnished Tom at this time that proved
in the end to be of much importance. Before Tom had seized upon this
idea of his eccentric friend, and had made proper use of it, something
happened that came near to wrecking utterly Tom's invention and
completely putting an end to Tom himself as an inventor.




Chapter X

A Strange Conversation


Mr. Wakefield Damon frequently came to the shops, for he was not alone
very friendly with the Swifts, but he was greatly interested in Tom's
new invention.

"If it goes as good as what you did for my chicken run," he declared,
chuckling, "bless my dampers! you'll beat all the electric locomotives
in the market."

"That is easy, perhaps," said Tom smiling. "There are not many in the
market at the present time. But I don't know what mine will be. This is
going to be some job."

"Bless my flues and clinkers!" cried Mr. Damon, "you are not losing
hope, Tom Swift? Look what you did for my chicken run. And believe me,
that entanglement will give a shock that makes a man stand right up and
shake."

"Have you tried it yourself?" asked Tom.

"No. But my servant did. I saw him through the window of my study doing
some kind of a shimmy with the shovel. Thought he'd gone crazy. Then I
saw what he had done. It was early in the morning and I hadn't turned
the current off, and he had put one hand against the wires. When he
dropped the shovel as I told him to, bless my plyers and nippers! he
was all right."

"The current would not seriously hurt him," said Tom. "I was careful
about that."

"It killed two tomcats," said Mr. Damon. "I certainly was glad of that,
for those two ash-barrel cats kept the whole neighborhood awake. Bless
my claws and whiskers! how those two cats did use to yell. But when one
tried to climb the wires and the other sprang on him, it was all over!
That is, all over but the burial party."

Mr. Damon was on the ground when the mechanical equipment and a part of
the electrical equipment of the new locomotive arrived and was set up
in the erection shed. The length of the machine was what first
impressed Ned Newton as well as Mr. Damon.

"Bless my yardstick!" exclaimed the eccentric man, "it's as long as a
gossip's tongue. What a monster it will be!"

"How long is it, Tom?" asked Ned Newton.

"When completed, and standing on its drivers and bogie truck and
trailer truck, from cow-catcher to rear bumper it will be a few inches
over ninety feet. And that is slightly longer than the biggest electric
locomotive so far built. But length does not so much enter into the
value of the machine. I would have it built more compactly if I could."

"What is the horsepower?" asked Mr. Damon.

"I figure on forty-four hundred horsepower. The power must be received
from a three thousand-volt direct-current trolley.  There are twelve
driving-wheels, as you can see. Each pair of drivers will be driven by
a twin-motor geared to the axles through a system of flexible spring
drive. Remember, I have got to obtain both speed as well as power in
this locomotive, for it is being built to pull a passenger train--a
fast cross-continent express--to compete with the best passenger
equipment in the country."

"Bless my combination ticket!" murmured Mr. Damon. "You have picked out
some task, and no mistake, Tom Swift."

"He'll do it," cried Ned, with his usual optimism when Tom had once
started on any experimental work. "Of course he will. Just as she
stands there now, only half put together, I would be willing to bet a
farm that she is a better locomotive than the Jandel patent."

"Three cheers!" laughed Tom. "Ned is as enthusiastic as usual.  But
believe me, friends, we are not going to turn out a better locomotive
than the Jandel without both thought and work."

His friends' enthusiasm was heartening, however. No doubt of that. He
never let them into his experiment room, any more than he allowed his
workmen in there. Aside from his own father, nobody really knew what
Tom Swift was doing behind that always-locked door.

The huge structure of the locomotive was set up on the driving wheels
and leading and trailing trucks by Tom's chief foreman and a picked
crew. Just such another locomotive had never been seen anywhere about
Shopton. Naturally the men at work on the monster began to speak of it
outside the works.

Not that they betrayed any secrets regarding the locomotive. In fact,
as yet none of them knew anything about what Tom intended to do with
the big machine. But the story soon circulated that Tom Swift, the
young inventor, was about to show all the previous builders of electric
locomotives how such machines should be built.

It was even whispered that Tom's objective was a two-mile-a-minute
locomotive. And when this was publicly known the information was not
long in seeping to the ears of certain men who had been keeping as
close a watch as they dared on the Swift Construction Company and the
activities of Tom himself.

Ned Newton went to the bank one Friday for money for the payroll of the
working and clerical force of the Swift Company.  It was an errand he
never relegated to any employee.

Ned had once worked himself in the bank, and naturally he knew many of
its employees as well as the officials. With his back to the general
waiting room, he sat at the vice president's desk discussing some minor
matter. Only a railing divided the vice president's enclosure from the
long settee on which waiting customers of the bank were seated.

Ned knew that there were two men directly behind him, whispering
together; but he paid no attention to them until he heard this phrase:

"It's time to explode in just five hours; then good-night to that
invention, whatever it is."

This statement might mean almost anything--or nothing.  Ordinarily Ned
Newton might not have paid any consideration to the words. But
"invention" was a term that he could not overlook. His mind then was
fixed upon Tom's invention almost as closely as the mind of the young
inventor himself.

Ned turned around slowly, as though idly, indeed, and tried to see the
faces of the two men behind him. One was a small, neatly dressed man of
professional appearance. He wore a Vandyke beard and eyeglasses. The
other's face Ned could not see; but as they both rose just then and
strolled toward the door of the bank he could observe that the fellow
was big and burly.

Ned wheeled to his friend, the vice president, and asked:

"Who are those men, Mr. Stanley? Do you know them?"

The pair were just going out through the revolving door. The vice
president craned his neck for a look at them.

"Don't know the small man, Ned. But the other is named O'Malley, I
believe. Somebody introduced him here and he gets a check cashed
occasionally. Not a customer of the bank."

At that moment the name "O'Malley" did not mean anything to Ned Newton.
But he bade his friend good-bye and went out after the two men. They
had disappeared.

Rad was in the electric runabout, waiting for him. The words spoken by
O'Malley (Ned thought it must have been he who spoke of the invention
because of his deep voice) continued to disturb Ned's thought.

"Rad," he said, as he got into the runabout, "did you ever hear the
name O'Malley?"

"Sure has," declared the colored man. "And it's a bad name and a bad
man owns it."

"Do you mean that?" exclaimed the financial manager of the Swift
Construction Company, with increasing apprehension. "Who is he?"

"Why, Mr. Newton, don't you 'member dat man?"

"Who is he?" repeated Ned.

"Dat Andy O'Malley is de one what tried to hold up Massa Tom dat time.
O'Malley is de man what's been spyin' on Massa Tom--"

"Great grief!" exclaimed Ned, breaking in with excitement.  "I'll drive
as fast as I can, Rad. There is something wrong at the works, I do
believe!"

"What's wrong, Mr. Ned?" demanded Rad. "We just come from dere, and
everyt'ing was all right."

"I just heard something that O'Malley said. I want to get back in a
hurry. I believe that scoundrel is attempting to blow up Tom's
locomotive. We've got to get to the works just as quick as we can."




Chapter XI

Touch and Go


The mechanical equipment of the new locomotive was now complete and Tom
was establishing the electrical equipment as rapidly as possible. He
not only acted as overseer of this work, but in overalls and jumper he
was doing a good share of the work himself.

The weight of the electrical equipment when it was finally set up was
not far from two hundred thousand pounds. Altogether, when the oil,
sand, and water tanks were filled, the great machine would weigh two
hundred and eighty-five tons--a monster indeed!

"She is going to take a lot of current to run her," said Tom to his
father, who was standing by. "When I come to arrange with the Shopton
Electric Company for power, it's a question if they can give me all I
need. And I must have plenty of current to make sure that my motors
fill the bill."

"As your tests will be made in the daytime, the company should be able
to furnish the power you need," rejoined Mr. Swift. "At night, of
course, when they must furnish so much light as well as power, it might
be difficult for them to give you the proper current."

"Forty-four hundred horsepower is a big demand," went on Tom.  "I've
got to have at least a three-thousand-volt direct-current to feed my
motors. I will soon have to take up the matter with the Electric
Company."

The heavy work of setting the electrical parts of the locomotive had
been finished the day previous, and the track-derrick was removed. Tom
was engaged in adjusting the more delicate parts of the equipment and
had merely stepped down from the cab to speak to Mr. Swift.

Now he climbed back into the interior of the great machine which, in a
general way, looked like a box car. An electric locomotive has not much
of the appearance of a steam engine. The machinery is all boxed in and
the entire floor of the locomotive is above even the drivers.

These six pairs of driving wheels were about seventy inches in
diameter, while the diameter of the leading and following truck-wheels
was but half that number of inches.

Mr. Swift had turned away from the locomotive when Tom put his head out
of the door again.

"Do you hear that, father?" he demanded in a puzzled tone.

"Hear what, Tom?" asked the old inventor, looking up.

"That ticking sound? I declare, I'd think it was one of those
death-watch beetles had got in here. Sounds like a big watch ticking. I
can't make it out."

"Where is it? What is it?" repeated Mr. Swift. "I hear nothing down
here on the floor of the shed."

"Well, it gets me," muttered Tom, and disappeared again. In a moment he
called out: "Say, you fellows! who left his bundle of overalls in here?
Better take 'em out to be manicured. Whose are these?"

Two or three of the mechanics working near looked up from their tasks.
Mr. Swift turned back to the door of the cab again.

"What is the matter now, Tom?" he asked, in added curiosity.

"That bundle, Dad."

Tom once more appeared and addressed the workmen: "Whose bundle of
dirty overalls is this in here? Come and take 'em away. They shouldn't
have been left here."

"Why, Mr. Tom," said the foreman who was near, "I didn't see any soiled
overalls in there when I left last evening. Any of you fellows," he
asked the group of hands, "know anything about any overalls?"

"The bundle is here all right. Pushed back against the third series
motors. Come up here, one of you fellows--"

Suddenly there was a noise at the end of the shed where the door to the
offices lay. Two figures burst through from the glass doors and charged
down the lanes between the lathes and cranes.  Ned Newton led, Rad
Sampson, his face a mouse-gray with fear, followed.

"Massa Tom! Massa Tom!" shouted the colored man. "Look out fo' de bomb!
Look out fo' de bomb!"

The foreman sprang toward the high door of the locomotive where Tom
stood, staring out. The young inventor, quick as his mind usually
functioned, did not understand at all what Eradicate meant.

"There's something wrong in there, Mr. Tom!" shouted the foreman. "Come
down, sir, and let me get up there and see what it is."

But Mr. Barton Swift grasped the meaning of what was going on more
quickly than anybody else. Tom's father, Tom frequently said, had spent
so many years investigating chemical and mechanical mysteries that he
saw more clearly and more exactly into and through most problems than
other people.

His raised voice now cut through the rumble of machinery and all the
other noises of the shop. Even Rad Sampson's delirious cry was dwarfed
by Mr. Swift's sharp tone:

"Tom! The ticking of that watch! That means danger!"

The declaration seemed to rip away a curtain from Tom's thoughts.
Perhaps Rad's cry about "de bomb" aided the young inventor to
understand the peril that threatened.

The faint ticking sound that had begun to annoy him during the past few
minutes betrayed the nature of the threatening peril.  Tom swung back
from the open doorway of the locomotive cab, reached in to the space
between the motors, and seized the bundle of overall stuff that he had
previously spied.

He knew instantly that the rapid ticking came from that bundle.  It
could be nothing but a time bomb. He had heard of such things and,
indeed, had seen one before, an infernal machine which, set like an
alarm clock, would go off at a certain time. That indicated time might
be an hour hence, or might be within a few seconds! Ned Newton, almost
at the spot, shouted to Tom when the latter reappeared with the bundle
in his hands:

"Get down out of that, Tom Swift! Quick! For your life!"

But Tom was cool enough now. He saw his father's white, strained face
at one side and the young inventor could even smile at him. Behind the
foreman was set a barrel of water in which tools were cooled and
tempered.

"Stoop, McAvoy!" Tom shouted, and tossed the bundle from him.

Had the infernal machine exploded in midair Tom would not have been
surprised. But McAvoy dodged, Rad clapped his hands over his ears, and,
even Ned Newton halted like a bird-dog at point.

The bundle splashed into the barrel of water. It sank to the bottom.
There was no explosion. When a few seconds had passed the group of
excited men began to relax. The barrel was carried carefully to a
neighboring field.

"Fo' de lawsy sake!" gasped Rad, and got a full breath again.

"That was touch and go, sure enough," muttered Ned Newton.

"Those overalls sure went to the wash, Boss," declared the foreman.
"What was in 'em? And who put 'em in the cab up there?"

But Tom dropped down the ladder and went to his father. Their hands
sought each other and gripped, hard.

"Better not tell Mary about this," whispered Tom. "She's worried enough
as it is."

"Right, Tom," agreed the old inventor. "From this time on we cannot be
too careful. If there proves to be an infernal machine in that package
we may be sure that we are dealing with desperate men. We've got to
keep our eyes open."

"Wide open," added Ned.

"I'll say we have," said Tom.




Chapter XII

The Try-Out Day Arrives


It did not need Ned Newton's story of what he had overheard at the bank
to prove that an attempt had been made to blow to pieces Tom Swift's
electric locomotive before even it had been tested.

An examination of the water-soaked package in the open yard of the
shops of the Swift Construction Company, proved that there was enough
explosive in the bomb to blow the shed itself to pieces. But the
stopping of the clockwork attachment of course made the bomb harmless.

"The main thing to be explained," Tom said, when he and his father and
Ned discussed the particulars of the affair, "is not who did it, or
what it was done for. Those are comparatively easy questions to answer."

"Yes," agreed Ned. "O'Malley did it, or caused it to be done; and it
was an attempt to balk Mr. Bartholomew and the H, & P. A.  rather than
a direct attack upon the Swift Construction Company."

"I am afraid, however," remarked Mr. Swift, "that Tom has aroused the
personal antagonism of this spy from the West. We must not overlook
that."

"I don't," replied the young inventor. "O'Malley has it in for me. No
doubt of that. But he could not be sure that I would be hurt by the
explosion he arranged for."

"True," said his father.

"The attempt was against my invention. And O'Malley was doubtless urged
to destroy the locomotive that I am building because my success will
aid Mr. Bartholomew and his railroad."

"Quite agreed," said Ned. "But--"

"But the important question," interrupted Tom, "is this: How did the
bomb get into the interior of the electric locomotive?  That is the
first and most important problem. Its having been done once warns us
that it can be done again until our system of guarding the works is
changed."

"We have five watchmen on the job at night, and the gates are never
opened in the daytime to anybody for any purpose without a pass,"
declared Ned. "I don't see how that fellow got in here with the time
bomb."

"Exactly. It shows that there is a fault in our system somewhere," said
Tom grimly. "We cannot surround the place at night with an armed guard.
It would cost too much. Even Koku cannot be everywhere. And I have
reason to know that he was wandering about the stockade last night as
usual."

"The fellow was pretty sharp to slip by," Ned observed.

"The stockade is no mean barrier, especially with the rows of barbed
wire at the top," said Mr. Swift.

"Barbed wire! That's it!" exclaimed Tom. It was just here that Mr.
Damon's idea for guarding his prize buff Orpingtons came into play in
Tom's scheme of things. "Barbed wire doesn't seem to keep out spies,"
he added slowly. "But believe me, something else will!"

For Tom to think of a thing was to start action without delay.
Immediately he called a gang from the shops and set them to work
stringing copper wire along the top of the stockade.

He was sure that the man who had set the time bomb in place had got
into the enclosure over the fence. If he tried the same trick again he
was very apt to have the surprise of his life!

Each night when the shops closed and the watchmen went on duty, a
current of electricity was turned into those copper wires entwined with
the barbed wire entanglement at the top of the stockade that would
certainly double up any marauder who sought to get over the top.

However, no further attempt was made against Tom's peace of mind and
against his invention during the immediate weeks that followed. The
young inventor was so closely engaged in his work that he scarcely left
the house or the confines of the shops.  Even Mary Nestor saw very
little of him.

But Mary realized fully that at such a time as this Tom must give all
his thought and energy to the task in hand. She was proud of Tom's
ability and took a deep interest in his inventions.

"I want to see the test when you try the locomotive, Tom," she told
him, when she came to the shops the first time to look at the monster
locomotive. "What a wonderful thing it is!"

"Its wonder is yet to be proved," rejoined the young inventor.  "I
believe I've got the right idea; but nothing is sure as yet."

In addition to his mechanical contrivances inside the locomotive, Tom
had to arrange for an increased supply of electric power to drive the
huge machine around the track that was being built inside the stockade.

A regular station had to be built for receiving the electricity in a
100,000-volt alternating current and delivering it to the locomotive in
a 3,000-volt direct current. Therefore, this station had two functions
to perform--reducing the voltage and changing the current from
alternating to direct.

The reduction of the voltage was accomplished as follows: The
100,000-volt alternating current was received through an oil switch and
was conveyed to a high-tension current distributor made up of three
lines of copper tubing, thus forming the source of power for this
station.

From the current distributor the current was conducted through other
oil switches to the transformers--entering at 100,000 volts and
emerging at 2,300 volts. Then the current was conducted from the
transformers through switches to the motor-generator sets and became
the power employed to operate them.

The motor generator consisted of one alternating current motor driving
two direct current generators. The motor Tom established in his station
was of the 60-cycle synchronous type, which means that the current
changes sixty times each second.

There were two sets, each generating a 1,500 or 2,000 volt direct
current; and the two generators being permanently connected, delivered
a combined direct current of 3,000 volts--as high a direct voltage
current, Tom knew, as had ever been adopted for railroad work. The
current voltage for ordinary street railway work is 550 volts.

"I could run even this big machine," Tom explained to Ned Newton, "with
a much lighter current. But out there on the Hendrickton & Pas Alos
line the transforming stations deliver this high voltage to the
locomotives. I want to test mine under similar conditions."

"This is going to be an expensive test, Tom," said Ned, grumbling a
little. "The cost-sheets are running high."

"We are aiming at a big target," returned the inventor. "You've got to
bait with something bigger than sprats to catch a whale, Ned."

"Humph! Suppose you don't catch the whale after all?"

"Don't lose hope," returned Tom, calmly. "I am going after this whale
right, believe me! This is one of the biggest contracts--if not the
very biggest--we ever tackled."

"It looks as if the expense account would run the highest," admitted
the financial manager.

"All right. Maybe that is so. But I'll spend the last cent I've got to
perfect this patent. I am going to beat the Jandels if it is humanly
possible to do so."

"I can only hope you will, Tom. Why, this track and the overhead
trolley equipment is going to cost a small fortune. I had no idea when
you signed that contract with Mr. Bartholomew that so much money would
have to be spent in merely the experimental stage of the thing."

Ned Newton possessed traits of caution that could not be gainsaid. That
was one thing that made him such a successful financial manager for the
Swift Company. He watched expenditures as closely now as he had when
the business was upon a much more limited footing.

The rails laid along the inside of the stockade made a two-mile track,
as well ballasted as any regular railroad right of way. In addition the
overhead equipment was costly.

To eliminate any possibility of the trolley wire breaking, a strong
steel cable, called a catenary, was slung just above the trolley wire.
To this catenary the trolley wire was suspended by hangers at short
intervals.

These cables were strung from brackets so that a single row of poles
could be used, save at the curves, at which cross-span construction was
used. The trolley wire itself was of the 4/0 size, and was the largest
diameter copper wire ever employed for railroad purposes.

Several weeks had now passed since the great locomotive had been
assembled in the erection shed and the cab of the locomotive completed.
It really was a monster machine, and any stranger coming into the place
and seeing it for the first time must have marveled at the grim power
suggested by the mere bulk of the structure.

When the day of the first test arrived Tom allowed only his most
intimate friends to be present. Mary Nestor accompanied Mr. Swift into
the shops at the time appointed, and she was as excited over the
outcome of the test as Tom himself.

Ned Newton and the mechanical force of the shops knocked off work to
become spectators at the exhibition.  The only other outsider was Mr.
Damon.

"Bless my alternating current!" cried the eccentric gentleman.  "I
would not miss this for the world. If you tried to shut me out, Tom,
I'd climb over the stockade to get in."

"You'd better not," Tom told him, dryly. "If you tried that you'd get a
worse shock than any chicken thief will get that tries to steal your
buff Orpingtons."




Chapter XIII

Hopes and Fears


Tom climbed into the huge cab of the electric locomotive. In fact, the
cab was the most of it, for every part of the mechanism save the
drivers was covered by the eighty-odd foot structure.  From the peak of
the pilot to the rear bumper the length was ninety feet and some inches.

As Tom slid the monster out upon the yard track the small crowd
cheered. At least, the locomotive had the power to move, and to the
unknowing ones, at least, that seemed a great and wonderful thing.

What they saw was apparently a box-car--like a mail coach, only with
more high windows--ten feet wide, its roof more than fourteen feet from
the rails, its locked pantagraph adding two feet more to its height.

Just what was in the cab--the water and oil tanks, the steam-heating
boiler to supply heat and hot water to the train the monster was to
draw, the motors and the many other mechanical contrivances--was hidden
from the spectators.

In fact, since completing the electrical equipment of the Hercules
0001, as Tom had named the locomotive, the young inventor had allowed
nobody inside the cab, any more than he allowed visitors inside his
private workshop. Even Mr. Swift did not know all the results of Tom's
experimental work. In a general way the older inventor knew the trend
of his son's attempts, but the details and the results of Tom's
experiments, the latter told to nobody.

But as the huge locomotive rolled into the yard and followed the more
or less circular track inside the yard fence, it was plain to all of
the onlookers that the motive-power was there all right! Just what
speed could be coaxed from the feed-cable overhead was another question.

Nor did Tom Swift try for much speed on this first test of the Hercules
0001. He went around the two-mile track several times before bringing
his machine to a stop near the crowd of onlookers. He came to the open
door of the cab.

"One thing is sure, Tom!" shouted Ned. "It do move!"

"Bless my slippery skates!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, "it slides right
along, Tom. You've done it, my boy--you've done it!"

"It looks good from where I stand, my son," said Mr. Barton Swift.

It was Mary who suspected that Tom was not wholly satisfied--as yet, at
least--with the test of the Hercules 0001. She cried:

"Tom! is it all right?"

"Nothing is ever all right--that is, not perfect--in this old world, I
guess, Mary," returned the young inventor. "But I am not discouraged.
As Ned says, the old contraption 'do move.' How fast she'll move is
another thing."

"What time did you make?" asked Mr. Swift.

"Not above fifteen miles an hour."

"Whew!" whistled Ned dolefully. "That is a long way from--"

Tom made an instant motion and Ned's careless lips were sealed.  It was
not generally known among the men the speed which Tom hoped to obtain
with his new invention.

"It is a wide shoot at the target, that is true," Tom said, soberly.
"But remember I cannot test it for speed on this short and almost
circular track. Right at the start, however, I see that something about
the power-feed must be changed."

"What is that?" asked Mary, curiously.

"I have only had rigged here one trolley wire. There must be two
attached alternately to the catenary cable. Such a form of twin
conductor trolley will permit the collection of a heavy current through
the twin contact of the pantagraph with the two trolley wires, and
should assure a sparkless collection of the current at any speed. You
noticed that when I took the sharper curves there was an aerial
exhibition. I want to do away with the fireworks."

The fact that the Hercules 0001 was a going and apparently powerful
draught engine satisfied most of the onlookers that Tom Swift was on
the road to final and overwhelming success. The mechanics, indeed, saw
no reason why the locomotive could not be run right out of the yard on
the freight track and coupled to the first train going West. Of course,
the Hercules 0001 could not be delivered to the Hendrickton & Pas Alos
under its own power.

When the locomotive was run back into the shed and stood once more on
the erection track, Tom confessed to Mary and Ned, while Mr. Damon and
Mr. Swift were looking through the huge cab, that he was not at all
pleased with the action of the machine.

"I have the best equipment of any electric locomotive on the rails
today. I am sure of that," he said. "The Hercules Three-Oughts-One is
not as long as those electric locomotives of the C. M. &. St. P. But
that's all right. I have built mine more compactly and, properly
geared, it should have all the power of either the Baldwin-Westinghouse
or the Jandel locomotive."

"Then, Tom dear, what is wrong?" cried Mary.

"Speed. That is what troubles me. Have I got anything like the speed I
am aiming for?"

"Two miles a minute!" breathed Ned Newton. "Some speed, boy!"

"And must you have such great speed, Tom?" repeated Mary.

"That is in my contract. Not only that, but to be of much use to the H.
& P. A. this locomotive must have such speed--or mighty near it. Of
course, under ordinary conditions, two miles a minute for a locomotive
and train of heavy freights would burn up the track--maybe melt the
flanges and throw everything out of gear."

"Why try for it, then?" demanded Mary.

"It is the power suggested by the possession of such speed that we want
in the Hercules Three-Oughts-One. That two miles a minute is a fiction
of the imagination, cannot be claimed. It is possible. It is humanly
possible. It is coming."

"Then you must be the fellow to first accomplish it, Tom Swift," Ned
declared.

"Of course, if anybody can do it, you can, Tom," agreed the girl
complacently.

"Thanks--many, many thanks," laughed the young inventor. "I'd be able
to harness the sun and stars, and put a surcingle around the moon if I
came up to my friends' opinion of my ability.

"Nevertheless, two-miles-a-minute is my objective point, and I do not
believe it is visionary. Consider the motor-cycle. Ninety miles an hour
has long been possible with that, and some tests have shown a speed of
over a hundred and ten. That is not far from my mark.

"Some Mallet locomotives of the oil-burning type have achieved from
eighty-five to ninety-five miles an hour with a heavy load behind them.
They are very powerful machines. The Mogul mountain climbers are
powerful, too, although they are not built for speed.

"The electric Goliaths built for the C. M. & St. P., and the Jandels,
are both very speedy under certain conditions. The former has a maximum
speed of sixty-five miles and the Jandel slightly faster."

"But that is only half what that Mr. Bartholomew demands of your
invention, Tom!" Mary cried.

"That is a fact. I must reach twice sixty miles an hour, anyway, to
meet his demand and gain that hundred thousand bonus.  But I have the
advantage of a knowledge of all that has been done before my time in
the matter of electrical locomotive construction."

"The world do move," repeated Ned. "You believe that you have the edge
on all the other inventors?"

"Along the line of this development--yes," said Tom. "I am taking up
the work where former experimenters ended theirs. Why shouldn't I find
the right combination to bring about a two-miles-a-minute drive?"

"Oh, Tom!" cried Mary, with clasped hands, "I hope you do."

"I hope I do, too," said Tom, grimly. "At least, if trying will bring
it, success is going to come my way."




Chapter XIV

Speed


More than four months had passed since the contract had been signed,
when Tom made his first yard-test of the Hercules 0001.  For a month
nothing had been seen or heard of Andy O'Malley, whose identity as the
spy, set by Montagne Lewis to cripple Tom's attempt to help the
Hendrickton & Pas Alos Railroad, had been determined beyond any doubt.

The private inquiry agent that Tom had engaged to find O'Malley had
been unsuccessful in his work. The spy had disappeared from Shopton and
the vicinity. Nevertheless, the inventor did not for a moment overlook
the possibility that the enemy might again strike.

Every night the electric current was turned into the wires that capped
the stockade of the Swift Construction Company enclosure.  Koku beat a
path around the enclosure at night, getting such short sleep as he
seemed to need in the forenoon.

"Dat crazy cannibal," grumbled Rad, "got it in his haid dat he's gwine
to he'p Massa Tom by walkin' out o' nights like he was dis here
Western, de great sprinter, Ma lawsy me! Koku ain't got brains enough
to fill up a hic'ry nut shell. Dat he ain't."

Nothing anybody else could do for Tom ever satisfied Rad. The colored
man fully believed that he was the only person really necessary for
Tom's success and peace of mind. In fact, Rad thought that even Ned
Newton's duties as financial manager of the firm were scarcely of as
much importance.

When he heard that Tom was going West, after a time, with the electric
locomotive, to try it out on the tracks of the H. & P. A., Rad was
quite sure that if he did not go along, the test would not come out
right.

"O' course yo'll need me, Massa Tom," he said, confidently.  "Couldn't
git along widout me nohow. Yo' knows, sir, I allus has to go 'long wid
yo' to fix things."

"Don't you think father will need you here, Rad?" Tom asked the
faithful old fellow. "You're getting old--"

"Me gittin' old?" cried, the colored man. "Huh! Yo' don't know 'bout
dis here chile. I don't purpose ever to git old. I been gray-haided
since befo' yo' was born; but I ain't old yit!"

Mr. Damon chanced to be present at this conversation, and he was highly
amused, yet somewhat impressed, too, by the colored man's statement.

"Bless my own antiquity!" he exclaimed. "I agree with Rad, Tom.  It's
us old fellows who know what to do when an emergency of any kind
arises. Experience teaches more than inspiration."

"Oh," said Tom, laughing, "I do not deny the value of old friends at
any stage of the game."

"Bless my roving nature! I am glad to hear you say that. For I tell you
right now, Tom, I want to be out there when you make your final test of
the locomotive."

"Do you mean that you will go West when I take out the Hercules
Three-Oughts-One?" cried Tom.

"It's just what I want to do. Bless my traveling bag, Tom! I mean to be
present at your final triumph."

"What will happen to your buff Orpingtons while you are gone?" asked
the young inventor, gravely.

"I have got my servant trained to look after those chickens," declared
Mr. Damon. "And this invention of yours is really more important than
even my buff Orpingtons."

"Just the same," remarked Tom to his eccentric friend, when Rad had
left the room. "I've got to fix it so that Eradicate stays at home with
father. He doesn't really know how old and broken he is--poor fellow."

"His heart is green, Tom. That's what is the matter with Rad."

"He is a loyal old fellow. But I shall take Koku with me, not Rad," and
the young inventor spoke decidedly. "And that is going to trouble poor
Rad a lot."

The prospect of going West, however, was not the main subject of Tom's
thoughts at this time. As the weeks passed and the end of the six
months of experiment came nearer, the inventor was more and more
troubled by the principal difficulty which had from the first
confronted him. Speed.

That was the mark he had set himself. A maximum speed of two miles a
minute on a level track for the Hercules 0001. With the speed already
attained by both steam and electric locomotives in the more recent
past, this was by no means an impossible attainment, as Tom quite well
knew.

But he became convinced that the conditions under which he labored made
it impossible for him to be positive of just how great a speed on a
straight, level track his invention would attain.

There was no electrified stretch of railroad near Shopton on which the
Hercules 0001 might be tested. The track inside the Swift Company's
enclosure did not offer the conditions the inventor needed. He felt
balked.

"I believe I have hit the right idea in my improvements on the Jandel
patents," he told Ned Newton when they were discussing the matter. "But
believing is one thing. Knowing is another!"

"Theoretically it works out all right, I suppose?" questioned Ned.

"Quite. I can prove on paper that I've got the speed. But that isn't
enough. You can see that."

"Impossible to be sure on the trackage already built here, Tom?"

"I haven't dared give her all she'll take," grumbled Tom. "If I did, I
fear she'd jump the rails and I'd have a wreck on my hands."

"And maybe kill yourself!" exclaimed Ned. "You want to have a care."

"Oh, that's all right! I've taken risks before. I don't want to risk
the safety of the locomotive, which is more important. That machine has
cost us a lot of money."

"I'll say so!" agreed Ned. "You'll have to wait till you can get the
locomotive out there on the H. & P. A. tracks before you get a fair
speed-test."

"And suppose instead of a triumph it is a fiasco?" Tom said,
doubtfully. "I tell you straight, Ned: I never was so uncertain about
the outcome of one of my inventions since I began dabbling with
motive-power."

"We could build several miles of straight track in the waste ground
behind the works," Ned said, thoughtfully.

"Not a chance! There is neither time nor money for such work.  Besides,
I should have to rebuild my transforming station if I supplied longer
conduit wires with current."

"You don't really consider that you have failed, do you, Tom?" and
Ned's anxiety made his voice sound very woeful indeed.

"I tell you that my belief doesn't satisfy me. I hate to go West
without being sure--positive. I want to know! I have tried the
locomotive out in the yard half a dozen times. It runs like a fine
watch. There doesn't seem to be a thing the matter with it now. But
what speed can I attain?"

"I don't see but you'll have to risk it, Tom."

"I mean to give her one more test. I'll run her out tonight when there
is nobody about but the watchmen--and you, if you want to come. I'll
arrange with the Electric Company for all the current they can spare.
By ginger! I've got to take some risk."

"By the way, Tom," said his chum, "did it ever strike you as odd that
that private detective agency never got any trace of O'Malley?"

"Well, he's gone away. We needn't worry about him. Maybe the detective
wasn't very smart, at that."

"And yet he was here in town after you put the inquiry on foot.  I saw
him in the bank. He came there occasionally. And either he, or somebody
he hired, placed that bomb in the locomotive."

"All those being facts, what of it?"

"Besides, there was that other fellow--the man with the Vandyke beard.
Might be a shyster lawyer, or something of the kind. He wasn't spotted,
either."

"To tell the truth, I didn't bother to give the Detective Agency the
description of that fellow, although you gave it to me," and Tom
laughed. "I must confess that I depend more upon my man-trap electric
wires to protect the invention than I do on the private inquiry agent."

"It's funny, just the same. If I had another job for a detective I
should not submit it to the Blatz Agency," grumbled Ned.

"I fancy Montagne Lewis and his crowd called off their Wild West
gunman," said Tom. "In any case, every attempt he made to bother us
turned out a fizzle. I am not, however, forgetting precautions, my boy."

Ned Newton realized that his chum had determined to make this night
test of the electric locomotive the pivotal trial of the whole affair.
He came back to the works after dinner and was let in by the office
watchman at about nine o'clock.

"Mr. Tom here yet?" he asked the man.

"Yes, Mr. Newton. The young boss didn't go home to supper, even. That
colored man brought something down for him, and he's in the shed yet."

"Rad is here, you mean?"

"Yes, sir. At least, he didn't go out this way, and we watchmen have
instructions to let nobody in or out by the yard gates at night."

"I'll say Tom is being careful," thought Ned, as he stepped out through
the runway toward the erection shed.

Before he reached the entrance to the huge shed, however, Ned chanced
to look down the enclosure. There were several arc lights burning, but
even these only furnished a dim illumination for the whole yard.

He supposed that four watchmen were tramping their several beats along
the inside of the stockade and close to the trolley-track. But when he
saw an instant gleam of light down there, close to the ground, Ned did
not believe that it was the flash of a torch in the hand of any sentry.

"Funny," he muttered. "That's outside the fence, or I'm much mistaken.
I wonder now--"

He turned from the door of the shed, left the runway, and began walking
toward the distant point at which he had seen the mysterious flash of
light.




Chapter XV

The Enemy Still Active


Ned was dressed in a dark business suit, so he was not likely to be
observed from a distance, for it was a starless night. Half way to the
end of the great yard he began to wonder if the light he had seen might
not have been an hallucination.

He doubted very much if anybody was creeping about outside the fence.
The boards were close together, with scarcely a crack half an inch wide
anywhere. A light out there--

It flashed again. He was positive of it this time, and of its locality
as well. It could be nobody who had any honest business about the Swift
Construction Company's premises. It was not Koku, for ordinarily the
giant would not use an electric torch.

Ned did not know where any of the watchmen were who were acting as
sentinels. In fact, as it appeared later, three of them had been called
off their beats by Tom himself to help in some necessary task inside
the shed. The young inventor was getting ready to run the huge
locomotive out upon the yard-track.

Remembering vividly the attempt which had been made some weeks before
to blow up the Hercules 0001, it was only natural that Ned should
suspect that the flash of light he had seen revealed the presence of
some ill-conditioned person lurking just beyond the fence.

A man might be crouching there prepared to hurl an explosive bomb over
the fence when the locomotive was brought around as far as that spot.
Or was the villain foolish enough to attempt to enter the enclosure by
surmounting the fence?

Ned, keeping close to the ground, crossed the rails in the fortunate
shadow of one of the posts. There he found a place where, with his back
to a pole-prop right at this curve in the trolley system, the shadow
enfolded him completely.

Had his movements been marked by the person outside the fence?  Ned
waited several long and anxious minutes for some move from out there.
Then something rather unexpected occurred. For the past ten minutes he
had forgotten about the test of the Hercules 0001 which Tom had
promised.

With a blast of its siren the huge electric locomotive burst out of the
shed and thundered around the track. It smote Ned Newton's mind
suddenly that the inventor was going to "take a chance" on this evening
and try to get some speed out of the huge machine.

The electric headlight cast a broad cone of white and dazzling light
across the yard. It suddenly struck full upon the spot where Ned Newton
crouched; but the upright against which he leaned was broad enough to
hide him completely.

Looking up at the top of the stockade at that moment of illumination,
the young financial manager of the Swift Construction Company beheld a
crawling figure nearing the wire entanglements on the summit of the
fence.

The unknown man was climbing by means of a notched pole. Ned could not
see that he bore any bulky object in his hands; indeed, he needed both
of them to aid him to climb. But the man's right hand was reaching
upward, above his head.

The Hercules 0001 came roaring on. Its cone of light passed beyond
Ned's station. In a few seconds it reached the spot, and roared on. Ned
had not made a move. It seemed to him that he could not move or speak.

The onrush of the electric locomotive all but swept the young fellow
from his feet. It had come and gone in an instant!

"He's making more than fifteen or twenty miles an hour, all right,"
muttered Ned.

Then he flashed another glance up at the figure outside the fence. The
man's cap showed above the top of the boards. He seemed to be dragging
something up to him from below--something that hung and swung around
and around a few feet from the ground.

Ned was about to dart out of concealment and hail the fellow.  He was
not armed, nor could he get out of the stockade near this point. He
feared what the marauder intended, and he felt that he must frighten
him away.

"Suppose that is a bomb and he means to fling it in front of Tom's
locomotive?" thought the anxious Ned.

He again saw the stranger's right hand reach up above his head.  But he
had no bomb in his hand. Ned suddenly shrieked a word of warning! It
had come to him what the man was doing and what the result of his act
would be.

The wire-cutters bit on one of the copper wires. There followed a flash
of blue flame, and the man screamed. He dropped the thing swinging
below him and involuntarily grabbed at the wires with his left hand.

He was caught, then! The crackling intermittent shocks of electric
fluid passed through his body in fiery sequence. His limbs writhed. He
mouthed horribly, and croaking gasps came from between his wide open
jaws.

The Hercules 0001 had rounded the enclosure and was coming down upon
its second lap. The cone of white radiance from the headlight fell upon
the writhing body of the victim on the wires.  The locomotive siren
emitted a blast that almost deafened Ned.

The monster ground to a stop. Tom swung himself half out of the cab
window beside the controller.

"Who's that?" he yelled. Then he saw Ned below him. "Who is that
fellow?"

"No friend of yours, Tom, I believe," returned his financial manager in
a shaking voice.

"Where's Rad? Rad!" Tom shouted at the top of his voice.

"I's comm', Massa Tom," rejoined the colored man.

"Never mind coming here! Get a move on, and get to the switchboard.
Turn the current out of the fence wires.

"Yis, sir, I'll go Massa Tom," declared the old man.

"Is he a spotter, Ned?" demanded the inventor.

"He's no friend. I am going out by the gate. He's got something there
that means harm, I believe. Do you think he's killed, Tom?"

"Only ought to be. Not enough current to kill him. But he's badly
burned and--and--well! I bet he won't care to fool around the works
again."

Ned dashed away to an entrance. A watchman came running, opened the
small gate, and followed Ned into the open.

Before they arrived at the vicinity of the accident Rad had got to the
switchboard. The electricity was shut out of the stockade wires.

Ned uttered another shout. He saw the writhing body of the shocked man
fall from the stockade. When he and the watchman got to the spot the
fellow lay upon his back, groaning and sobbing; but Ned saw at once
that he was more frightened than hurt.

"Well, you did it that time!" exclaimed the young financial manager.
"And I hope you got enough."

"You--you demons!" gasped the man. "I'll have the law on you--"

"Sure you will," cackled the watchman. "You had every right in the
world to try to cut those wires, of course, and get into the yard of
the works. Sure! The judge will believe you all right."

Ned was, meanwhile, staring closely at the fallen man. Tom had come
down from the locomotive and was close to the fence.

"Who is he?" demanded the inventor. "Not O'Malley?"

Ned stepped to the fence and whispered:

"It's the other fellow. The little chap with the Vandyke. He's dressed
like a tramp, but it's the same man."

"Is he badly hurt?" demanded Tom.

"His temper is, Boss," said the watchman callously. "And say! I know
this fellow. He works for the Blatz Detective Agency. I used to work
for those folks myself. His name is Myrick--Joe Myrick."

"Ned," said Tom sternly, "go to the office and call the police.  I'll
make him tell why he was here. And I'll make the Blatz people explain,
too. Hullo! what's that?"

Ned had seized the rope he had seen in Myrick's hand, and from a patch
of weeds drew a two-gallon oil-can.

"What you got there, Ned?" repeated the young inventor.

"Whatever it is, I am going to be mighty easy with it. I think this
scoundrel was trying to get it over the fence and into the way of the
locomotive."

"You can't hang anything on me," said Myrick, suddenly. "I was just
climbing up to the top of the fence to get a squint at that contraption
you've built. You can't hang anything on me."

"He's evidently feeling better," said Tom, scornfully. "Nugent, don't
let him get away from you. Go call the police, Ned. And take care of
that can until we can find out what's in it."

Later, when the police had removed Joe Myrick and the mysterious can
had been deposited in a tub of water in the open lot until its contents
could be examined, Tom said to his chum:

"I was just working up some speed on the locomotive. The speedometer
indicated fifty-five when I saw that fellow sprawling up there on the
fence. I would not have dared go much faster in any case."

"Why, you weren't half trying, Tom!" cried the delighted Ned.

"She did slide around easy, didn't she? Fifty-five on an almost
circular track is a good showing. I am not so scared as I was, my boy."

"You think that on a straight track you might accomplish what you set
out to do?"

"It looks like it. At any rate, I shall risk a trial on the H. & P. A.
tracks. I'm going to take her West. Be ready on Monday, Ned, for I
shall want you with me," declared Tom Swift.




Chapter XVI

Off for the West


Of course, as Tom supposed they would, the Blatz Detective Agency
denied that Joe Myrick, their one-time operative, had been engaged
through their bureau either to spy upon the Swift Construction Company
or to injure Tom's invention of the electric locomotive.

Nevertheless, three points were indisputable: Myrick had been caught
spying; in his possession was a can of explosive which could be set off
by concussion; and it was a fact that to Myrick had been first
entrusted the matter of hunting for Andy O'Malley when Tom had put the
search for the Westerner up to the Blatz people.

"He played traitor both to you, Mr. Swift, and to our agency," declared
Blatz to Tom. "I wash my hands of him. I hope the police send him away
for life!"

"He'll go to prison all right," said Tom, confidently. "But the main
point is that one of your operatives fell down on a simple job. I
wanted that Andy O'Malley traced. He's out of the way, now, of course.
If you had put an honest man to work for me, O'Malley would be behind
the bars himself."

"Some doubt of that, Mr. Swift," grumbled Blatz.

"Why?"

"Where's your evidence that this O'Malley was connected with the
attempt to blow up your locomotive the first time? Mr. Newton's
testimony would need corroboration."

"Never mind that," rejoined the young inventor, with a smile.  "I'd
have him for highway robbery. I recognized him. He robbed me of a
wallet. Guess we could put O'Malley away for awhile on that charge. And
by the time he got out again my job for that Western railroad would be
completed."

"Humph! Nothing personal in your going after the fellow, then?" queried
the head of the detective agency.

"No. But I frankly confess that I am afraid of O'Malley. He is
undoubtedly in the employ of men who will pay him well if he wrecks my
invention. But there really is no personal grudge between O'Malley and
me. At least, I feel no particular enmity against the fellow."

There was a pause.

"If you say so we will give you a couple of good men as bodyguards on
your trip West," suggested Blatz, licking his lips hungrily.

"As good men as Myrick?" retorted Tom, rather scornfully. "No, thank
you. Just make your bill out to the Swift Construction Company to date,
and a check will be sent you the first of the month. I will take my own
precautions hereafter."

And those precautions Tom considered sufficient. When the Hercules 0001
was towed out of the enclosure belonging to the Swift Construction
Company early on Monday morning, each door and window of the huge cab
was barred and locked. Inside the cab rode Koku, the giant.

Koku had his orders to allow nobody to enter the Hercules 0001 until
Tom or Ned Newton came to relieve him of his responsibility as guard.
The giant had a swinging cot to sleep on and sufficient food--of a
kind--to last him for a fortnight if necessary.

He was not armed, for Tom did not often trust him with weapons.  The
young inventor, however, did not expect that any armed force would
attack the electric locomotive.

If Montagne Lewis desired to wreck the new invention which might mean
so much to Mr. Bartholomew and the H. & P. A., he surely would not
allow his hirelings to attack openly the locomotive while it was en
route.

On the other hand, Tom did not really believe that Andy O'Malley would
attempt any reprisal against him personally. Of course, the Western
desperado might feel himself abused by Tom, especially in the matter of
Tom's use of his ammonia pistol.

But that had happened months ago. O'Malley had undoubtedly been hired
by Mr. Bartholomew's enemies to obtain knowledge of the contract signed
between the young inventor and the railroad president; and later it was
certain that the spy had tried his best to wreck the electric
locomotive.

As for any personal assault so many weeks after O'Malley had clashed
with him Tom Swift did not expect it. With Ned in his company on this
journey to Hendrickton, the young inventor had good reason to consider
that he was perfectly safe.

Mary Nestor and Mr. Swift came to the station to see the two young men
off on Monday evening. Mary had heard about the second attempt made to
blow up the Hercules 0001 and she begged Tom to take every precaution
while he was in the West.

"You will be in the enemy's country out there, Tom dear," she warned
him. "You won't be careless?"

"I know I shall be mighty busy," he told her, laughing. "I'll let Ned
play watch-dog. And you know, his is a cautious soul, Mary."

"I've every confidence in Ned's faithfulness," the girl said, still
with anxious tone. "But those men who are trying to ruin Mr.
Bartholomew's road will stop at nothing. I must hear from you
frequently, Tom, or I shall worry myself ill."

"Don't lose your courage, Mary," rejoined the inventor, more gravely.
"I do not think they will attack me personally again.  Remember that
Koku is on the job, as well as Ned. And Mr. Damon declares he will
follow us West very shortly," and again Tom chuckled.

"Even Mr. Damon may be a help to you, Tom," declared Mary, warmly. "At
least, he is completely devoted to you."

"So is Rad Sampson," said Tom, with a little grimace. "I certainly had
my hands full convincing him that father needed him here at home. At
that, Rad is pretty warm over the fact that I sent Koku on with the
locomotive. If anything should chance to happen to my invention,
Eradicate Sampson is going to shout 'I told you so!' all over the shop."

Mary dabbed her eyes a little with her handkerchief, and Tom patted her
shoulder.

"Don't worry, Mary," he said more cheerfully. "There won't a thing
happen to me out there at Hendrickton. I'll keep the wires hot with
telegrams. And I'll write to both you and father, and give you the full
particulars of how we get along. You'll keep your eye on father, Mary,
won't you?"

"You may be sure of that," said the girl. "I will not leave him
entirely to the care of Rad," and she tried hard to smile again.  But
it was a difficult matter.

Such a parting as this is always hard to endure. Tom wrung his father's
hand and warned him to be careful of his health. The train came along
and the two young men boarded it with their personal luggage.

They had a flash of the two faces--that of Mr. Swift's and Mary's
blooming countenance--as the express started again, and then the
outlook from the Pullman coach showed them the fast-receding environs
of Shopton.

"We're on our way, my boy," said Tom to his chum.

"We certainly are," said Ned, thoughtfully. "I wonder what the outcome
of the trip will be? It may not be all plain sailing."

"Don't croak," rejoined the young inventor, with a grin.

"I don't see how you can appear so cheerful. Why! you don't even know
if that electric locomotive is safe. Something may have already
happened to it. The freight train might be wrecked. A dozen things
might happen."

"I am not crossing any bridges before I come to them," declared Tom.
"Besides, I propose to keep in touch with the Hercules Three-Oughts-One
in a certain way--Hullo! Here it is."

"Here what is?" demanded Ned.

The Pullman conductor at that moment came in through the forward
corridor. He had a telegram in his hand, and intoned loudly as he
approached:

"Mr. Swift! Mr. Thomas Swift! Telegram for Mr. Swift."

"That is for me, Conductor," said Tom briskly, offering his card.

"All right, Mr. Swift. Just got it at Shopton. Operator said you had
boarded my car. This is railroad business, you'll notice.  Have you any
reply, sir?"

Tom ripped open the envelope and unfolded the telegram. He held it so
that Ned could read, too. It was signed: "N. G. Smith, Conductor,
Number 48."

"What's that?" exclaimed Ned, reading the message.

"'Locomotive and crazy man in it all right at Lingo,'" repeated Tom
aloud, and chuckled.

"No, Conductor, there is no answer."

"Good!" exclaimed Ned. "You arranged to get reports en route from the
conductors handling the Hercules Three-Oughts-One?"

"Surest thing you know," replied Tom. "And I guess, from the wording of
this message, that the crew of Forty-eight have already found out that
Koku is not an ordinary guard."

"He's a great boy," smiled Ned. "Glad he is on the job."




Chapter XVII

The Wreck of Forty-Eight


The two chums sought their berths that night in high fettle.  Even Ned
sloughed off his mood of apprehension which he had worn on boarding the
train at Shopton.

For, true to the arrangement Tom had made with the railroad people,
another reassuring telegram was brought to him before bedtime. The
second conductor responsible for the management of the Western bound
freight to which the Hercules 0001 was attached, sent back a brief
statement of the safety of the electric locomotive.

Naturally the two chums would have passed the freight and got well
ahead of it before reaching Hendrickton. But Tom had business in
Chicago, and they stayed over in that city for twenty-four hours. The
freight train went around the city, of course. But the telegrams
continued to reach Tom promptly, even at the hotel where he and Ned
stopped in the city.

Occasionally the trainmen in charge of the freight mentioned Koku. His
eccentric behavior doubtless somewhat puzzled the railroaders.

"That's all right," chuckled Ned. "Let them think Koku is dangerous if
they want to. That O'Malley person believed he was!"

"I'll say so!" replied Tom. "The way he ran when Koku started after him
that time on the Waterfield Road seemed to prove that he didn't want to
mix with Koku."

"If he--or other spies--learns that Koku is with the Hercules
Three-Oughts-One, it ought to warn them away from the locomotive."

This was Ned's final speech before getting into his berth. He, as well
as Tom, slept quite as calmly on this first night out of Chicago as
they had before.

They knew exactly where the electric locomotive was. It was on the same
road as this train they were traveling in, and, although on a different
track, it was not many miles ahead. In fact, if the two trains kept to
schedule, the transcontinental passenger train would pass the freight
in question about five o'clock in the morning.

It lacked half an hour of that time when the Pullman train came
suddenly to a jolting stop. Both Tom and Ned were awakened with the
rest of the passengers in their coach.

Heads were poked out between curtains all along the aisle and a chorus
of more or less excited voices demanded:

"What's the matter?"

"Nothin's the matter wid dis train, gen'lemens an' ladies," came in the
porter's important voice. "Jest nothin' at all's happened. It's done
happened up ahead of us, das all."

"Well, what has happened ahead of us, George?" asked Ned.

"Jest another train, Boss, been splatterin' itself all ober de right of
way. We sort o' bein' held up, das all," replied the porter.

"That's good news--for us," said Ned, preparing to climb back into his
berth. But he halted where he was when he heard his chum ask:

"What train left the track, George?"

"A freight train, sah. Yes, sah. Number Forty-eight. She jumped de
rails, side-swiped de accommodation dat was holdin' us back, and has
jest done spread herself all over de right of way."

"My goodness!" gasped Ned.

"Hear that, Ned?" exclaimed Tom. "Scramble into your clothes, boy. The
Hercules Three-Oughts-One is hitched to Forty-eight."

"Suppose she's off the track?" murmured Ned.

"It's lucky if she isn't smashed to matchwood," groaned Tom, and almost
immediately left the Pullman coach on the run.

Ned was not far behind him. When they reached the cinder path beside
the freight train it was just sunrise. Long arms of rosy light reached
down the mountain side to linger on the tracks and what was strewed
across them. A glance assured the two young fellows from the East that
it was a bad smash indeed.

Several of the rear boxcars were slung athwart the passenger tracks.
The passenger train that had been ahead of the Pullman train on which
Tom and Ned rode, had been badly beaten in all along its side. Scarcely
a whole window was left on the inner side of the five cars. But those
cars were not derailed. It was merely some of the freight cars that
retarded the further progress of the transcontinental flyer. A derrick
car must be brought up to lift away the debris before the fast train
could move on.

Tom and Ned walked forward along the length of the wreck.  Suddenly the
anxious young inventor seized Ned's arm.

"Glory be!" he ejaculated. "It's topside up, anyway."

"The Hercules Three-Oughts-One?" gasped Ned.

"That's what it is!"

Tom quickened his pace, and his financial manager followed close upon
his heels. The forward end of Forty-eight had not left the track and
the electric locomotive stood upright upon the rails, being near the
head end of the train.

"If this wreck was intentional, and aimed at your invention, Tom,"
whispered Ned Newton, "it did not result as the wreckers expected."

Tom scouted the idea suggested by his chum. And in a few moments they
learned from a railroad employee that a broken flange on a boxcar wheel
had caused the wreck.

"So that disposes of your suspicion, Ned," said Tom, approaching the
huge electric locomotive.

"Hey, gents!" exclaimed another railroad man, one of the crew of the
wrecked freight. "Better keep away from that locomotive."

"What's the matter with it?" Ned asked, curiously.

"Got some kind of an aborigine caged up in it. You put your hand on any
part of it and he's likely to jump out and bite your hand off, or
something. Believe me, he's some savage."

Both Tom and Ned burst into laughter. The former went forward to the
door of the cab and knocked in a peculiar way. It was a signal that the
giant recognized instantly.

"Master!" Koku cried from inside the cab. "Master! Him come in?"

"No, Koku," said Tom. "I'm not coming in. Are you all right?"

"Yes. Koku all right. Him come out?"

"No, no!" laughed Tom. "You are not at your journey's end yet, Koku.
Keep on the job a while longer."

"Sure. Koku stay here forever, if Master say so."

"Forever is a long word, Koku," said Tom, more seriously. "I'll tell
you when to open the door. I'll be at the end of the journey to meet
you."

"It all right if Master say so. But Koku no like to travel in box,"
grumbled the giant.

Tom turned from the electric locomotive to see Ned staring across the
tracks at a man who was talking to several of the train crew of the
side-swiped accommodation train. That train was about to be moved on
under its own power. None of the wreckage of the freight interfered
with the progress of the accommodation.

Tom stepped to Ned's side and touched his arm. "Who is he?" the
inventor asked.

The man who had attracted Ned's attention and now held Tom's interest
as well was a solid looking man with gray hair and a dyed mustache. He
was chewing on a long and black cigar, and he spoke to the train hands
with authority.

"Well, why can't you find him?" he wanted to know in a hoarse and
arrogant voice.

"Who is he?" asked Tom again in Ned's ear.

"I've seen him somewhere. Or else I've seen somebody that looks like
him. Maybe I've seen his picture. He's somebody of importance."

"He thinks he is," rejoined the young inventor, with some disdain.

In answer to something one of the railroad men said the important
looking individual uttered an oath and added:

"There's nobody been killed then? He's just missing? He was sitting in
the coach ahead of me. I saw him just before the wreck. You know
O'Malley yourself. Do you mean to say you haven't seen him, Conductor?"

"I assure you he disappeared like smoke, sir," said the passenger
conductor. "I haven't an idea what became of him."

"Humph! If you see him, send him to me," and the solid man stepped
heavily aboard the nearest coach and disappeared inside.

Tom and Ned stared at each other with wondering gaze. O'Malley!  The
spy who had represented Montagne Lewis and the Hendrickton & Western
Railroad in the East.

"What do you know about that?" demanded Ned, wonderingly.

"Hold on!" exclaimed Tom. He sprang across the rails after the
conductor of the accommodation train that was just starting on.  "Let
me ask you a question."

"Yes, sir?" replied the conductor

"Who was that man who just spoke to you?" "That man? Why, I thought
everybody out this way knew Montagne Lewis. That is his name, sir--and
a big man he is. Yes, sir," and the conductor, giving the watching
engineer of his train the "highball," caught the hand-rail of the car
and swung himself aboard as the train started.




Chapter XVIII

On the Hendrickton & Pas Alos


The transcontinental was delayed three hours by the strewn wreckage of
the rear of Number Forty-eight. When she went on the two young fellows
from Shopton gazed anxiously at the Hercules 0001, which stood between
two gondolas in the forward end of the freight train.

"Just by luck nothing happened to it," muttered Ned.

"Just luck," agreed Tom Swift. "It was a shock to me to learn that Andy
O'Malley was right there on the spot when the accident happened."

"And his employer, too," added Ned. "For we must admit that Mr.
Montagne Lewis is the man who sicked O'Malley on to you."

"True."

"And they were both in the accommodation that was sideswiped by the
derailed cars of Number Forty-eight."

"That, likewise is a fact," said Tom, nodding quickly.

"But what puzzles me, as it seemed to puzzle Lewis, more than anything
else, is what became of O'Malley?"

"I guess I can see through that knot-hole," Tom rejoined.

"Yes?"

"I bet O'Malley got a squint at me--or perhaps at you--as we walked up
the track from this coach, and he lit out in a hurry.  There stood the
Three-Oughts-One, and there were we. He knew we would raise a hue and
cry if we saw him in the vicinity of my locomotive."

"I bet that's the truth, Tom."

"I know it. He didn't even have time to warn his employer. By the way,
Ned, what a brute that Montagne Lewis looks to be."

"I believe you! I remember having seen his photograph in a magazine.
Oh, he's some punkins, Tom."

"And just as wicked as they make 'em, I bet! Face just as pleasant as a
bulldog's!"

"You said it. I'm afraid of that man. I shall not have a moment's peace
until you have handed the Hercules Three-Oughts-One over to Mr.
Bartholomew and got his acceptance."

"If I do," murmured Tom.

"Of course you will, if that Lewis or his henchmen don't smash things
up. You are not afraid of the speed matter now, are you?" demanded Ned
confidently.

"I can be sure of nothing until after the tests," said Tom, shaking his
head. "Remember, Ned, that I have set out to accomplish what was never
done before--to drive a locomotive over the rails at two miles a
minute. It's a mighty big undertaking."

"Of course it will come out all right. If Koku is faithful----"

"That is the smallest 'if' in the category," Tom interposed, with a
laugh. "If I was as sure of all else as I am of Koku, we'd have plain
sailing before us."

Two days later Tom Swift and Ned Newton were ushered into the private
office of the president of the H. & P. A. at the Hendrickton terminal.
The two young fellows from the East had got in the night before, had
become established at the best hotel in the rapidly growing Western
municipality, and had seen something of the town itself during the
hours before midnight.

Now they were ready for business, and very important business, too.

Mr. Richard Bartholomew sat up in his desk chair and his keen eyes
suddenly sparkled when he saw his visitors and recognized them.

"I did not expect you so soon. Your locomotive arrived yesterday, Mr.
Swift. How are you, Mr. Newton?"

He motioned for them to take chairs. His secretary left the room. The
railroad magnate at once became confidential.

"Nothing happened on the way?" he asked, pointedly. "There was a
freight wreck, I understand?"

"And we chanced to be right at hand when that happened," said Tom.

"So was your friend, Mr. Lewis," remarked Ned Newton.

"You don't mean to say that Montagne Lewis--"

"Was there. And Andy O'Malley," put in Tom.

Then he detailed the incident, as far as he and Ned knew the details,
to Mr. Bartholomew, who listened with close attention.

"Well, it might merely have been a coincidence," murmured the railroad
president. "But, of course, we can't be sure. Anyhow, it is just as
well if your servant, Mr. Swift, keeps close watch still upon that
locomotive."

"He will," said Tom, nodding. "He is down there in the yard with the
Hercules Three-Oughts-One, and I mean to keep Koku right on the job."

"Good! Let's go down and look at her," Mr. Bartholomew said, eagerly.

But first Tom wanted to go into the theoretical particulars of his
invention. And he confessed that thus far his tests of the locomotive
had not been altogether satisfactory.

"I have got to have a clear track on a stretch of your own line here,
Mr. Bartholomew, and under certain conditions, before I can be sure as
to just how much speed I can get out of the machine."

"Speed is the essential point, Mr. Swift," said the railroad man,
seriously.

"That is what I have been telling Ned," Tom rejoined. "I believe my
improvements over the Jandel patents are worthy. I know I have a very
powerful locomotive. But that is not enough."

"We have got to shoot our trains through the Pas Alos Range faster than
trains were ever shot over the grades before, or we have failed," said
Mr. Bartholomew, with decision.

"But--" began Ned; but Tom put up an arresting hand and his financial
manager ceased speaking.

"I have not forgotten the details of our contract, Mr. Bartholomew," he
said, quietly. "Two-miles-a-minute is the target I have aimed for.
Whether I have hit it or not, well, time will show. I have got to try
the locomotive out on the tracks of the H. & P. A. in any case. The
Hercules Three-Oughts-One has been dragged a long distance, and has
been through at least one wreck.  I want to see if she is all right
before I test her officially."

"I'll arrange that for you," said Mr. Bartholomew, briskly, putting
away his papers. "I will go with you, too, and take a look at the
marvel."

"And a marvel it is," grumbled Ned. "Don't let him fool you, Mr.
Bartholomew. Tom never does consider what he's done as being as great
as it really is."

"Everything must be proved," Tom said, cautiously. "If it was a
financial problem, Mr. Bartholomew, believe me it would be Ned who
displayed caution. But I have seldom built anything that could not--and
has not--later been improved."

"You do not consider your electric locomotive, then, a completed
invention?" asked Mr. Bartholomew, as the three walked down the yard.

"I have too much experience to say it is perfect," returned Tom. "I can
scarcely believe, even, that it is going to suit you, Mr. Bartholomew,
even if the speed test is as promising as I hope it may be."

"Humph!"

"But before I shall be willing to throw up the sponge and say that I
have failed, I shall monkey with the Hercules Three-Oughts-One quite a
little on your tracks."

"Your six months isn't up yet," said Mr. Bartholomew, more cheerfully.
"And it doesn't matter if it is. If you see any chance of making a
success of your invention, you are welcome to try it out on the tracks
of the H. & P. A. for another six months."

"All right," Tom said, smiling. "Now, there is the Hercules
Three-Oughts-One, Mr. Bartholomew. And there is Koku looking longingly
through the window."

In fact, the giant, the moment he saw Tom, ran to unbar and open the
door of the cab on that side.

"Master! If no let Koku out, Koku go amuck--crazy! No can breathe in
here! No can eat! No can sleep!"

"The poor fellow!" ejaculated Ned.

"What's the matter with him?" asked Mr. Bartholomew, curiously.

"Get out, if you want to, Koku. I'll stay by while you kick up your
heels."

No sooner had the inventor spoken than the giant leaped from the open
door of the locomotive and dashed away along the cinder path as though
he actually had to run away. Tom burst into a laugh, as he watched the
giant disappear beyond the strings of freight cars.

"What is the matter with him?" repeated the railroad president.

"He's got the cramp all right," laughed Tom Swift. "You don't
understand, Mr. Bartholomew, what it means to that big fellow to be
housed in for so many days, and unable to kick a free limb. I bet he
runs ten miles before he stops."

"The police will arrest him," said the railroad man.

It was then Ned's turn to chuckle. "I am sorry for your railroad police
if they tackle Koku right now," he said. "He'd lay out about a dozen
ordinary men without half trying. But, ordinarily, he is the most
mild-mannered fellow who ever lived."

"He will come back, if he is let alone, as harmless as a kitten," Tom
observed. "And when I am not with the Hercules Three-Oughts-One, and
while I continue making my tests, Koku will be on guard. You might tell
your police force, Mr. Bartholomew, to let him alone. Now come aboard
and let me show you what I have been trying to do."

They spent two hours inside the cab of the great locomotive.  Mr.
Richard Bartholomew was possessed of no small degree of mechanical
education. He might not be a genius in mechanics as Tom Swift was, but
he could follow the latter's explanations regarding the improvements in
the electrical equipment of this new type of locomotive.

"I don't know what your speed tests will show, Mr. Swift," said the
railroad president, with added enthusiasm. "But if those parts will do
what you say they have already done, you've got the Jandels beat a
mile! I'm for you, strong. Yes, sir! like your friend, Newton, here, I
believe that you have hit the right track. You are going to triumph."

But Tom's triumph did not come at once. He knew more about the
uncertainties of mechanical contrivances than did either Mr.
Bartholomew or Ned Newton.

The very next day the Hercules 0001 was got out upon a section of the
electrified system of the Hendrickton & Pas Alos Railway, and the
pantagraphs of the huge locomotive for the first time came into
connection with the twin conductor trolleys which overhung the rails.

Ned accompanied Tom as assistant. Koku was allowed by the inventor to
roam about the hills as much as he pleased during the hours in which
his master was engaged with the Hercules 0001. Tom did not think any
harm would come to Koku, and he knew that the giant would enjoy
immensely a free foot in such a wild country.  The two young fellows,
dressed in working suits of overall stuff, spent long hours in the cab
of the electric locomotive. Their try-outs had to be made for the most
part on sidetracks and freight switches, some miles outside
Hendrickton, where the invention would not be in the way of regular
traffic.

Speed on level tracks had been raised in one test to over ninety-five
miles an hour and Mr. Bartholomew cheered wildly from the cab of a huge
Mallet that paced Tom's locomotive on a parallel track. No steam
locomotive had ever made such fast time.

But Tom was after something bigger than this. He wanted to show the
president of the H. & P. A. that the Hercules 0001 could drag a load
over the Pas Alos Range at a pace never before gained by any
mountain-hog.

Therefore he coaxed the electric locomotive out into the hills, some
hundred or more miles from headquarters. He had to keep in touch with
the train dispatcher's office, of course; the new machine had often to
take a sidetrack. Nor was much of this hilly right-of-way electrified.
The Jandels locomotive had been found to be a failure on the sharp
grades; so the extension of the trolley system had been abandoned.

But there was one steep grade between Hammon and Cliff City that had
been completed. The current could be fed to the cables over this
stretch of track, and for a week Tom used this long and steep grade
just as much as he could, considering of course the demands of the
regular traffic.

The telegraph operator at Half Way (merely a name for a station, for
there was not a habitation in sight) thrust his long upper-length out
of the telegraph office window one afternoon and waved a "highball" to
the waiting electric locomotive on the sidetrack.

"Dispatcher says you can have Track Number Two West till the
four-thirteen, westbound, is due. I'll slip the operator at Cliff City
the news and he'll be on the lookout for you as well as me, Mr. Swift.
Go to it."

Every man on the system was interested, and most of them enthusiastic,
about Tom's invention. The latter knew that he could depend upon this
operator and his mate to watch out for the western-bound flyer that
would begin its climb of the grade at Hammon less than half an hour
hence.

The electric locomotive was coaxed out across the switch. Tom was
earnestly inspecting the more delicate parts of the mechanism while Ned
(and proud he was to do it) handled the levers. Once on the main line
he moved the controller forward. The machine began to pick up speed.

The drumming of the wheels over the rail joints became a single
note--an increasing roar of sound. The electric locomotive shot up the
grade. The arrow on the speedometer crept around the dial and Ned's eye
was more often fastened on that than it was on the glistening twin
rails which mounted the grade.

Black-green hemlock and spruce bordered the right of way on either
hand. Their shadows made the tunnel through the forest almost dark. But
Tom had not seen fit to turn on the headlight.

"How is she making out?" asked the inventor, coming to look over his
chum's shoulder.

"It's great, Tom!" breathed Ned Newton, his eyes glistening.  "She eats
this grade up."

"And it's within a narrow fraction of a two per cent.," said the
inventor proudly. "She takes it without a jar--Hold on! What's that
ahead?"

The locomotive had traveled ten miles or more from Half Way.  The
summit of the grade was not far ahead. But the forest shut out all view
of the station at Cliff City and the structures that stood near it.

Right across the steel ribbons on which the hercules 0001 ran, Tom had
seen something which brought the question to his lips.  Ned Newton saw
it too, and he shouted aloud:

"Tree down! A log fallen, Tom!"

He did not lose completely his self-control. But he grabbed the levers
with less care than he should. He tried to yank two of them at once,
and, in doing so, he fouled the brakes!

He had shut off connection with the current. But the brake control was
jammed. The locomotive quickly came to a halt. Then, before Tom could
get to the open door, the wheels began spinning in reverse and the
great Hercules 0001 began the descent of the steep grade, utterly
unmanageable!




Chapter XIX

Peril, The Mother of Invention


Tom Swift's first thought was one of thankfulness. Thankfulness that he
did not have a drag of fifty or sixty steel gondolas or the like to add
their weight to the down-pull. The locomotive's own weight of
approximately two hundred and seventy tons was enough.

For when the inventor pushed Ned aside and tried to handle the
controllers properly, he found them unmanageable. There was not a
chance of freeing them and getting power on the brakes. The Hercules
0001 was backing down the mountain side with a speed that was
momentarily increasing, and without a chance of retarding it!

The young inventor at that moment of peril, knew no more what to do to
avert disaster than Ned Newton himself.

It flashed across his mind, however, that others beside themselves were
in peril because of this accident. The fast express from the East that
should pass Half Way at four-thirteen, might already be climbing the
hill from Hammon. Hammon, at the foot of the grade, was twenty-five
miles away. Nor was the track straight.

If the operator at Half Way did not see the runaway locomotive and
telephone the danger to the foot of the grade, when the Hercules 0001
came tearing down the track it might ram something in the Hammon yard,
if it did not actually collide with the approaching westbound express.

Such an emergency as this is likely either to numb the brains of those
entangled in the peril or excite them to increased activity. Ned Newton
was apparently stunned by the catastrophe.  Tom's brain never worked
more clearly.

He seized the siren lever and set it at full, so that the blast called
up continuous echoes in the forest as the locomotive plunged down the
incline. He ran to the door again, on the side where Half Way station
lay, and hung out to signal the operator who had so recently given him
right of way on this stretch of mountain road.

"We're going to smash! We're going to smash!" groaned Ned Newton.

Tom read these words on his chum's lips, rather than heard them, for
the roar of the descending locomotive drowned every other sound. Tom
waved an encouraging hand, but did not reply audibly.

Meanwhile his brain was working as fast as ever it had. He had
instantly comprehended all the danger of the situation. But in addition
he appreciated the fact that such an accident as this might happen at
any time to this or any other locomotive he might build.

Automatic brakes were all right. If there had been a good drag of cars
behind the Hercules 0001, on which the compressed air brakes might have
been set, the present manifest peril might have been obliterated. The
brakes on the cars would have stopped the whole train.

But to halt this huge monster when alone, on the grade, was another
matter. Once the locomotive brake lever was jammed, as in this case,
there was no help for the huge machine. It had to ride to the foot of
the grade--if it did not chance to hit something on the way!

And with this realization of both the imminent peril and the need of
averting it, to Tom's active brain came the germ of an idea that he
determined to put into force, if he lived through this accident, on
each and every electric locomotive that he might in the future build.

This monster, flying faster and faster down the mountain side, was a
menace to everything in its track. There might be almost anything in
the way of rolling stock on the section between Half Way and Hammon at
the foot of the grade. If this thunderbolt of wood and steel collided
with any other train, with the force and weight gathered by its plunge
down the mountain, it would drive through such obstruction like a
projectile from Tom's own big cannon.

Tom realized this fact. He knew that whatever object the Hercules 0001
might strike, that object would be shattered and scattered all about
the right of way. What might happen to the runaway was another matter.
But the inventor believed that the electric locomotive would be less
injured than anything with which it came into collision.

At any rate, thought of the peril to himself and his invention had
secondary consideration in Tom Swift's mind. It was what the monster
which he could not control might do to other rolling stock of the H. &
P. A. that rasped the young fellow's mind.

The grade above Half Way had few curves. Tom soon caught the first
glimpse of the station. Would the operator hear the roar of the
descending runaway and understand what had happened?

He leaned far out from the open doorway and waved his cap madly. He
began to shout a warning, although he saw not a soul about the station
and knew very well that his voice was completely drowned by the voice
of the siren and the drumming of the great wheels.

Suddenly the tousled head of the operator popped out of his window. He
saw the coming locomotive, the drivers smoking!

To be a good railroad man one has to have his wits about him.  To be a
good operator at a backwoods station one has to have two sets of
wits--one set to tell what to do in an emergency, the other to listen
and apprehend the voice of the sounder.

This Half Way man was good. He knew better than to try the telegraph
instrument. He grabbed the telephone receiver and jiggled the hook up
and down on the standard while the Hercules 0001 roared past the
station.

It did not need Tom's frantically waving cap to warn him what had
happened. And he remembered clearly the fact of the expected westbound
flyer.

"Hammon? Get me? This is Half Way. That derned electric hog has sprung
something and is coming down, lickity-split!

"Yes! Clear your yard! Where's Number Twenty-eight? Good! Side her, or
she'll be ditched. Get me?"

The voice at the other end of the wire exploded into indignant
vituperation. Then silence. The Half Way operator had done his
best--his all. He ran out upon the platform. The electric locomotive
had disappeared behind the woods, but the roar of its wheels and the
shrill voice of its siren echoed back along the line.

The sound faded into insignificance. The operator went back into his
hut and stayed close by the telephone instrument for the next ten
minutes to learn the worst.

If the operator's nerves were tense, what about those of Tom Swift and
his chum? Ned staggered to the door and clung to Tom's arm. He shrilled
into the latter's ear:

"Shall we jump?"

"I don't see any soft spots," returned Tom, grimly. "There aren't any
life nets along this line."

Ned Newton was frightened, and with good reason. But if his chum was
equally terrified he did not show it. He continued to lean from the
open door to peer down the grade as the Hercules 0001 drove on.

Around curve after curve they flew. It entered Ned's tortured mind that
if his chum had wanted speed, he was getting it now! He realized that
two miles a minute was a mere bagatelle to the pace now accomplished by
the runaway locomotive.




Chapter XX

The Result


As Ned Newton, fumbling at the controls when he saw the fallen tree
across the tracks, had jammed the brakes, the station master at Hammon,
at the bottom of this long grade on the Hendrickton & Pas Alos, had
stepped out to the blackboard in the barnlike waiting room and scrawled
with a bit of chalk:

"No. 28--Westbound--due 3:38 is 15 m. late."


The fact, thus given to the general public or to such of it as might be
interested, averted what would have been a terrible catastrophe.

The fast express was late. When the babbling voice of the Half Way
operator over the telephone warned Hammon of the coming of the runaway
electric locomotive, there was time to shift switches at the head of
the yard so that, when Number Twenty-eight came roaring in, she was
shunted on to a far track and flagged for a stop before she hit the
bumper.

Thirty seconds later, from the west, the Hercules 0001 roared down the
grade and shot into the cleared west track in a halo of smoke and dust.
Speed! No runaway had ever traveled faster and kept the rails. The
story of the incident was embalmed in railroad history, and no history
is so full of vivid incident as that of the rail.

When the first relay of excited railroad men reached the electric
locomotive after it had stopped on the long level, even Ned Newton had
pulled himself together and could look out upon the world with some
measure of calmness. Tom Swift was making certain notes and draughting
a curious little diagram upon a page of his notebook.

"What happened to you, Mr. Swift?" was the demand of the first arrival.

"Oh, my foot slipped," said the young inventor, and they got nothing
more out of him than that.

But to Ned, after the crowd had gone, the inventor said:

"Ned, my boy, they used to say that necessity was the mother of
invention. Therefore a loaf of bread was considered the maternal parent
of the locomotive. I've got one that will beat that."

"Whew!" gasped Ned. "How can you? I haven't got my breath back yet."

"It is peril that is the mother of invention," Tom went on, still
jotting down his notes. "Believe me! that jolt gave me a new idea--an
important idea. Suppose that operator at Half Way had been out back
somewhere, and had not seen or heard us flash by?"

"Well, suppose he had? What's the answer?" sighed Ned.

"Like enough we would have rammed something down here."

"And I hardly understand even now why we didn't do just that," muttered
his chum, with a shake of his head.

"Wake up, Ned! It's all over," laughed Tom. "While it was happening I
admit I was guessing just as hard as you were about the finish. But--"

"Your recovery is better," grumbled his friend. "I'm scared yet."

"And it might happen again--"

"No--not--ever!" exclaimed Ned. "I shall never touch those controllers
again. I'll drive your airscout, or your fastest automobile, or
anything like that. But me and this electric locomotive have parted
company for good. Yes, sir!"

"All right. It wasn't your fault. It might happen to any
motor-engineer. And the very fact that it can happen has given me my
idea. I tell you that danger is the mother of invention."

"As far as I am concerned, it can be father and grandparents into the
bargain," Ned declared, with a smile.

"Wake up!" cried his friend again. "I have got a dandy idea. I wouldn't
have missed that trip for anything."

"You are crazy," interrupted Ned. "Suppose we had bumped something?"

"But we didn't bump anything, except my brain tank. An idea bumped it,
I tell you. I am going to eliminate any such peril as that here-after."

"You mean you are going to make it impossible for this locomotive ever
to slide down such a hill again if the brakes won't work? Humph!
Meanwhile I will go out and make the nearest water-fall begin to run
upward."

"Don't scoff. I do not mean just what you mean."

"I bet you don't!"

"But although I cannot be sure that a locomotive will never again fall
downhill," said Tom patiently, "I'm going to fix it so that warning
need not be given by some operator along the line.  The engineer must
be able to send warning of his accident, both up and down the road."

"Huh? How are you going to do that?" demanded Ned.

"Wireless telephone. I may make some improvements on the present
models; but it is practicable. It has been used on submarines and
cruisers, and lately its practicability has been proved in the forestry
service.

"Every one of these electric locomotives I turn out will be supplied
with wireless sets. The expense of making certain telegraph offices
along the line into receiving stations will be small. I am going to
take that up with Mr. Bartholomew at once.  And I am going to fix these
brake controls so that nobody need ball them up again."

If, out of such a desperate adventure, Tom could bring to fruition
really worthwhile improvements in relation to his invention, Ned
acknowledged the value of the incident. Just the same, he had a
personal objection to having any part in a similar experience.

He was brave, but he could not forget danger. Tom seemed to throw the
effect of that terrible ride off his mind almost instantly. Ned dreamed
of it at night!

However, from that time things seemed to go with a rush.  Mr.
Bartholomew approved of the young inventor's suggestion regarding the
use of the wireless telephone as a method of averting a certain quality
of danger in the use of the proposed monster locomotive. The railroad
man was convinced that Tom's ideas were finally to culminate in
success, and he was ready to spend money, much money, in pushing on the
work.

It was not long before a private test of the Hercules 0001 up the grade
from Hammon to Cliff City showed Mr. Bartholomew that the speed he had
required in his contract was attainable. With a drag fully as heavy as
any two locomotives had been able to get over the same sector, the new
locomotive alone marked a forty-five mile an hour pace.

This attainment was kept quiet; not even the train crew knew what the
monster had done when they reached the summit of the mountain. But Mr.
Bartholomew, who rode with Tom and Ned in the cab, had held his own
watch on the test and compared it every minute with the speedometer.

"I am satisfied that you are going to do more than I had really hoped,
Mr. Swift," the railroad president said at the end of the run. "Already
you could drive this locomotive at a two-mile-a-minute clip on level
rails, I am sure. Keep at it! Nobody will be more delighted than I
shall be if you pull down that hundred thousand dollars' bonus."

"That's a fine way to talk, sir," cried Ned, with enthusiasm.

"I mean every word of it, Mr. Newton. The money is his as soon as he
makes good."

Both Tom and his financial manager left the president's office in a
satisfied state of mind.

"Great news to send home, Tom," remarked Ned, when they were alone.

"Righto, Ned. My father will be glad to hear it."

"And what about Mary?" And Ned poked his chum in the ribs.

"I guess she'll be glad too," Tom replied, his face reddening.

That night Tom sent word to Mary and also a telegram, in code, to his
father, saying the prospects were now bright for a quick finish of the
task that had brought him West.




Chapter XXI

The Open Switch


Meanwhile the work of electrifying another division of the Hendrickton
& Pas Alos Railroad had been pushed to completion. As Mr. Bartholomew
had in the first place stated, the road controlled water rights in the
hills which would supply any number of electric power stations, and his
enemies could not shut his road off from these waterfalls.

Tom had not warned his faithful servant, the giant Koku, to watch out
for Andy O'Malley in particular; the inventor knew that the giant would
be as cautious about any stranger as could be wished. But personally
Tom was amazed that either O'Malley or some other henchman of the
president of the Hendrickton & Western did not make an attempt to
injure the electric locomotive.

"Perhaps Mr. Bartholomew's police are really of some good," said Ned
Newton, when his chum mentioned his surprise on this point. "Has Koku
seen nobody lurking about at night?"

"He certainly has not seen the man he calls 'Big Feet,'" chuckled Tom.
"If he had spotted O'Malley, there certainly would have been an
explosion."

"Tell you what," Ned said reflectively, "the longer Lewis keeps off
you, the more suspicious I should be."

"You think he is a bad citizen, do you?"

"And then some, as the boys say out here," replied Ned. "I wouldn't
trust that man any farther than I would a nest of hornets or a shedding
rattlesnake."

"I am inclined to believe, with you, Ned, that Lewis is hatching up
something and is keeping mighty whist about it. I sounded Mr.
Bartholomew on the idea and he, too, is puzzled."

"I guess he knows that hombre," grumbled Ned.

"Mr. Bartholomew admits that several roads have sent representatives to
make inquiries about my locomotive. They have got wind of it, and,
after all, most railroads work in unison.  What means progress for one
is progress for all."

"That same rule does not seem to apply in the case of the H. & P. A.
and the H. & W.," remarked Ned.

"No. They are out and out rivals. And Lewis and his gang have done this
road dirt--no two ways about that. But when I am convinced that my
locomotive has got all the speed and power contracted for, Mr.
Bartholomew wants to invite a bunch of his brother railroaders to see
the tests--to ride in the Hercules Three-Oughts-One, in fact."

"How about it? You going to agree? Suppose they have some inventive
sharp along who will be able to steal some of your mechanical
contrivances--in his head, I mean," and Ned seemed quite suddenly
anxious.

"I had thought of that. But before the test I shall send my blueprints
to Washington. Our patent attorney there has already filed tentative
plans and applied for certain patents that I consider completed. Don't
fret. I'll make it impossible for anybody to steal our patents legally."

"Yes! But illegally?"

"That we cannot help in any case, and you know it," Tom said.  "If some
road tries to build anything like the Hercules Three-Oughts-One for the
first two years without arranging with the Swift Construction Company,
you know that that railroad can be made to suffer in the courts, and
you are the boy, Ned, to put them over the jumps for it."

"Sure," grumbled his chum. "It's always up to me to save the day."

"Exactly," chuckled Tom. "And in your character of life saver, do look
out for anybody who looks suspicious hanging about the Hercules
Three-Oughts-One. I'll take care of rival inventors. You and Koku keep
your eyes peeled for the H. & W. spies. Especially for that Andy
O'Malley. I feel that he will again show up. Maybe by 'the pricking of
my thumb' as Macbeth's witch used to remark."

Every day save Sunday the electric locomotive had some kind of try-out.
On a level track Tom was sure of his monster invention's qualities; but
in the hills, at a distance from the Hendrickton terminal, it was
another matter.

The grades were steep; but the road was well ballasted. There was
plenty of power. He saw the Jandel locomotives hurry back and forth
with the local trains and realized that this rival invention was by no
means to be despised.

It was at about this time, too, that Mr. Damon appeared in Hendrickton.
Early one forenoon, when Tom and Ned were preparing to take the
Hercules 0001 out of the yard, and Koku was going to his lodgings to
get a little sleep, Tom's eccentric friend came across the tracks,
waving his cane at Tom.

"Bless my frogs and switch-targets!" he ejaculated, "I've walked a mile
from that station to get here. Where are you going with that big
contraption? How does it work? Does it make all the speed you want, Tom
Swift? Bless my rails and sleepers!'

"We're going about a hundred miles out on the road to a good, stiff
grade," Tom told him, having shaken hands in welcome. "If you want to,
get aboard."

"They haven't blown you up yet, or otherwise wrecked the locomotive,"
remarked Mr. Damon, grinning broadly. "I'll have to write right back to
your father--and to a certain young lady who shows a remarkable
interest in your welfare--that you are all right."

"They should already be sure of that," laughed Tom. "Ned and I have
kept the post-office department and the telegraph company very busy."

"They are waiting for my report," announced Mr. Damon, with confidence.
"And I am waiting for yours. Tell me, Tom: Is the locomotive a success?"

"It's going to be," declared the inventor, with decision.

"Bless my trolley wires!" cried Mr. Damon, "I am glad to hear that.
Then you will surely pull down the extra hundred thousand dollars?"

"I believe I shall fulfill every clause of the contract Mr. Bartholomew
and I signed," said Tom.

"Then it's more than a success!" cried his friend. "You have invented
another marvel, Tom Swift!"

"Marvel or not," rejoined Tom, "I believe that the Hercules
Three-Oughts-One will top anything so far built in the way of electric
locomotives."

"Hurrah!" cried Mr. Damon. "Bless my controller! But your father and
Mary Nestor will be glad to hear that!"

Mr. Damon was quite as much interested in this invention as he always
was in anything the young inventor worked upon. When he had once seen
the Hercules 0001 work on an up-grade he was doubly enthusiastic. To
his sanguine mind the locomotive was already completed. He could see no
possibility of failure.

Tom, however, had to prove to his own satisfaction the success of every
detail of his invention before he was willing to tell Mr. Bartholomew
that he was ready for a public test. Mr. Damon, nor even Ned, could
scarcely see the reason for Tom's caution.

Tom's favorite try-out grade was between Hammon and Cliff City.  He
could obtain a right of way order from the train dispatcher on that
grade, sometimes of an hour's duration. He often snaked a load of
gondolas or cattle cars up the grade, relieving both the puller and
pusher steam locomotive. By this time the H. & P. A.  system had
stopped using the Jandel machines on any grades. They had proved their
lack of power for such work.

"But the Hercules Three-Oughts-One shows at every test that it has the
kick," Mr. Damon cried.

In his enthusiasm he was out every day with Tom and Ned. And sometimes
Koku remained in the cab during the trial runs as well.

On one such occasion Tom had drawn a heavy train over the mountain,
taking it down the grade beyond Cliff City to Panboro in the farther
valley. This was over a newly built stretch of the electrified road.
The power station charged the trolley cables with an abundance of
current, and the Hercules 0001 made a splendid trip.

"Bless my cuff-links!" ejaculated Mr. Damon, his rosy face one beaming
smile. "You couldn't expect to do better than this. You save one
locomotive on the haul, and you beat the schedule ten minutes, so that
you had to lay by to get right of way into the yard here. Why linger
longer, Tom?"

"I agree with Mr. Damon," Ned said. "It seems to work perfectly. And
you have, I believe, established your required speed."

"Can't be too perfect," said the young inventor, smiling. "But I will
tell Mr. Bartholomew when we get back that he can set his time for the
big test whenever he pleases. I have already sent our patent attorney
in Washington the final blueprints. Now, if nothing happens--"

"Bless my stickpin!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, "What can happen now that the
locomotive is practically perfect?"

That question was answered in one way, and a most startling way, within
the hour. Tom got right of way back over the mountain and pushed the
electric locomotive up-grade at almost top speed.  He drew no train on
this occasion, and the speed made by the Hercules 0001 was really
remarkable.

They topped the rise at Cliff City and got orders from the dispatcher
to proceed on the time of Number Eighty-seven, which chanced to be
late. With that release Tom might have made the entire distance of a
hundred and ten miles to Hendrickton had it not been for the
accident--the unexpected something that so often happens in the
railroad business.

Tom was a careful driver; the chatter of Ned and Mr. Damon did not take
the inventor's mind off his business for one instant. He was quite
alert at his window, looking ahead, as Koku was at the open doorway of
the cab.

Not a mile outside of Cliff City, and on this eastbound side of the
right of way, was a long siding and a shipping point for timber. It was
sometimes a busy point; but at this time of year there were no
lumbermen about and no activities in the adjacent forest.

The Hercules 0001 came spinning along from the Cliff City yards, and
Tom Swift gave scarcely a glance to the joint of the switch ahead. He
had been over it so many times of late, and knew that it was always
locked. The railroad did not even keep a man here at this season.

Suddenly Koku emitted a wild yell. He startled everybody else in the
cab, as he flung his huge body more than half out of the doorway and
prepared to jump--or so it seemed.

Ned shrieked a warning to the big fellow. Mr. Damon began to bless
everything in sight. But it was Tom, quite as excited as his friends,
who understood what Koku shouted:

"Big Feet! Big Feet! I see um Big Feet, Master!"

The next moment he threw himself from the rapidly moving locomotive. He
might have been killed easily enough. But fortunately he landed feet
first in the drift beside the rails, and remained upright as he slid
down into the ditch.

Tom, glancing ahead again, saw the flash of a man in a checked Mackinaw
running up through the open wood and away from the right of way. He
could not be sure of Andy O'Malley's figure at that distance; but he
could be pretty confident of Koku's identification.

And then, with a shock that gripped and almost paralyzed his mind, Tom
saw again the switch ahead of the pilot of the Hercules 0001. The
switch was open, and at the speed the electric locomotive had attained,
if she did not jump the rails, it seemed scarcely possible that she
could be stopped before hitting the bumper at the end of the siding!




Chapter XXII

A Desperate Chase


These moments were fraught with peril, and not alone peril to the huge
machine that Tom Swift had built, but peril to those who remained in
the cab of the electric locomotive, as her forward trucks struck the
open switch.

There was a mighty jerk that brought a shout from Ned Newton's lips and
a grunt from Mr. Damon. Tom clung to his swivel-seat, staring ahead.

The pilot of the electric locomotive shot over on the siding; the
forward trucks followed, then the great drivers. The whole locomotive
swerved into the siding, but for several breathless seconds Tom was not
at all sure that the monster would not jump the rails and head into the
ditch!

Meanwhile his gaze measured the speed of that flying figure in the
Mackinaw as it scuttled up the slope through the open grove of hard
wood and pine. He could not at first see Koku, but he knew the giant
was headed for the fugitive, whether the latter proved to be Andy
O'Malley or not.

Tom's gaze flashed to what lay ahead of the electric locomotive. As it
seemed to joggle back into balance, gain its uprightness, as it were,
the inventor saw the great, log-braced bumper between the two rails at
the end of the siding. With what force would the locomotive hit that
obstruction?

Until the trailers were over the switch Tom dared not give her the
brakes. To lock the brake shoes upon the wheels might easily throw the
locomotive off the rails. But the instant he felt the tail of the long
locomotive swerve off the switch he jabbed the compressed air lever and
the wild shriek of the brake shoes answered to his effort.

Then the bumper was but a few yards ahead. The electric locomotive was
bound to collide with it. And under the speed at which it had been
running, now scarcely reduced by half, the collision was apt to be a
tragic happening!

Weeks of effort might be ruined in that moment! If the crash was
serious, thousands of dollars might be lost! In truth, Tom Swift
apprehended the possibility of a disaster, the complete results of
which might put the test of his invention forward for weeks--perhaps
for months.

Nor could he do a thing to avert the disaster. He had reversed and set
the brakes immediately after the last wheel of the trailer was on the
siding. Nothing more could he do as the great electric locomotive bore
down upon the solid timber at the far end of this short track.

Those few seconds, as the locked wheels slid toward the end of the
siding, were about as hard to bear as any experience the young inventor
had ever gone through. It was not so much the peril of the accident, it
was the possibility of what might happen to the locomotive.

Within those few moments, however, Tom considered more than the safety
of his companions and himself, and more than the peril of wreck to his
locomotive. He considered the schedule of the trains on this division
of the Hendrickton & Pas Alos and remembered all those that might be
within this sector at this time.

If the locomotive smashed into the bumper with force enough to wreck
the structure, would some approaching train on the westbound track not
be endangered?

The thought was parent to Tom's act before the collision occurred. With
a single swift motion he reached for the signaling apparatus which he
had established in connection with his wireless telephone.

Just the moment before the head of the locomotive rammed that seemingly
immovable barrier at the end of the siding there flashed into the air
from Tom's annunciator the code word agreed upon announcing a wreck,
and the number of the sector on which the electric locomotive was then
running.

The next moment the crash occurred.

Tom had leaped up with a shout of warning. "Hang on!" was his cry. But
when the locomotive had struck and rebounded Ned, from far down the
aisle of the locomotive, wanted to know in a very peevish tone what he
should have hung on to?

"My elbows!" he groaned. "I've skinned 'em, and my back has got a twist
in it like the Irishman thought he had when he put on his overalls
hind-side to. What's happened?"

"Bless my radiolite!" growled Mr. Damon. "My watch crystal is broken
all to finders, if you want to know. Bless my shock-absorbers! you
won't do this locomotive a bit of good, Tom Swift, if you stop it so
abruptly."

"And that's the surest word you ever said," responded Tom, hurrying to
the door. "I don't know what's broken, but we're still on the rails.
The most immediate thing to learn, is the where-abouts of the fellow
who did this."

"Who opened the switch?" cried Ned.

"I believe it was Andy O'Malley. Come on, Ned! Koku is after him and I
don't want him to tear O'Malley apart before I get there."

"O'Malley has got powerful interests behind him, and it might go hard
with Koku if he injured the spy and some of these Westerners caught
him," suggested Mr. Damon.

"They ought to thank Koku for manhandling the fellow--if he does," said
Ned.

"As a matter of fact," replied Tom, "Koku will merely hold to the
fellow until we get there. But my giant's strength is enormous, and he
does not always know the strength of his grasp. He might hurt the
fellow. Come on," and Tom leaped from the doorway of the electric
locomotive.

Ned leaped down the ladder after his chum.

"Which way did they go?" he asked.

"Across the ditch and up the hill," said Tom. "Mr. Damon!" he called
back to that eccentric man, "will you please remain there and watch the
locomotive?"

"I certainly will. And I'm armed, too," shouted Mr. Damon.  "Don't fear
for this locomotive, Tom. I am right on the job."

Tom waved his hand in reply, leaped the ditch, and started up through
the wood. Ned was close behind him, and the two young men ran as hard
as they could in the direction Tom had seen Andy O'Malley, followed by
the giant, running.

In places the earth was slippery with pine needles, and the ground was
elsewhere rough. Therefore the chums did not make much speed in running
after the giant and his quarry. But Tom was sure of the direction in
which the two had disappeared, and he and Ned kept doggedly on.

They went over the crest of the hill and lost sight of the siding and
the locomotive. Here was a sharp descent into a gulch, and some rods
away, in the bottom of this gully, the young fellows obtained their
first sight of Koku. He was still running with mighty strides and was
evidently within sight of the man he had set out after in such haste.

"Hey! Koku!" shouted Tom Swift.

The giant's hearing was of the keenest. He glanced back and raised his
arm in greeting. But he did not slacken his pace.

"He must see O'Malley, Tom," cried Ned Newton.

"I am sure he does. And I want to get there about as soon as Koku grabs
the fellow," panted Tom.

"He'll maul O'Malley unmercifully," said Ned.

"I don't want Koku to injure him," admitted Tom, and he increased his
own stride as he plunged down into the gully.

The young inventor distanced his chum within the next few moments. Tom
ran like a deer. He reached the bottom of the gully and kept on after
Koku's crashing footsteps. At every jump, too, he began to shout to the
giant:

"Koku! Hold him!"

The giant's voice boomed back through the heavy timber: "I catch him! I
hold him for Master! I break all um bones! Wait till Koku catch him!"

"Hold him, Koku!" yelled Tom again. "Be careful and don't hurt him till
I get there!"

He could not see what the giant was doing. The timber was thicker down
here. It might be that the giant would seize the man roughly. His zeal
in Tom's cause was great, and, of course, his strength was enormous.

Yet Tom did not want to call the giant off the trail. Andy O'Malley
must be captured at this time. He had done enough, too much, indeed, in
attempting the ruin of Tom's plans. Before the matter went any further
the young inventor was determined that Montagne Lewis' spy should be
put where he would be able to do no more harm.

But he did not want the man permanently injured. He knew now that Koku
was so wildly excited that he might set upon O'Malley as he would upon
an enemy in his own country.

"Koku! Stop! Wait for me!" Tom finally shouted.

Now the young inventor got no reply from the giant. Had the latter got
so far ahead that he no longer heard his master's command?

Tom pounded on, working his legs like pistons, putting every last ounce
of energy he possessed into his effort. This was indeed a desperate
chase.




Chapter XXIII

Mr. Damon at Bay


Mr. Wakefield Damon was a very odd and erratic gentleman, but he did
not lack courage. He was much more disturbed by the possible injury to
Tom Swift's invention by this collision with the bumper at the end of
the timber siding than he had been by his own danger at the time of the
accident.

He did not understand enough about the devices Tom had built in the
forward end of the locomotive cab to understand, by any casual
examination, if they were at all injured. But when he climbed down
beside the track he saw at once that the forward end of the locomotive
had received more than a little injury.

The pilot, or cow-catcher, looked more like an iron cobweb than it did
like anything else. The wheels of the forward trucks had not left the
track, but the impact of the heavy locomotive with the bumper had been
so great that the latter was torn from its foundations. A little more
and the electric locomotive would have shot off the end of the rails
into the ditch.

While Mr. Damon was examining the front of the locomotive, and Tom and
Ned remained absent, he suddenly observed a group of men hurrying out
of the forest on the other side of the H. & P. A.  right of way. They
were not railroad men--at least, they were not dressed in uniform--but
they were drawn immediately to the locomotive.

The leader of the party was a squarely built man with a determined
countenance and a heavy mustache much blacker than his iron gray hair.
He was a bullying looking man, and he strode around the rear of the
locomotive and came forward just as though he was confident of boarding
the machine by right.

Mr. Damon, knowing himself in the wilderness and not liking the
appearance of this group of strangers, had retired at once to the cab,
and now stood in the doorway.

"Where's that young fool Swift?" growled the man with the dyed
mustache, looking up at Mr. Damon and laying one hand upon the rail
beside the ladder.

"Don't know any such person," declared Mr. Damon promptly.

"You don't know Tom Swift?" cried the man.

"Oh! That's another matter," said Mr. Damon coolly. "I don't know any
fool named Swift, either young or old. Bless my blinkers! I should say
not."

"Isn't he here?" demanded the man, gruffly.

"Tom Swift isn't here just now--no."

"I'm coming up," announced the stranger, and started to put his foot on
the first rung of the iron ladder.

"You're not," said Mr. Damon, promptly.

"What's that?" ejaculated the man.

"You only think you are coming up here. But you are not. Bless my
fortune telling cards!" ejaculated Mr. Damon, "I should say not."

At this point the black-mustached man began to splutter words and
threats so fast that nobody could quite understand him. Mr. Damon,
however, did not shrink in the least. He stood adamant in the doorway
of the cab.

Finding little relief in bad language, the enemy made another attempt
to climb up. For one thing, he was physically brave. He did not call on
his companions to go where he feared to.

"I'll show you!" he bawled, and scrambled up the rungs of the ladder.

Mr. Damon did show him. He drew from some pocket a black object with a
bulb and a long barrel. Somebody below on the cinder path shouted:

"Look out, boss he's got a gun!"

At that moment the marauder reached out to seize Mr. Damon's coat. Then
the object in Mr. Damon's hand spat a fine spray into the florid face
of the enemy!

"Whoo! Achoo! By gosh!" bawled the big man, and he fell back screaming
other ejaculations.

"Bless my face and eyes!" cried Mr. Damon. "What did I tell you? And
you other fellows want to notice it. Tom Swift isn't here just at this
precise moment; but he is guarding his locomotive just the same. He
invented this ammonia pistol, and I should say it was effectual. Do
you?"

The eccentric man was shrewd enough now to keep behind the jamb of the
cab door. For some of these fellows, he realized, might be armed with
more deadly weapons than his own.

"Hey, Mr. Lewis!" cried one big fellow, "d'you want we should get that
fellow for you?"

"I want to know how badly that blamed thing is smashed," replied the
big man with the dyed mustache savagely. "Where's O'Malley?"

"O'Malley's lit out, Boss, like I told you. That giant and them other
fellows is after him."

"Break into that cab! Oh! My eyes! I'll kill that old fool!  Break a
way in there--What's that?"

In pain as he was, his other senses were alert. He was first to hear
the screeching whistle of the on-coming freight.

"Think they got wind of this so quick?" demanded Montagne Lewis, for it
was he. "Are they sending help from Cliff City?"

"It's a regular freight," returned one of his men.

"She's comm' a-whizzin'," added another. "Right down the eastbound
track. If the crew see us--"

"Wait!" commanded Lewis. "Isn't that switch open?"

"You bet it is, Boss."

"Let it be, then," cried the chief plotter. "Let 'em run into it. That
freight will smash up this electric locomotive more completely than we
could possibly do it. Stand away, men, and let her go!"

A sharp curve in the right of way hid the siding, as well as the open
switch into it, from the gaze of the engineer who held the throttle of
the coming freight. His locomotive drew a string of empties, eastbound,
and having had a heavy pull of it coming up the grade to Cliff City, as
soon as he had got the highball from the yardmaster there, he had "let
her out," and was now coming to the head of the down grade to Hammon at
high speed.

As it chanced, the wireless receiving station of Tom's new telephone
system was not yet completed at Cliff City. The news of the wreck of
the Hercules 0001 and her position had not been relayed to the master
of the Cliff City yards.

That employee of the H. & P. A. had taken a chance in letting the
string of empties through his block. He knew the electric locomotive
was somewhere ahead, but he thought it would be making its usual time
and would have already passed Half Way.

But the situation was serious. The freight was coming along at top
speed and the switch into the siding was still open. Montagne Lewis and
his crew of ruffians might well stand back and let what seemed sure to
happen, happen! The driving freight must do more harm to Tom Swift's
invention than they could have hoped to do with the sledges and bars
they had brought with them to the spot.

Mr. Wakefield Damon had shown his courage already. He would have been
glad to do more to save Tom's locomotive from further injury, but he
did not realize what was threatening. He did not hear the shriek of the
freight engine's whistle.




Chapter XXIV

Putting the Enemy to Flight


The pilot and headlight of the freight locomotive came around the turn
and the freight thundered on toward the switch. Seeing the group of men
standing by the stalled electric locomotive, and the locomotive itself
in the clear of the siding, the driver of the freight did not suppose
the switch was open. Nobody who was not a criminal would have stood by
idly in such an emergency and let the freight run into an open switch.

Therefore, for the first minute, the coming engineer did not observe
his danger. Lewis and his gang stared at the head of the freight and
did nothing. They had moved hastily back from the siding so as to be
clear of the wreckage. Mr. Damon was in the front of the cab of
Hercules 0001 and had no idea of the approaching menace.

But of a sudden a loud shout echoed through the wood. Tom Swift came
over the ridge and started toward his invention at top speed. From that
height he saw the freight train coming, he observed the men standing at
the siding, and he recognized Montagne Lewis, roughly as the railroad
magnate was dressed.

Instantly Tom realized what was about to happen--what would surely
occur--and he saw what must be done if the utter wreck of his
locomotive was to be averted. Yelling at the top of his voice, he
leaped down the slope.

"That's Swift!" shouted Lewis. "Stop him!" But the men he had hired to
do his wicked work fell back instead of trying to halt the young
inventor. It was not Tom's appearance that made them quail. Over the
ridge there appeared a second figure--and a more fearful or threatening
apparition none of them had ever before seen!

Koku came running with the limp body of Andy O'Malley slung over his
shoulder like a bag of meal. The fellows knew it was Andy from his
dress.

The giant came down the slope after Tom as though he wore the
seven-league boots. The fellows Lewis had hired to wreck the electric
locomotive shrank back from before both Tom and the giant.

"Get him!" yelled the half blinded Lewis again.

"Get your grandmother!" bawled one of the men suddenly. "Good-night!"

He turned tail and ran, disappearing almost instantly into the thicker
woods. And his mates, after a moment of wavering, sped after him. Lewis
was left alone, quite helpless because of the ammonia fumes.

As a matter of fact not all of O'Malley's predicament was due to Koku.
The rascal, exhausted by his run and half blind through fright and
rage, had stumbled, fallen, and struck his head on a root, which
rendered him unconscious.

This, of course, Lewis and his ruffians did not know. All the men of
the railroad president's gang saw was the gigantic Koku coming along in
great strides, bearing the unconscious O'Malley, who was a burly
fellow, as though he were a featherweight. No wonder they fled from
such a monster.

Tom had reached the switch, and he was several seconds ahead of the
freight locomotive. The engineer saw the open switch then; but he was
too late to stop his train.

Going into reverse, however, helped some. Tom seized the switch lever
and threw it over, locking it in place, just as the forward trucks
thundered upon the joint. The train swept by in safety, and the
engineer leaned from his cab window to wave a grateful hand at the
young inventor.

Neither the engineer nor the crew of the freight understood the meaning
of the scene at the timber siding. All they learned was that Tom Swift
had saved the freight from a possible wreck.

The young inventor turned sharply from the switch and motioned with his
hand to Koku.

"Throw that fellow into the cab, Koku," he commanded.

The giant did as he was told, just as Ned Newton came panting to the
spot.

"Did they do any harm, Tom?" he cried. Then he saw Montagne Lewis
standing by, and he seized his chum's arm. "Do you see what I see,
Tom?" he demanded, earnestly.

"I guess we both see the same snake," rejoined his chum. "And I mean to
scotch it."

"Montagne Lewis!" murmured Ned. "And we've got his chief tool."

Tom said nothing to his chum, but he approached Lewis with determined
mien.

"I can see something has happened to you, Mr. Lewis, and I can guess
what it is. The effect of that ammonia will blow away after a time. Ask
your friend, Andy O'Malley. He knows all about it, for he sampled it
back East, in Shopton."

"I'm going to get square for this, young man," growled the railroad
magnate. "You know who I am. And that fellow in the cab knew me, too.
How dared he shoot that stuff into my face and eyes?"

"I fancy it didn't take much daring on Mr. Damon's part," and Tom
actually chuckled. "A big crook isn't any more important in our eyes
than a little crook. We've got your henchman, O'Malley--"

"And you'd better let him go. I'm telling you," snarled Lewis.  "I'll
ruin you in this country, Tom Swift. I've got influence--"

"You won't have much after this thing comes out. And believe me, I mean
to spread it abroad. I've got nothing to win or lose from you, Mr.
Lewis. As for O'Malley, I'll put him behind the bars for a good long
term."

"You'll do a lot--"

"More than you think," said Tom. "Koku!" The giant had pitched
O'Malley, who was still senseless, into the cab, and now was coming up
behind Lewis.

"Yes, Master," said the giant.

"Get him!"

"Yes, Master," said Koku, and to Lewis' startled amazement, the next
instant he was in the hands of the giant!

He screamed and threatened, and even kicked, to no avail. When he was
pitched into the electric locomotive he was held under the threat of
Mr. Damon's ammonia pistol until Tom and Ned and the giant entered and
the door was shut. Then Koku proceeded to tie both the prisoners by
wrist and ankle while the others examined the mechanism of the Hercules
0001.

The pantagraph had been torn off the trolley wires when the locomotive
had gone on the siding. But now Tom climbed to the roof of the
locomotive, and with Koku's aid managed to set the rear pantagraph at
such an angle that its wheels caught the trolley cables again, and once
more the current was pumped into the Hercules 0001.

Tom tried out the several parts of the mechanism and found that,
despite the jar of the collision, nothing was really injured.

"I built this thing to withstand hard usage," he declared with pride.
"The Swift Hercules Electric Locomotives will not be built for parlor
ornaments. She is going to run into Hendrickton under her own power, in
spite of a smashed cows catcher and target lights."

"Is nothing really injured, Tom?" asked Mr. Damon. "Bless my dinner
set! I thought everything had gone to smash when she hit that bumper."

"She will be as good as new in a week," declared Tom, with conviction.

This prophecy of the young inventor proved to be true. A week from that
day the public test of the electric locomotive on the Hendrickton & Pas
Alos Railroad was held. A picked delegation of railroad men was present
to observe and marvel, with Mr. Bartholomew; but Montagne Lewis, the
president of the H. & W., was not one of those who attended.

Of course, Lewis soon got out of jail on bail. But the accusation
against him was a serious one. His guilt would be proved by his own
employee, Andy O'Malley, who was in a hospital for the time being.

O'Malley had got enough. He had turned State's evidence and implicated
his employer. Influential and wealthy as Lewis was, he could not escape
trial with O'Malley when the time came.

"One thing sure, Lewis has got all he wants. He isn't likely to try any
more crooked work against the H. & P. A.," Mr. Bartholomew said. "I can
thank you for that, Tom Swift, as well as for your invention. You
have saved the day for my railroad."

"You can thank Koku," chuckled Tom. "If he hadn't spied and identified
'Big Feet,' we might not have caught O'Malley, and, through O'Malley,
implicated Montagne Lewis. You give Koku a new suit of clothes, Mr.
Bartholomew, and we will call it square. But be sure and have the
pattern of the goods loud enough."

This conversation took place while the party of guests was gathering to
board Mr. Bartholomew's private car, attached to the Hercules 0001. Mr.
Damon was one of the guests and so was Ned Newton. Tom took into the
cab a crew of H. & P. A. men who would hereafter drive the huge
locomotive and take care of her.

The semaphore signal dropped and the electric locomotive started as
quietly as a baby going to sleep! There was not a jar as the train
moved off the siding and over the switches to the main line.

The dispatcher had arranged a clear road for them. Tom knew that he had
a free track ahead of him--a level of ninety-odd miles to the Hammon
yards. As he passed the Hendrickton shops he touched the siren lever
for a moment, and the shrill voice of the Hercules 0001 bade the town
good-bye.

The next minute the visitors in the private car grabbed out their
split-second watches and began to murmur. The electric locomotive had
begun to travel!




Chapter XXV

Speed and Success


"What town is that?"

"Looks like a splotch of paint on a board fence, we went by so quick."

"I've lost count, Bartholomew. Where are we?"

Ned Newton listened to these comments from the visiting railroad men
with delight. In reply to a question of his neighbor, the grinning
financial manager of the Swift Construction Company paid:

"No, sir. That isn't a picket fence. It's the telegraph poles you see,
and they are no nearer together than on another railroad. But we're
going some."

"Bless my railroad stock!" shouted Mr. Damon, "I should say we were."

The electric locomotive and the private car were hurled toward the Pas
Alos Range at a speed that almost frightened some of the guests.

"Three-quarters of an hour!" gasped one man as they began to see the
outskirts of Hammon. "And ninety-six miles? Great Scott, Bartholomew!
that's over two miles a minute!"

"That is the speed we set out to get," Mr. Richard Bartholomew said,
with quite as much pride as though he had done it all himself.

But it had been his suggestion and his money that had accomplished this
wonder. Tom Swift was willing to give the railroad president his share
of the fame.

The train scarcely slackened speed at Hammon, for Tom got the signal
announcing a clear track ahead, and he bucked the grade with all the
power he could get from the feed wires. This hill, so well known to him
now, was surmounted at a slightly decreased speed; but it was a
wonderful display of power after all.

They went down the other side to Panboro and there linked up with an
eastbound freight that the Hercules 0001 snatched over the mountain to
Hammon at a pace slightly exceeding forty-five miles an hour--at least
twice the speed that any two oil-burning locomotives could attain. As
for the Jandels, they were not in the same class at all with Tom
Swift's locomotive!

"Bless my speedometer!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, when the train pulled down
and stopped again at the Hendrickton terminal. "This is the greatest
test of speed and power I ever heard of. Why, a coal burner or an oil
burner isn't in it with this Hercules locomotive! What do you say, Mr.
Bartholomew?"

"I'll say I am satisfied--completely and thoroughly satisfied, Mr.
Damon," said the president of the Hendrickton & Pas Alos Railroad
frankly. "Mr. Swift has fulfilled his contract in every particular."

An hour later the young inventor and his two friends were in conference
with Mr. Bartholomew over a new contract. The bonus of a hundred
thousand dollars would be paid at once to the Swift Construction
Company. But as the elder Swift's name would be needed on the new
contract for the building of other Hercules locomotives, Tom had an
idea.

"We won't send the papers East for father to sign," he said. "I want
him to see the locomotive in real action. And I know where he can
borrow a private car and come out here in comfort. Rad can come with
him."

"Bless my valentines!" ejaculated Mr. Damon, "I bet somebody else will
come too."

Mr. Damon must have been a prophet, for a fortnight later, when the
borrowed car got in to the Hendrickton terminal at the tail of the
transcontinental flyer, Tom Swift saw first of all Mary Nestor's rosy
face on the platform of the car.

"Tom! are you all right?" she cried, beaming down upon the young
inventor.

"No. Half of me is left," he said, grinning up at her. "You look great,
Mary!"

"Do you think so?" she cried, dimpling. "Well, if anybody should ask
you, Mr. Tom Swift, you look very good to me."

"Don't make me swell all up, Mary," he laughed. "How's father?"

"Splendid! And Rad--"

"Eradicate Sampson is sho' 'nough puffectly all right," broke in the
voice of the old colored man, eager to make himself heard and seen.
"Here I is, Massa Tom. What dat lizard doin' here?  Ain't he a sight?"

The old man had caught sight of Koku in the wonderful new suit Mr.
Bartholomew had ordered made for the giant. A Navajo blanket had
nothing on that suit for a mixture of colors, and Koku strutted like a
turkey-gobbler.

"My lawsy!" gasped Rad again, "he's as purty as a sunset. Is dat de way
de tailors out here build a man up? Sure's yo live, Massa Tom, I needs
a new suit of clo'es myself."

And before he got away from Hendrickton, Rad Sampson sported a suit off
the same piece of goods as that of Koku's. Otherwise there might have
been a lasting feud between the giant and the Swift's ancient serving
man.

Mr. Barton Swift had stood the easy journey in the private car very
well. Before he would sign the contract that Mr. Bartholomew offered,
he wished to see for himself just how good his son's invention was.

They made another test from Hendrickton to Panboro, over the "official
route," as Ned called it. The time made by Hercules 0001 was even a
little better than before.

That the invention was well nigh perfect, and that it could do even
more than Mr. Bartholomew had hoped or Tom had claimed, was Mr. Swift's
conviction.

"Tom," he said to his son, "you have done a wonderful thing.  Not only
have you completed a marvelous invention and gained thereby a lot of
money, and more in prospect, but you have aided in the world's progress
to no small degree.

"Speed in transportation is the big problem before the world of
commerce today. To move goods from point to point safely and cheaply,
as well as rapidly, is the great task of this age. We are entering the
Age of Speed. The railroads must solve the problem to compete with
motor-truck traffic and fast boats on the lakes and rivers of our land.

"You have, by your invention, shoved the clock of progress forward. I
am proud of you, my boy. I know now that, no matter what may happen to
me, you will make an enviable mark in the world of invention.

"You have done much before for the Government in time of stress. But
war engines of any kind are not worthy examples of inventive genius
beside such a thing as this.

"It is the inventions of peace, rather than those of war, that stand
for human progress."

Coming back over the mountain, Mary Nestor rode in the cab with Tom.
She sat on the swivel stool, in fact, and handled the controls for part
of the way. But she gave up the driver's place to Tom before they
reached the timber siding east of Cliff City.

"I cannot go by that place without a shudder," Mary said to the
inventor. "Ned and Mr. Damon told me all about that accident.  Suppose
you had been killed, Tom!"

"I see I'll have to build an invention that will make that impossible,"
chuckled the young fellow.

"Make what impossible?"

"Some invention that will make it positively certain that no matter
what I do or where I go, nothing can harm me. Nothing else will suit
you, Mary, I plainly see."

"Well," returned the girl, smiling fondly at him. "I admit that would
satisfy me completely!"





This Isn't ALL!


Would you like to know what became of the good friends you have made in
this book?

Would you like to read other stories continuing their adventures and
experiences, or other books quite as entertaining by the same author?

On the reverse side of the wrapper which comes with this book, you will
find a wonderful list of stories which you can buy at the same store
where you got this book.


Don't throw away the Wrapper

Use it as a handy catalog of the books you want some day to have.  But
in case you do mislay it, write to the Publishers for a complete
catalog.


THE TOM SWIFT SERIES

By VICTOR APPLETON

Uniform Style of Binding. Individual Colored Wrappers.
           Every Volume Complete in Itself.
Every boy possesses some form of inventive genius. Tom Swift is a
bright, ingenious boy and his inventions and adventures make the most
interesting kind of reading.

  TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR CYCLE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRSHIP
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIRELESS MESSAGE
  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE DIAMOND MAKERS
  TOM SWIFT IN THE CAVES OF ICE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS SKY RACER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RIFLE
  TOM SWIFT IN THE CITY OF GOLD
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR GLIDER
  TOM SWIFT IN CAPTIVITY
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIZARD CAMERA
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT SEARCHLIGHT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GIANT CANNON
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS PHOTO TELEPHONE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AERIAL WARSHIP
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG TUNNEL
  TOM SWIFT IN THE LAND OF WONDERS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WAR TANK
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR SCOUT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS UNDERSEA SEARCH
  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE FIRE FIGHTERS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS FLYING BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT OIL GUSHER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS CHEST OF SECRETS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRLINE EXPRESS




THE DON STURDY SERIES

By VICTOR APPLETON

Individual Colored Wrappers and Text illustrations by WALTER S. ROGERS

Every Volume Complete in Itself

In company with his uncles, one a mighty hunter and the other a noted
scientist, Don Sturdy travels far and wide, gaining much useful
knowledge and meeting many thrilling adventures.

DON STURDY ON THE DESERT OF MYSTERY;
  Or, Autoing in the Land of the Caravans.

An engrossing tale of the Sahara Desert, of encounters with wild
animals and crafty Arabs.

DON STURDY WITH THE BIG SNAKE HUNTERS;
  Or, Lost in the Jungles of the Amazon.

Don's uncle, the hunter, took an order for some of the biggest snakes
to be found in South America--to be delivered alive! The filling of
that order brought keen excitement to the boy.

DON STURDY IN THE TOMBS OF GOLD;
  Or, The Old Egyptian's Great Secret.

A fascinating tale of exploration and adventure in the Valley of Kings
in Egypt. Once the whole party became lost in the maze of cavelike
tombs far underground.

DON STURDY ACROSS THE NORTH POLE;
  Or, Cast Away in the Land of Ice.

Don and his uncles joined an expedition bound by air across the north
pole. A great polar blizzard nearly wrecks the airship.

DON STURDY IN THE LAND OF VOLCANOES;
  Or, The Trail of the Ten Thousand Smokes.

An absorbing tale of adventures among the volcanoes of Alaska in a
territory but recently explored. A story that will make Don dearer to
his readers than ever.




THE RADIO BOYS SERIES (Trademark Registered)

By ALLEN CHAPMAN

Author of the "Railroad Series," Etc.  Individual Colored Wrappers.
Illustrated.  Every Volume Complete in Itself.

A new series for boys giving full details of radio work, both in
sending and receiving--telling how small and large amateur sets can be
made and operated, and how some boys got a lot of fun and adventure out
of what they did. Each volume from first to last is so thoroughly
fascinating, so strictly up-to-date and accurate, we feel sure all lads
will peruse them with great delight.

Each volume has a Foreword by Jack Binns, the well-known radio expert.

THE RADIO BOYS' FIRST WIRELESS;
  Or, Winning the Ferberton Prize.

THE RADIO BOYS AT OCEAN POINT;
  Or, The Messsage That Saved the Ship.

THE RADIO BOYS AT THE SENDING STATION;
  Or, Making Good in the Wireless Room.

THE RADIO BOYS AT MOUNTAIN PASS;
  Or, The Midnight Call for Assistance.

THE RADIO BOYS TRAILING A VOICE;
  Or, Solving a Wireless Mystery.

THE RADIO BOYS WITH THE FOREST RANGERS;
  Or, The Great Fire on Spruce Mountain.

THE RADIO BOYS WITH THE ICEBERG PATROL;
  Or, Making Safe the Ocean Lanes.

RADIO BOYS WITH THE FLOOD FIGHTERS;
  Or, Saving the City in the Valley.



THE RAILROAD SERIES

By ALLEN CHAPMAN

Author of the "Radio Boys," Etc.

Uniform Style of Binding. Illustrated.

Every Volume Complete in Itself.


In this line of books there is revealed the whole workings of a great
American railroad system. There are adventures in abundance--railroad
wrecks, dashes through forest fires, the pursuit of a "wildcat"
locomotive, the disappearance of a pay car with a large sum of money on
board--but there is much more than this--the intense rivalry among
railroads and railroad men, the working out of running schedules, the
getting through "on time" in spite of all obstacles, and the
manipulation of railroad securities by evil men who wish to rule or
ruin.

RALPH OF THE ROUND HOUSE;
  Or, Bound to Become a Railroad Man.

RALPH IN THE SWITCH TOWER;
  Or, Clearing the Track.

RALPH ON THE ENGINE;
  Or, The Young Fireman of the Limited Mail.

RALPH ON THE OVERLAND EXPRESS;
  Or, The Trials and Triumphs of a Young Engineer.

RALPH, THE TRAIN DISPATCHER;
  Or, the Mystery of the Pay Car.

RALPH ON THE ARMY TRAIN;
  Or, The Young Railroader's Most Daring Exploit.

RALPH ON THE MIDNIGHT FLYER;
  Or, The Wreck at Shadow Valley.

RALPH AND THE MISSING MAIL POUCH;
  Or, The Stolen Government Bonds.




THE RIDDLE CLUB BOOKS By ALICE DALE HARDY

Individual Colored Wrappers. Attractively Illustrated.  Every Volume
Complete in Itself.

Here is as ingenious a series of books for little folks as has ever
appeared since "Alice in Wonderland." The idea of the Riddle books is a
little group of children--three girls and three boys decide to form a
riddle club. Each book is full of the adventures and doings of these
six youngsters, but as an added attraction each book is filled with a
lot of the best riddles you ever heard.

THE RIDDLE CLUB AT HOME

An absorbing tale that all boys and girls will enjoy reading.  How the
members of the club fixed up a clubroom in the Larue barn, and how
they, later on, helped solve a most mysterious happening, and how one
of the members won a valuable prize, is told in a manner to please
every young reader.

THE RIDDLE CLUB IN CAMP

The club members went into camp on the edge of a beautiful lake. Here
they had rousing good times swimming, boating and around the campfire.
They fell in with a mysterious old man known as The Hermit of Triangle
Island. Nobody knew his real name or where he came from until the
propounding of a riddle solved these perplexing questions.

THE RIDDLE CLUB THROUGH THE HOLIDAYS

This volume takes in a great number of winter sports, including skating
and sledding and the building of a huge snowman. It also gives the
particulars of how the club treasurer lost the dues entrusted to his
care and what the melting of the great snowman revealed.

THE RIDDLE CLUB AT SUNRISE BEACH

This volume tells how the club journeyed to the seashore and how they
not only kept up their riddles but likewise had good times on the sand
and on the water. Once they got lost in a fog and are marooned on an
island. Here they made a discovery that greatly pleased the folks at
home.




THE HONEY BUNCH BOOKS

By HELEN LOUISE THORNDYKE Individual Colored Wrappers and Text
Illustrations Drawn by

WALTER S. ROGERS


A new line of fascinating tales for little girls. Honey Bunch is a
dainty, thoughtful little girl, and to know her is to take her to your
heart at once.

HONEY BUNCH: JUST A LITTLE GIRL

Happy days at home, helping mamma and the washerlady. And Honey Bunch
helped the house painters too--or thought she did.

HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST VISIT TO THE CITY

What wonderful sights Honey Bunch saw when she went to visit her
cousins in New York! And she got lost in a big hotel and wandered into
a men's convention!

HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST DAYS ON THE FARM

Can you remember bow the farm looked the first time you visited it? How
big the cows and horses were, and what a roomy place to play in the
barn proved to be?

HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST VISIT TO THE SEASHORE

Honey Bunch soon got used to the big waves and thought playing in the
sand great fun. And she visited a merry-go-round, and took part in a
seaside pageant.

HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST LITTLE GARDEN

It was great sport to dig and to plant with one's own little garden
tools. But best of all was when Honey Bunch won a prize at the flower
show.

HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST DAYS IN CAMP

It was a great adventure for Honey Bunch when she journeyed to Camp
Snapdragon. It was wonderful to watch the men erect the tent, and
wonderful to live in it and have good times on the shore and in the
water.




THE OUTDOOR GIRLS SERIES

By LAURA LEE HOPE

Author of the "Bobbsey Twins," "Bunny Brown" Series, Etc.

Uniform Style of Binding. Individual Colored Wrappers.

Every Volume Complete in Itself.


These tales take in the various adventures participated in by several
bright, up-to-date girls who love outdoor life.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS OF DEEPDALE;
  Or, Camping and Tramping for Fun and Health.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT RAINBOW LAKE;
  Or, The Stirring Cruise of the Motor Boat Gem.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A MOTOR CAR;
  Or, The Haunted Mansion of Shadow Valley.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A WINTER CAMP;
  Or, Glorious Days on Skates and Ice Boats.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN FLORIDA;
  Or, Wintering in the Sunny South.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT OCEAN VIEW;
  Or, The Box That Was Found in the Sand.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ON PINE ISLAND;
  Or, A Cave and What it Contained.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN ARMY SERVICE;
  Or, Doing Their Bit for Uncle Sam.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT THE HOSTESS HOUSE;
  Or, Doing Their Best For the Soldiers.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT BLUFF POINT;
  Or, A Wreck and A Rescue.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT WILD ROSE LODGE;
  Or, The Hermit of Moonlight Falls.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN THE SADDLE;
  Or, The Girl Miner of Gold Run.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AROUND THE CAMPFIRE;
  Or, The Old Maid of the Mountains.

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ON CAPE COD;
  Or, Sally Ann of Lighthouse Rock.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tom Swift and his Electric Locomotive, by
Victor Appleton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOM SWIFT AND ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE ***

***** This file should be named 1364.txt or 1364.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/6/1364/

Produced by Anthony Matonac

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
