The Project Gutenberg eBook, More Nonsense, by Edward Lear


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: More Nonsense

Author: Edward Lear

Release Date: October 8, 2004  [eBook #13648]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MORE NONSENSE***


E-text prepared by Dave Newman, Ben Courtney, and Project
Gutenberg Distributed Proofreaders



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 13648-h.htm or 13648-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/3/6/4/13648/13648-h/13648-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/3/6/4/13648/13648-h.zip)





MORE NONSENSE

Pictures, Rhymes, Botany, etc.

by

EDWARD LEAR







[Illustration]





CONTENTS

  NONSENSE BOTANY

  ONE HUNDRED NONSENSE PICTURES AND RHYMES

  TWENTY-SIX NONSENSE RHYMES AND PICTURES




[Illustration]



INTRODUCTION

In offering this little book--the third of its kind--to the public, I am
glad to take the opportunity of recording the pleasure I have received at
the appreciation its predecessors have met with, as attested by their wide
circulation, and by the universally kind notices of them from the Press. To
have been the means of administering innocent mirth to thousands, may
surely be a just motive for satisfaction, and an excuse for grateful
expression.

At the same time, I am desirous of adding a few words as to the history of
the two previously published volumes, and more particularly of the first or
original "Book of Nonsense," relating to which many absurd reports have
crept into circulation, such as that it was the composition of the late
Lord Brougham, the late Earl of Derby, etc.; that the rhymes and pictures
are by different persons; or that the whole have a symbolical meaning,
etc.; whereas, every one of the Rhymes was composed by myself, and every
one of the Illustrations drawn by my own hand at the time the verses were
made. Moreover, in no portion of these Nonsense drawings have I ever
allowed any caricature of private or public persons to appear, and
throughout, more care than might be supposed has been given to make the
subjects incapable of misinterpretation: "Nonsense," pure and absolute,
having been my aim throughout.

As for the persistently absurd report of the late Earl of Derby being the
author of the "First Book of Nonsense," I may relate an incident which
occurred to me four summers ago, the first that gave me any insight into
the origin of the rumor.

I was on my way from London to Guildford, in a railway carriage,
containing, besides myself, one passenger, an elderly gentleman: presently,
however, two ladies entered, accompanied by two little boys. These, who had
just had a copy of the "Book of Nonsense" given them, were loud in their
delight, and by degrees infected the whole party with their mirth.

"How grateful," said the old gentleman to the two ladies, "all children,
and parents too, ought to be to the statesman who has given his time to
composing that charming book!"

(The ladies looked puzzled, as indeed was I, the author.)

"Do you not know who is the writer of it?" asked the gentleman.

"The name is 'Edward Lear,'" said one of the ladies.

"Ah!" said the first speaker, "so it is printed; but that is only a whim of
the real author, the Earl of Derby. 'Edward' is his Christian name, and, as
you may see, LEAR is only EARL transposed."

"But," said the lady, doubtingly, "here is a dedication to the
great-grandchildren, grand-nephews, and grand-nieces of Edward, thirteenth
Earl of Derby, by the author, Edward Lear."

"That," replied the other, "is simply a piece of mystification; I am in a
position to know that the whole book was composed and illustrated by Lord
Derby himself. In fact, there is no such a person at all as Edward Lear."

"Yet," said the other lady, "some friends of mine tell me they know Mr.
Lear."

"Quite a mistake! completely a mistake!" said the old gentleman, becoming
rather angry at the contradiction; "I am well aware of what I am saying: I
can inform you, no such a person as 'Edward Lear' exists!"

Hitherto I had kept silence; but as my hat was, as well as my handkerchief
and stick, largely marked inside with my name, and as I happened to have in
my pocket several letters addressed to me, the temptation was too great to
resist; so, flashing all these articles at once on my would-be
extinguisher's attention, I speedily reduced him to silence.

The second volume of Nonsense, commencing with the verses, "The Owl and the
Pussy-Cat," was written at different times, and for different sets of
children: the whole being collected in the course of last year, were then
illustrated, and published in a single volume, by Mr. R.J. Bush, of 32
Charing Cross.

The contents of the third or present volume were made also at different
intervals in the last two years.

Long years ago, in days when much of my time was passed in a country house,
where children and mirth abounded, the lines beginning, "There was an old
man of Tobago," were suggested to me by a valued friend, as a form of verse
lending itself to limitless variety for rhymes and pictures; and
thenceforth the greater part of the original drawings and verses for the
first "Book of Nonsense" were struck off with a pen, no assistance ever
having been given me in any way but that of uproarious delight and welcome
at the appearance of every new absurdity.

Most of these Drawings and Rhymes were transferred to lithographic stones
in the year 1846, and were then first published by Mr. Thomas McLean, of
the Haymarket. But that edition having been soon exhausted, and the call
for the "Book of Nonsense" continuing, I added a considerable number of
subjects to those previously-published, and having caused the whole to be
carefully reproduced in woodcuts by Messrs. Dalzell, I disposed of the
copyright to Messrs. Routledge and Warne, by whom the volume was published
in 1843.
                                                              EDWARD LEAR.

VILLA EMILY, SAN REMO,
August, 1871.




NONSENSE BOTANY.


[Illustration: Barkia Howlaloudia.]

[Illustration: Enkoopia Chickabiddia.]

[Illustration: Jinglia Tinkettlia.]

[Illustration: Nasticreechia Krorluppia.]

[Illustration: Arthbroomia Rigida.]

[Illustration: Sophtsluggia Glutinosa.]

[Illustration: Minspysia Deliciosa.]

[Illustration: Shoebootia Utilis.]

[Illustration: Stunnia Dinnerbellia.]

[Illustration: Tickia Orologica.]

[Illustration: Washtubbia Circularis.]

[Illustration: Tigerlillia Terribilis.]

       *        *        *        *        *




ONE HUNDRED NONSENSE PICTURES AND RHYMES.


[Illustration]

    There was a young person of Bantry,
    Who frequently slept in the pantry;
    When disturbed by the mice, she appeased them with rice,
    That judicious young person of Bantry.

[Illustration]

    There was an Old Man at a Junction,
    Whose feelings were wrung with compunction
    When they said, "The Train's gone!" he exclaimed, "How forlorn!"
    But remained on the rails of the Junction.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Minety,
    Who purchased five hundred and ninety
    Large apples and pears, which he threw unawares
    At the heads of the people of Minety.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Thermopylae,
    Who never did anything properly;
    But they said, "If you choose to boil eggs in your shoes,
    You shall never remain in Thermopylae."

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Deal,
    Who in walking used only his heel;
    When they said, "Tell us why?" he made no reply,
    That mysterious old person of Deal.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man on the Humber,
    Who dined on a cake of Burnt Umber;
    When he said, "It's enough!" they only said, "Stuff!
    You amazing old man on the Humber!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old man in a barge,
    Whose nose was exceedingly large;
    But in fishing by night, it supported a light,
    Which helped that old man in a barge.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Dunrose;
    A parrot seized hold of his nose.
    When he grew melancholy, they said, "His name's Polly,"
    Which soothed that old man of Dunrose.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Toulouse
    Who purchased a new pair of shoes;
    When they asked, "Are they pleasant?" he said, "Not at present!"
    That turbid old man of Toulouse.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Bree,
    Who frequented the depths of the sea;
    She nurs'd the small fishes, and washed all the dishes,
    And swam back again into Bree.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Bromley,
    Whose ways were not cheerful or comely;
    He sate in the dust, eating spiders and crust,
    That unpleasing old person of Bromley.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Shields,
    Who frequented the vallies and fields;
    All the mice and the cats, and the snakes and the rats,
    Followed after that person of Shields.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Dunluce,
    Who went out to sea on a goose:
    When he'd gone out a mile, he observ'd with a smile,
    "It is time to return to Dunluce."

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Dee-side
    Whose hat was exceedingly wide,
    But he said, "Do not fail, if it happen to hail,
    To come under my hat at Dee-side!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old person in black,
    A Grasshopper jumped on his back;
    When it chirped in his ear, he was smitten with fear,
    That helpless old person in black.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of the Dargle
    Who purchased six barrels of Gargle;
    For he said, "I'll sit still, and will roll them down hill,
    For the fish in the depths of the Dargle."

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Pinner,
    As thin as a lath, if not thinner;
    They dressed him in white, and roll'd him up tight,
    That elastic old person of Pinner.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of China,
    Whose daughters were Jiska and Dinah,
    Amelia and Fluffy, Olivia and Chuffy,
    And all of them settled in China.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man in a Marsh,
    Whose manners were futile and harsh;
    He sate on a log, and sang songs to a frog,
    That instructive old man in a Marsh.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Brill,
    Who purchased a shirt with a frill;
    But they said, "Don't you wish, you mayn't look like a fish,
    You obsequious old person of Brill?"

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Wick,
    Who said, "Tick-a-Tick, Tick-a-Tick;
    Chickabee, Chickabaw." And he said nothing more,
    That laconic old person of Wick.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man at a Station,
    Who made a promiscuous oration;
    But they said, "Take some snuff!--You have talk'd quite enough,
    You afflicting old man at a Station!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Three Bridges,
    Whose mind was distracted by midges,
    He sate on a wheel, eating underdone veal,
    Which relieved that old man of Three Bridges.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Hong Kong,
    Who never did anything wrong;
    He lay on his back, with his head in a sack,
    That innocuous old man of Hong Kong.

[Illustration]

    There was a young person in green,
    Who seldom was fit to be seen;
    She wore a long shawl, over bonnet and all,
    Which enveloped that person in green.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Fife,
    Who was greatly disgusted with life;
    They sang him a ballad, and fed him on salad,
    Which cured that old person of Fife.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man who screamed out
    Whenever they knocked him about:
    So they took off his boots, and fed him with fruits,
    And continued to knock him about.

[Illustration]

    There was a young lady in white,
    Who looked out at the depths of the night;
    But the birds of the air, filled her heart with despair,
    And oppressed that young lady in white.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Slough,
    Who danced at the end of a bough;
    But they said, "If you sneeze, you might damage the trees,
    You imprudent old person of Slough."

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Down,
    Whose face was adorned with a frown;
    When he opened the door, for one minute or more,
    He alarmed all the people of Down.

[Illustration]

    There was a young person in red,
    Who carefully covered her head,
    With a bonnet of leather, and three lines of feather,
    Besides some long ribands of red.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Hove,
    Who frequented the depths of a grove;
    Where he studied his books, with the wrens and the rooks,
    That tranquil old person of Hove.

[Illustration]

    There was a young person in pink,
    Who called out for something to drink;
    But they said, "O my daughter, there's nothing but water!"
    Which vexed that young person in pink.

[Illustration]

    There was an old lady of France,
    Who taught little ducklings to dance;
    When she said, "Tick-a-tack!" they only said, "Quack!"
    Which grieved that old lady of France.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Putney,
    Whose food was roast spiders and chutney,
    Which he took with his tea, within sight of the sea,
    That romantic old person of Putney.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Loo,
    Who said, "What on earth shall I do?"
    When they said, "Go away!" she continued to stay,
    That vexatious old person of Loo.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Woking,
    Whose mind was perverse and provoking;
    He sate on a rail, with his head in a pail,
    That illusive old person of Woking.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Dean
    Who dined on one pea, and one bean;
    For he said, "More than that, would make me too fat,"
    That cautious old person of Dean.

[Illustration]

    There was a young lady in blue,
    Who said, "Is it you? Is it you?"
    When they said, "Yes, it is," she replied only, "Whizz!"
    That ungracious young lady in blue.

[Illustration]

    There was an old Man in a Garden,
    Who always begged every one's pardon;
    When they asked him, "What for?" he replied, "You're a bore!
    And I trust you'll go out of my garden."

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Pisa,
    Whose daughters did nothing to please her;
    She dressed them in gray, and banged them all day,
    Round the walls of the city of Pisa.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Florence,
    Who held mutton chops in abhorrence;
    He purchased a Bustard, and fried him in Mustard,
    Which choked that old person of Florence.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Sheen,
    Whose expression was calm and serene;
    He sate in the water, and drank bottled porter,
    That placid old person of Sheen.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Ware,
    Who rode on the back of a bear;
    When they ask'd, "Does it trot?" he said, "Certainly not!
    He's a Moppsikon Floppsikon bear!"

[Illustration]

    There was a young person of Janina,
    Whose uncle was always a fanning her;
    When he fanned off her head, she smiled sweetly, and said,
    "You propitious old person of Janina!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Cashmere,
    Whose movements were scroobious and queer;
    Being slender and tall, he looked over a wall,
    And perceived two fat ducks of Cashmere.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Cassel,
    Whose nose finished off in a tassel;
    But they call'd out, "Oh well! don't it look like a bell!"
    Which perplexed that old person of Cassel.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Pett,
    Who was partly consumed by regret;
    He sate in a cart, and ate cold apple tart,
    Which relieved that old person of Pett.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Spithead,
    Who opened the window, and said,--
    "Fil-jomble, fil-jumble, fil-rumble-come-tumble!"
    That doubtful old man of Spithead.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man on the Border,
    Who lived in the utmost disorder;
    He danced with the cat, and made tea in his hat,
    Which vexed all the folks on the Border.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Dumbree,
    Who taught little owls to drink tea;
    For he said, "To eat mice is not proper or nice,"
    That amiable man of Dumbree.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Filey,
    Of whom his acquaintance spoke highly;
    He danced perfectly well, to the sound of a bell,
    And delighted the people of Filey.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man whose remorse
    Induced him to drink Caper Sauce;
    For they said, "If mixed up with some cold claret-cup,
    It will certainly soothe your remorse!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Ibreem,
    Who suddenly threaten'd to scream;
    But they said, "If you do, we will thump you quite blue,
    You disgusting old man of Ibreem!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Wilts,
    Who constantly walked upon stilts;
    He wreathed them with lilies and daffy-down-dillies,
    That elegant person of Wilts.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Grange,
    Whose manners were scroobious and strange;
    He sailed to St. Blubb in a waterproof tub,
    That aquatic old person of Grange.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Newry,
    Whose manners were tinctured with fury;
    He tore all the rugs, and broke all the jugs,
    Within twenty miles' distance of Newry.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Dumblane,
    Who greatly resembled a crane;
    But they said, "Is it wrong, since your legs are so long,
    To request you won't stay in Dumblane?"

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Port Grigor,
    Whose actions were noted for vigour;
    He stood on his head till his waistcoat turned red,
    That eclectic old man of Port Grigor.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of El Hums,
    Who lived upon nothing but crumbs,
    Which he picked off the ground, with the other birds round,
    In the roads and the lanes of El Hums.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of West Dumpet,
    Who possessed a large nose like a trumpet;
    When he blew it aloud, it astonished the crowd,
    And was heard through the whole of West Dumpet.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Sark,
    Who made an unpleasant remark;
    But they said, "Don't you see what a brute you must be,
    You obnoxious old person of Sark!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old man whose despair
    Induced him to purchase a hare:
    Whereon one fine day he rode wholly away,
    Which partly assuaged his despair.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Barnes,
    Whose garments were covered with darns;
    But they said, "Without doubt, you will soon wear them out,
    You luminous person of Barnes!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Nice,
    Whose associates were usually Geese.
    They walked out together in all sorts of weather,
    That affable person of Nice!

[Illustration]

    There was a young lady of Greenwich,
    Whose garments were border'd with Spinach;
    But a large spotty Calf bit her shawl quite in half,
    Which alarmed that young lady of Greenwich.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Cannes,
    Who purchased three fowls and a fan;
    Those she placed on a stool, and to make them feel cool
    She constantly fanned them at Cannes.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Ickley,
    Who could not abide to ride quickly;
    He rode to Karnak on a tortoise's back,
    That moony old person of Ickley.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Hyde,
    Who walked by the shore with his bride,
    Till a Crab who came near fill'd their bosoms with fear,
    And they said, "Would we'd never left Hyde!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old person in gray,
    Whose feelings were tinged with dismay;
    She purchased two parrots, and fed them with carrots,
    Which pleased that old person in gray.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Ancona,
    Who found a small dog with no owner,
    Which he took up and down all the streets of the town,
    That anxious old man of Ancona.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Sestri,
    Who sate himself down in the vestry;
    When they said, "You are wrong!" he merely said "Bong!"
    That repulsive old person of Sestri.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Blythe,
    Who cut up his meat with a scythe;
    When they said, "Well! I never!" he cried, "Scythes for ever!"
    That lively old person of Blythe.

[Illustration]

    There was a young person of Ayr,
    Whose head was remarkably square:
    On the top, in fine weather, she wore a gold feather;
    Which dazzled the people of Ayr.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Rimini,
    Who said, "Gracious! Goodness! O Gimini!"
    When they said, "Please be still!" she ran down a hill,
    And was never more heard of at Rimini.

[Illustration]

    There is a young lady, whose nose,
    Continually prospers and grows;
    When it grew out of sight, she exclaimed in a fright,
    "Oh! Farewell to the end of my nose!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Ealing,
    Who was wholly devoid of good feeling;
    He drove a small gig, with three Owls and a Pig,
    Which distressed all the people of Ealing.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Thames Ditton,
    Who called out for something to sit on;
    But they brought him a hat, and said, "Sit upon that,
    You abruptious old man of Thames Ditton!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Bray,
    Who sang through the whole of the day
    To his ducks and his pigs, whom he fed upon figs,
    That valuable person of Bray.

[Illustration]

    There was a young person whose history
    Was always considered a mystery;
    She sate in a ditch, although no one knew which,
    And composed a small treatise on history.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Bow,
    Whom nobody happened to know;
    So they gave him some soap, and said coldly, "We hope
    You will go back directly to Bow!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Rye,
    Who went up to town on a fly;
    But they said, "If you cough, you are safe to fall off!
    You abstemious old person of Rye!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Crowle,
    Who lived in the nest of an owl;
    When they screamed in the nest, he screamed out with the rest,
    That depressing old person of Crowle.

[Illustration]

    There was an old Lady of Winchelsea,
    Who said, "If you needle or pin shall see
    On the floor of my room, sweep it up with the broom!"
    That exhaustive old Lady of Winchelsea!

[Illustration]

    There was an old man in a tree,
    Whose whiskers were lovely to see;
    But the birds of the air pluck'd them perfectly bare,
    To make themselves nests in that tree.

[Illustration]

    There was a young lady of Corsica,
    Who purchased a little brown saucy-cur;
    Which she fed upon ham, and hot raspberry jam,
    That expensive young lady of Corsica.

[Illustration]

    There was a young lady of Firle,
    Whose hair was addicted to curl;
    It curled up a tree, and all over the sea,
    That expansive young lady of Firle.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Stroud,
    Who was horribly jammed in a crowd;
    Some she slew with a kick, some she scrunched with a stick,
    That impulsive old person of Stroud.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Boulak,
    Who sate on a Crocodile's back;
    But they said, "Towr'ds the night he may probably bite,
    Which might vex you, old man of Boulak!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Skye,
    Who waltz'd with a Bluebottle fly:
    They buzz'd a sweet tune, to the light of the moon,
    And entranced all the people of Skye.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Blackheath,
    Whose head was adorned with a wreath
    Of lobsters and spice, pickled onions and mice,
    That uncommon old man of Blackheath.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man, who when little
    Fell casually into a kettle;
    But, growing too stout, he could never get out,
    So he passed all his life in that kettle.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Dundalk,
    Who tried to teach fishes to walk;
    When they tumbled down dead, he grew weary, and said,
    "I had better go back to Dundalk!"

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Shoreham,
    Whose habits were marked by decorum;
    He bought an Umbrella, and sate in the cellar,
    Which pleased all the people of Shoreham.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Bar,
    Who passed all her life in a jar,
    Which she painted pea-green, to appear more serene,
    That placid old person of Bar.

[Illustration]

    There was a young person of Kew,
    Whose virtues and vices were few;
    But with blamable haste she devoured some hot paste,
    Which destroyed that young person of Kew.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Jodd,
    Whose ways were perplexing and odd;
    She purchased a whistle, and sate on a thistle,
    And squeaked to the people of Jodd.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Bude,
    Whose deportment was vicious and crude;
    He wore a large ruff of pale straw-colored stuff,
    Which perplexed all the people of Bude.

[Illustration]

    There was an old person of Brigg,
    Who purchased no end of a wig;
    So that only his nose, and the end of his toes,
    Could be seen when he walked about Brigg.

[Illustration]

    There was an old man of Messina,
    Whose daughter was named Opsibeena;
    She wore a small wig, and rode out on a pig,
    To the perfect delight of Messina.




TWENTY-SIX NONSENSE RHYMES AND PICTURES.


[Illustration]

    The Absolutely Abstemious Ass,
    who resided in a Barrel, and only lived on
    Soda Water and Pickled Cucumbers.

[Illustration]

    The Bountiful Beetle,
    who always carried a Green Umbrella when it didn't rain,
    and left it at home when it did.

[Illustration]

    The Comfortable Confidential Cow,
    who sate in her Red Morocco Arm Chair and
    toasted her own Bread at the parlour Fire.

[Illustration]

    The Dolomphious Duck,
    who caught Spotted Frogs for her dinner
    with a Runcible Spoon.

[Illustration]

    The Enthusiastic Elephant,
    who ferried himself across the water with the
    Kitchen Poker and a New pair of Ear-rings.

[Illustration]

    The Fizzgiggious Fish,
    who always walked about upon Stilts,
    because he had no legs.

[Illustration]

    The Good-natured Grey Gull,
    who carried the Old Owl, and his Crimson Carpet-bag,
    across the river, because he could not swim.

[Illustration]

    The Hasty Higgeldipiggledy Hen,
    who went to market in a Blue Bonnet and Shawl,
    and bought a Fish for her Supper.

[Illustration]

    The Inventive Indian,
    who caught a Remarkable Rabbit in a
    Stupendous Silver Spoon.

[Illustration]

    The Judicious Jubilant Jay,
    who did up her Back Hair every morning with a Wreath of Roses,
    Three feathers, and a Gold Pin.

[Illustration]

    The Kicking Kangaroo,
    who wore a Pale Pink Muslin dress
    with Blue spots.

[Illustration]

    The Lively Learned Lobster,
    who mended his own Clothes with
    a Needle and Thread.

[Illustration]

    The Melodious Meritorious Mouse,
    who played a merry minuet on the
    Piano-forte.

[Illustration]

    The Nutritious Newt,
    who purchased a Round Plum-pudding
    for his grand-daughter.

[Illustration]

    The Obsequious Ornamental Ostrich,
    who wore Boots to keep his
    feet quite dry.

    [Illustration: PARSNIP PIE]

    The Perpendicular Purple Polly,
    who read the Newspaper and ate Parsnip Pie
    with his Spectacles.

[Illustration]

    The Queer Querulous Quail,
    who smoked a Pipe of tobacco on the top of
    a Tin Tea-kettle.

[Illustration]

    The Rural Runcible Raven,
    who wore a White Wig and flew away
    with the Carpet Broom.

[Illustration]

    The Scroobious Snake,
    who always wore a Hat on his Head, for
    fear he should bite anybody.

[Illustration]

    The Tumultuous Tom-tommy Tortoise,
    who beat a Drum all day long in the
    middle of the wilderness.

[Illustration]

    The Umbrageous Umbrella-maker,
    whose Face nobody ever saw, because it was
    always covered by his Umbrella.

[Illustration]

    The Visibly Vicious Vulture,
    who wrote some Verses to a Veal-cutlet in a
    Volume bound in Vellum.

[Illustration]

    The Worrying Whizzing Wasp,
    who stood on a Table, and played sweetly on a
    Flute with a Morning Cap.

[Illustration]

    The Excellent Double-extra XX
    imbibing King Xerxes, who lived a
    long while ago.

[Illustration]

    The Yonghy-Bonghy-Bo,
    whose Head was ever so much bigger than his
    Body, and whose Hat was rather small.

[Illustration]

    The Zigzag Zealous Zebra,
    who carried five Monkeys on his back all
    the way to Jellibolee.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MORE NONSENSE***


******* This file should be named 13648.txt or 13648.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/3/6/4/13648



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

