The Project Gutenberg eBook, Elsie's New Relations, by Martha Finley


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Elsie's New Relations

Author: Martha Finley

Release Date: February 4, 2005  [eBook #14909]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELSIE'S NEW RELATIONS***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (www.pgdp.net)



ELSIE'S NEW RELATIONS

What They Did and How They Fared at Ion

A Sequel to _Grandmother Elsie_

by

MARTHA FINLEY

A. L. Burt Company
Publishers
New York Chicago

1911







CHAPTER I.

    "For wild, or calm, or far or near,
     I love thee still, thou glorious sea."
                      --Mrs. Hemans.

    "I bless thee for kind looks and words
      Shower'd on my path like dew,
     For all the love in those deep eyes,
      A gladness ever new."
                      --Mrs. Hemans.


It is late in the afternoon of a delicious October day; the woods back of
the two cottages where the Dinsmores, Travillas and Raymonds have spent
the last three or four months are gorgeous with scarlet, crimson and gold;
the air from the sea is more delightful than ever, but the summer visitors
to the neighboring cottages and hotels have fled, and the beach is almost
deserted, as Edward and his child-wife wander slowly along it, hand in
hand, their attention divided between the splendors of a magnificent
sunset and the changing beauty of the sea; yonder away in the distance it
is pale gray; near at hand delicate green slowly changing to pink, each
wave crested with snowy foam, and anon they all turn to burnished gold.

"Oh, how very beautiful!" cries Zoe, in an ecstasy of delight. "Edward,
did you ever see anything finer?"

"Never! Let us go down this flight of steps and seat ourselves on the next
to the lowest. We will then be quite near the waves and yet out of danger
of being wet by them."

He led her down as he spoke, seated her comfortably and himself by her
side with his arm around her.

"I've grown very fond of the sea," she remarked. "I shall be sorry to
leave it. Will not you?"

"Yes and no," he answered, doubtfully. "I, too, am fond of old ocean, but
eager to get to Ion and begin life in earnest. Isn't it time, seeing I
have been a married man for nearly five months? But why that sigh, love?"

"O Edward, are you not sorry you are married? Are you not sometimes very
much ashamed of me?" she asked, her cheek burning hotly and the downcast
eyes filling with tears.

"Ashamed of you, Zoe? Why, darling, you are my heart's best treasure," he
said, drawing her closer to his side, and touching his lips to her
forehead. "What has put so absurd an idea into your head?"

"I know so little, so very little compared with your mother and sisters,"
she sighed. "I'm finding it out more and more every day, as I hear them
talk among themselves and to other people."

"But you are younger than any of them, a very great deal younger than
mamma, and will have time to catch up to them."

"But I'm a married woman and so can't go to school any more. Ah," with
another and very heavy sigh, "I wish papa hadn't been quite so indulgent,
or that I'd had sense enough not to take advantage of it to the neglect of
my studies!"

"No, I suppose it would hardly do to send you to school, even if I could
spare you--which I can't," he returned laughingly, "but there is a
possibility of studying at home, under a governess or tutor. What do you
say to offering yourself as a pupil to grandpa?"

"Oh, no, no! I'm sure he can be very stern upon occasion. I've seen it in
his eyes when I've made a foolish remark that he didn't approve, and I
should be too frightened to learn if he were my teacher."

"Then some one else must be thought of," Edward said, with a look of
amusement. "How would I answer?"

"You? Oh, splendidly!"

"You are not afraid of me?"

"No, indeed!" she cried, with a merry laugh and a saucy look up into his
face.

"And yet I'm the only person who has authority over you."

"Authority, indeed!" with a little contemptuous sniff.

"You promised to obey, you know."

"Did I? Well, maybe so, but that's just a form that doesn't really mean
anything. Most any married woman will tell you that."

"Do you consider the whole of your marriage vow an unmeaning form, Zoe?"
he asked, with sudden gravity and a look of doubt and pain in his eyes
that she could not bear to see.

"No, no! I was only in jest," she said, dropping her eyes and blushing
deeply. "But really, Edward, you don't think, do you, that wives are to
obey like children?"

"No, love, I don't; and I think in a true marriage the two are so entirely
one--so unselfishly desirous each to please the other--that there is
little or no clashing of wills. Thus far ours has seemed such to me. How
is it, do you think, little wife?"

"I hope so, Edward," she said, laying her head on his shoulder, "I know
one thing--that there is nothing in this world I care so much for as to
please you and be all and everything to you."

"And I can echo your words from my very heart, dearest," he said,
caressing her. "I hope you are at home and happy among your new
relatives."

"Yes, indeed, Edward, especially with mamma. She is the dearest, kindest
mother in the world; to me as much as to her own children, and oh, so wise
and good!"

"You are not sorry now that you and I are not to live alone?" he queried,
with a pleased smile.

"No, oh, no! I'm ever so glad that she is to keep house at Ion and all of
us to live together as one family."

"Except Lester and Elsie," he corrected; "they will be with us for a short
time, then go to Fairview for the winter. And it will probably become
their home after that, as mamma will buy it, if Mr. Leland--Lester's
uncle, who owns the place--carries out his intention of removing to
California. His children have settled there, and, of course, the father
and mother want to be with them."

The sun had set, and all the bright hues had faded from the sea, leaving
it a dull gray.

"What a deserted spot this seems!" remarked Zoe, "and only the other day
it was gay with crowds of people. Nobody to be seen now but ourselves,"
glancing up and down the coast as she spoke. "Ah, yes! yonder is someone
sitting on that piece of wreck."

"It is Lulu Raymond," Edward said, following the direction of her glance.
"It is late for the child to be out so far from home; a full mile I should
say. I'll go and invite her to walk back with us."

"No, you needn't," said Zoe, "for see, there is her father going to her.
But let us go home, for I must change my dress before tea."

"And we want time to walk leisurely along," returned Edward, rising and
giving her his hand to help her up the steps.

Lulu was reading, so absorbed in the story that she did not perceive her
father's approach, and as he accosted her with, "It is late for you to be
here alone, my child, you should have come in an hour ago," she gave a
great start, and involuntarily tried to hide her book.

"What have you there? Evidently something you do not wish your father to
see," he said, bending down and taking it from her unwilling hand.

"Ah, I don't wonder!" as he hurriedly turned over a few pages. "A dime
novel! Where did you get this, Lulu?"

"It's Max's, papa, he lent it to me. O papa, what made you do that?" as
with an energetic fling the captain suddenly sent it far out into the sea.
"Max made me promise to take care of it and give it back to him, and
besides I wanted to finish the story."

"Neither you nor Max shall ever read such poisonous stuff as that with my
knowledge and consent," replied the captain in stern accents.

"Papa, I didn't think you'd be so unkind," grumbled Lulu, her face
expressing extreme vexation and disappointment, "or that you would throw
away other people's things."

"Unkind, my child?" he said, sitting down beside her and taking her hand
in his. "Suppose you had gathered a quantity of beautiful, sweet-tasted
berries that I knew to be poisonous, and were about to eat them; would it
be unkind in me to snatch them out of your hand and throw them into the
sea?"

"No, sir; because it would kill me to eat them, but that book couldn't
kill me, or even make me sick."

"No, not your body, but it would injure your soul, which is worth far
more. I'm afraid I have been too negligent in regard to the mental food of
my children," he went on after a slight pause, rather as if thinking aloud
than talking to Lulu, "and unfortunately I cannot take the oversight of it
constantly in the future. But remember, Lulu," he added firmly, "I wholly
forbid dime novels, and you are not to read anything without first
obtaining the approval of your father or one of those under whose
authority he has placed you."

Lulu's face was full of sullen discontent and anger. "Papa," she said, "I
don't like to obey those people."

"If you are wise, you will try to like what has to be," he said.

"It wouldn't have to be if you would only say I needn't, papa."

"I shall not say that, Lucilla," he answered with grave displeasure. "You
need guidance and control even more than most children of your age, and I
should not be doing my duty if I left you without them."

"I don't like to obey people that are no relation to me!" she cried,
viciously kicking away a little heap of sand.

"No, you don't even like to obey your father," he said with a sigh. "Max
and Gracie together do not give me half the anxiety that you do by your
wilful temper."

"Why, can't I do as I please as well as grown people?" she asked in a more
subdued tone.

"Even grown people have to obey," said her father. "I am now expecting
orders from the government, and must obey them when they come. I must obey
my superior officers, and the officers and men under me must obey me. So
must my children. God gave you to me and requires me to train you up in
His fear and service to the best of my ability. I should not be doing that
if I allowed you to read such hurtful trash as that I just took from
you."

"It was Max's, papa, and I promised to give it back. What shall I say when
he asks me for it?"

"Tell him to come to me about it."

"Papa----"

"Well, what is it?" he asked, as she paused and hesitated.

"Please, papa, don't punish him. You never told him not to buy or read
such things, did you?"

"No; and I think he would not have done so in defiance of a prohibition
from me. So I shall not punish him. But I am pleased that you should plead
for him. I am very glad that my children all love one another."

"Yes, indeed we do, papa!" she said, "And we all love you, and you love
Max and Gracie very much, and----"

"And Lulu also," he said, putting his arm about her and drawing her closer
to his side, as she paused with quivering lip and downcast eyes.

"As much as you do Max and Gracie?" she asked brokenly, hiding her face on
his shoulder. "You said just now I was naughtier than both of them put
together."

"Yet you are my own dear child, and it is precisely because I love you so
dearly that I am so distressed over your quick temper and wilfulness. I
fear that if not conquered they will cause great unhappiness to yourself
as well as to your friends. I want you to promise me, daughter, that you
will try to conquer them, asking God to help you."

"I will, papa," she said, with unwonted humility; "but, oh, I wish you
were going to stay with us! It's easier to be good with you than with
anybody else."

"I am sorry, indeed, that I cannot," he said, rising and taking her hand.
"Come, we must go back to the house now."

They moved along in silence for a little, then Lulu said, with an
affectionate look up into her father's face, "Papa, I do so like to walk
this way!"

"How do you mean?" he asked, smiling kindly upon her.

"With my hand in yours, papa. You know I haven't often had the chance."

"No, my poor child," he sighed, "that is one of the deprivations to which
a seaman and his family have to submit."

"Well," said the little girl, lifting his hand to her lips, "I'd rather
have you for my father than anybody else, for all that."

At that he bent down and kissed her with a smile full of pleasure and
fatherly affection.




CHAPTER II.

    "By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou
    shalt be condemned."--_Matt._ 12:37.


As they drew near the house Max came to meet them.

"I've been to the post-office since the mail came in, papa," he said, "and
there is no government letter for you yet. I'm so glad! I hope they're
going to let us keep you a good deal longer."

"I'm not sorry to prolong my stay with wife and children," the captain
responded, "but cannot hope to be permitted to do so very much longer."

"Grandpa Dinsmore has come back from taking Harold and Herbert to
college," pursued Max, "and we're all to take tea in there, Mamma Vi says;
because grandpa wants us all about him this first evening."

"That is kind," said the captain, opening the gate and looking smilingly
at Violet, who, with little Grace, was waiting for him on the veranda. He
stopped there to speak with them, while Lulu hurried on into the house
and up to her own room, Max following.

"Where's my book, Lu?" he asked.

"O Max, I couldn't help it--but papa caught me reading it and took it away
from me. And he told me when you asked me for it I should send you to
him."

Max's face expressed both vexation and alarm. "I sha'n't do that," he
said, "if I never get it. But was he very angry, Lu?"

"No; and you needn't be afraid to go to him, for he won't punish you; I
asked him not to, and he said he wouldn't. But he threw the book into the
sea, and said neither you nor I should ever read such poisonous stuff with
his knowledge or consent."

"Then, where would be the use of my going to him for it? I'll not say a
word about it."

He went out, closed the door and stood irresolutely in the hall, debating
with himself whether to go up-stairs or down. Up-stairs in his room was
another dime novel which he had been reading that afternoon; he had not
quite finished it, and was eager to do so; he wanted very much to know how
the story ended, and had meant to read the few remaining pages now before
the call to tea. But his father's words, reported to him by Lulu, made it
disobedience.

"It's a very little sin," whispered the tempter; "as having read so much,
you might as well read the rest."

"But it will be disobeying wilfully the kind father who forgave a heedless
act of disobedience not very long ago," said conscience; "the dear father
who must soon leave you to be gone no one knows how long, perhaps never to
come back."

Just then the captain came quickly up the stairs. "Ah, Max, are you
there?" he said, in a cheery tone, then laying his hand affectionately on
the boy's shoulder. "Come in here with me, my son, I want to have a little
talk with you while I make my toilet."

"Yes, sir," said Max, following him into the dressing-room.

"What have you been reading to-day?" asked the captain, throwing off his
coat, pouring water into the basin from the pitcher, and beginning his
ablutions.

Max hung his head in silence till the question was repeated, then
stammered out the title of the book, the perusal of which he was so
desirous to finish.

"Where did you get it?" asked his father.

"I bought it at a news-stand, papa."

"You must not buy anything more of that kind, Max; you must not read any
such trash."

"I will not again, papa; I should not this time if you had ever forbidden
me before."

"No, I don't believe you would be guilty of wilful disobedience to any
positive command of your father," the captain said in a grave but kindly
tone; "and yet I think you suspected I would not approve, else why were
you so unwilling to tell me what you had been reading?"

He was standing before the bureau now, hairbrush in hand, and as he spoke
he paused in his work, and gazed searchingly at his son.

Max's face flushed hotly, and his eyes drooped for a moment, then looking
up into his father's face he said frankly, "Yes, papa, I believe I was
afraid you would take the book from me if you saw it. I deserve that you
should be angry with me for that and for lending one to Lu."

"I am displeased with you on both accounts," the captain replied, "but I
shall overlook it this time, my son, hoping there will be no repetition of
either offence. Now go to your room, gather up all the doubtful reading
matter you have, and bring it here to me. I shall not go with you, but
trust to your honor to keep nothing back."

"Oh, thank you, papa, for trusting me!" cried Max, his countenance
brightening wonderfully, and he hastened away to do his father's bidding.

"Just the dearest, kindest father that ever was!" he said to himself, as
he bounded up the stairs. "I'll never do anything again to vex him, if I
can help it."

He was down again in a moment with two dime novels and a story-paper of
the same stamp.

The captain had finished his toilet. Seating himself he took what Max had
brought, and glancing hastily over it, "How much of this trash have you
read, Max?" he asked.

"The paper and most of one book, papa. I'll not read any more such, since
you've forbidden me; but they're very interesting, papa."

"I dare say, to a boy of your age. But you don't think I would want to
deprive you of any innocent pleasure, Max?"

"No, sir; oh, no! But may I know why you won't let me read such stories?"

"Yes; it is because they give false views of life, and thus lead to wrong
and foolish actions. Why, Max, some boys have been made burglars and
highwaymen by such stories. I want you to be a reader, but of good and
wholesome literature; books that will give you useful information and good
moral teachings; above all things, my son, I would have you a student of
the Bible, 'the holy Scriptures, which are able to make you wise unto
salvation through faith which is in Jesus Christ.' Do you read it often,
Max?"

"Not very, papa. But you know I hear you read it every morning and
evening."

"Yes; but I have sometimes been grieved to see that you paid very little
attention."

Max colored at that. "Papa, I will try to do better," he said.

"I hope you will," said his father. "You will enjoy the same religious
advantages at Ion, and, my boy, try to profit by them, remembering that we
shall have to render an account at last of the use or abuse of all our
privileges. I want you to promise me that you will read a few verses of
the Bible every day, and commit at least one to memory."

"I will, papa. And what else shall I read? You will let me have some
story-books, won't you?" Max said, entreatingly.

"Yes," said his father, "I have no objection to stories of the right sort.
There are some very beautiful stories in the Bible; there are entertaining
stories in history; and there are fictitious stories that will do you good
and not harm. I shall take care in future that you have plenty of
wholesome mental food, so that you will have no excuse for craving such
stuff as this," he added, with a glance of disgust at what he held in his
hand. "It may go into the kitchen fire."

"Mrs. Scrimp never burns the least little bit of paper, papa," said Max.

"Indeed! Why not?" asked his father, with an amused smile.

"She says it is wicked waste, because it is better than rags for the
paper-makers."

"Ah! well, then, we will tear these into bits and let them go to the
paper-makers."

Max was standing by his father's side. "Papa," he said, with a roguish
look into his father's face, "don't you think you would enjoy reading them
first?"

The captain laughed. "No, my son," he said; "I have not the slightest
inclination to read them. Bring me that waste basket and you may help me
tear them up."

They began the work of destruction, Max taking the paper, the captain the
book his son had been reading. Presently something in it attracted his
attention; he paused and glanced over several pages one after the other,
till Max began to think he had become interested in the story. But no; at
that instant he turned from it to him, and Max was half frightened at the
sternness of his look.

"My son," he said, "I am astonished and deeply grieved that you could read
and enjoy anything like this, for it is full of profanity; and reading or
hearing such expressions is very likely to lead to the use of them. Max,
do you ever say such words?"

Max trembled and grew red and pale by turns, but did not speak.

"Answer me," was his father's stern command.

"Not often, papa."

The captain barely caught the low breathed words. "Not often? sometimes,
then?" he groaned, covering his face with his hand.

"O papa, don't be so grieved! I'll never do it again," Max said in a
broken voice.

The captain sighed deeply. "Max," he said, "dearly as I love my only son,
I would sooner lay him under the sod, knowing that his soul was in heaven,
than have him live to be a profane swearer. Bring me that Bible from the
table yonder."

The boy obeyed.

"Now turn to the twenty-fourth chapter of Leviticus, and read the
sixteenth verse."

Max read in a trembling voice, "'And he that blasphemeth the name of the
Lord, he shall surely be put to death, and all the congregation shall
certainly stone him; as well the stranger, as he that is born in the land,
when he blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall be put to death.'"

"Now the twenty-third," said his father.

"'And Moses spake to the children of Israel, that they should bring forth
him that had cursed out of the camp, and stone him with stones; and the
children of Israel did as the Lord commanded Moses.'"

Max had some difficulty in finishing the verse, and at the end quite broke
down.

"Papa," he sobbed, "I didn't know that was in the Bible. I never thought
about its being so dreadfully wicked to say bad words."

"What do you now think a boy deserves who has done it again and again? say
as often as Max Raymond has?" asked his father.

"I suppose to be stoned to death like that man. But nobody is ever put to
death for swearing nowadays?" the boy said, half inquiringly, not daring
to look at his father as he spoke.

"No, Max, fortunately for you and many others. But suppose you were my
father and I a boy of your age, and that I had been swearing, what would
you think you ought to do about it?"

"Give you a sound flogging," he answered, in a low, reluctant tone.

"Well, Max, that is just what I shall have to do, if I ever know you to
use a profane word again," said his father, in a grave, sad tone. "I
should do it now, but for the hope that you are sorry enough for the past
to carefully avoid that sin in the future."

"Indeed I will, papa," he said, very humbly.

"And, Max," resumed his father, "you are never to make a companion of, or
go at all with anybody who uses such language, and never to read a book or
story that has in it anything of that kind. And you are not to say by
George or by anything. Our Saviour says, 'Let your communication be Yea,
yea, Nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil.' My son,
have you asked God to forgive you for taking His holy name in vain?"

"No, sir."

"Then go at once to your room and do it."

"I did, papa," Max said, when he came down again to find his father
waiting for him.

"I trust the petition came from your heart, my son," was the grave but
kind rejoinder. "I must have a little more talk with you on this subject,
but not now, for it is time we followed the others into the next house, if
we would not keep Grandma Rose's tea waiting."




CHAPTER III.

    "A kingdom is a nest of families, and a family is a small
    kingdom."--Tupper.


It was a bright and cheerful scene that greeted the eyes of Captain
Raymond and his son as they entered the parlor of the adjacent cottage.

It was strictly a family gathering, yet the room was quite full. Mr.
Dinsmore was there with his wife, his daughter Elsie and her children,
Edward and Zoe, Elsie Leland with her husband and babe, Violet Raymond
with her husband's two little girls, Lulu and Grace, and lastly Rosie and
Walter.

Everybody had a kindly greeting for the captain, and Violet's bright face
grew still brighter as she made room for him on the sofa by her side.

"We were beginning to wonder what was keeping you," she said.

"Yes, I'm afraid I am rather behind time," he returned. "I hope you have
not delayed your tea for me, Mrs. Dinsmore."

"No; it is but just ready," she said. "Ah, there's the bell. Please, all
of you walk out."

When the meal was over all returned to the parlor, where they spent the
next hour in desultory chat.

Gracie claimed a seat on her father's knee. Lulu took possession of an
ottoman and pushed it up as close to his side as she could; then seating
herself on it leaned up against him.

He smiled and stroked her hair, then glanced about the room in search of
Max.

The boy was sitting silently in a corner, but reading an invitation in his
father's eyes, he rose and came to his other side.

The ladies were talking of the purchases they wished to make in Boston,
New York or Philadelphia, on their homeward route.

"I must get winter hats for Lulu and Gracie," said Violet.

"I want a bird on mine, Mamma Vi," said Lulu; "a pretty one with gay
feathers."

"Do you know, Lulu, that they skin the poor little birds alive in order to
preserve the brilliancy of their plumage?" Violet said with a troubled
look. "I will not wear them on that account, and as you are a kind-hearted
little girl, I think you will not wish to do so either."

"But I do," persisted Lulu. "Of course I wouldn't have a bird killed on
purpose, but after they are killed I might just as well have one."

"But do you not see," said Grandma Elsie, "that if every one would refuse
to buy them, the cruel business of killing them would soon cease? and that
it will go on as long as people continue to buy and wear them?"

"I don't care, I want one," pouted Lulu. "Papa, can't I have it?"

"No, you cannot," he said with grave displeasure. "I am sorry to see that
you can be so heartless. You can have just whatever Grandma Elsie and
Mamma Vi think best for you, and with that you must be content."

Lulu was silenced, but for the rest of the evening her face wore an ugly
scowl.

"My little girl is growing sleepy," the captain said presently to Gracie.
"Papa will carry you over home and put you to bed. Lulu, you may come
too."

"I don't want to, papa, I----" she began; but he silenced her with a look.

"Bid good-night to our friends and come," he said. "You also, Max."

Max, though surprised at the order, obeyed with cheerful alacrity in
strong contrast to Lulu's sullen and reluctant compliance, which said as
plainly as words that she would rebel if she dared.

"I don't see why papa makes us come away so soon," she grumbled to her
brother in an undertone, as they passed from one cottage to the other,
their father a little in advance.

"He must have some good reason," said Max, "and I for one am willing
enough to obey him, seeing it's such a little while I'll have the chance."

They had now reached the veranda of their own cottage.

"Come in quickly out of this cold wind, children," their father said; then
as he closed the outer door after them, "Run into the parlor and get
thoroughly warm before going up to your rooms."

He sat down by the stove with Grace on his knee, and bade the other two
draw up close to it and him, one on each side. And when they had done so,
"My three dear children," he said in tender tones, glancing from one to
another, "no words can tell how much I love you. Will you all think very
often of papa and follow him with your prayers when he is far away on the
sea?"

"Oh, yes, yes, papa!" they all said with tears in their eyes, while Gracie
put her small arms round his neck. Lulu rested her head on his shoulder,
and Max took a hand and pressed it in both of his.

"Papa, you will think of us, too?" he said inquiringly.

"Yes, indeed, my darlings; you will never be long out of my mind, and
nothing will make me happier than to hear that you are well and doing your
duty faithfully."

"I shall try very hard, papa," Max said, with affectionate look and tone,
"if it is only to please you and make your heart glad."

"Thank you, my son," his father replied, "but I hope a still stronger
motive will be that you may please God and honor Him. Never forget, my
children, that though your earthly father may be far away and know nothing
of your conduct, God's all-seeing eye is ever upon you."

A half hour had passed very quickly and delightfully to the children, when
at length, seeing Gracie's eyelids begin to droop, their father said it
was time for him to carry her up to bed.

"Shall we stay here till you come down again, papa?" asked Max.

"No; you and Lulu may go to bed now."

"Then good-night, papa."

"No, you need not bid me good-night yet," the captain said. "I shall see
you both in your rooms before you are asleep."

"Well, Lu, are you sorry now that papa made you come home so soon?" asked
Max, as they went up-stairs together.

"No, indeed! Haven't we had a nice time, Max? Oh, if only we could keep
papa all the time!"

"I wish we could," said Max. "But we won't have so hard a time as we've
had for the last two years whenever he was away."

They had reached the door of Lulu's room. "Max," she said, turning to him
as with a sudden thought, "what do you suppose papa is coming to our rooms
for?"

"What do _you_ suppose? have you done anything you ought to be punished
for?" asked Max, a little mischievously. "I thought you looked very cross
and rebellious about the hat and about having to come home so soon. I'm
very sure, from what I've heard of Grandpa Dinsmore's strictness, that if
you were his child you'd get a whipping for it."

Lulu looked frightened.

"But, Max, you don't think papa means to punish me for that, do you? He
has been so kind and pleasant since," she said, with a slight tremble in
her voice.

"You'll find out when he comes," laughed Max. "Good-night," and he
hastened away to his own room.

A guilty conscience made Lulu very uneasy as she hurried through her
preparations for bed, and as she heard her father's step approach the door
she grew quite frightened.

He came in and closed it after him. Lulu was standing in her night-dress,
just ready for bed. He caught up a heavy shawl, wrapped it about her, and
seating himself lifted her to his knee.

"Why, how you are trembling!" he exclaimed. "What is the matter?"

"O papa! are you--are you going to punish me for being so naughty this
evening?" she asked, hanging her head while her cheeks grew red.

"That was not my intention in coming in here," he said. "But, Lulu, your
wilfulness is a cause of great anxiety to me. I hardly know what to do
with you. I am very loath to burden our kind friends--Grandpa Dinsmore and
Grandma Elsie--with so rebellious and unmanageable a child, for it will be
painful to them to be severe with you, and yet I see that you will compel
them to it."

"I won't be punished by anybody but you! Nobody else has a right!" burst
out Lulu.

"Yes, my child, I have given them the right, and the only way for you to
escape punishment is not to deserve it. And if you prove too troublesome
for them, you are to be sent to a boarding-school, and that, you will
understand, involves separation from Max and Gracie, and life among total
strangers."

"Papa, you wouldn't, you couldn't be so cruel!" she said, bursting into
tears and hiding her face on his breast.

"I hope you will not be so cruel to yourself as to make it necessary," he
said. "I have fondly hoped you were improving, but your conduct to-night
shows me that you are still a self-willed, rebellious child."

"Well, papa, I've wanted a bird on my hat for ever so long, and I believe
you would have let me have it, too, if Mamma Vi and Grandma Elsie hadn't
said that."

"I shouldn't let you have it, if they were both in favor of it," he said
severely.

"Why, papa?"

"Because of the cruelty it would encourage. And now, Lucilla, I want you
to reflect how very kind it is in Grandpa Dinsmore and Grandma Elsie to be
willing to take my children in and share with them their own delightful
home. You have not the slightest claim upon their kindness, and very few
people in their case would have made such an offer. I really feel almost
ashamed to accept so much without being able to make some return, even if
I knew my children would all behave as dutifully and gratefully as
possible. And knowing how likely your conduct is to be the exact reverse
of that, I can hardly reconcile it to my conscience to let you go with
them to Ion. I am afraid I ought to place you in a boarding-school at
once, before I am ordered away."

"O papa, don't!" she begged. "I'll try to behave better."

"You must promise more than that," he said; "promise me that you will
yield to the authority of your mamma and her mother and grandfather as if
it were mine; obeying their orders and submitting to any punishment they
may see fit to inflict, just as if it were my act."

"Papa, have you said they might punish me?" she asked, with a look of
wounded pride.

"Yes; I have full confidence in their wisdom and kindness. I know they
will not abuse the authority I give them, and I have told them they may
use any measures with my children that they would with their own in the
same circumstances. Are you ready to give the promise I require?"

"Papa, it is too hard!"

"The choice is between that and being sent to boarding-school."

"Oh, it's so hard!" she sobbed.

"Not hard at all if you choose to be good," her father said. "In that case
you will have a delightful life at Ion. Do you make the promise?"

"Yes, sir," she said, as if the words were wrung from her, then hid her
face on his breast again and cried bitterly.

"My little daughter, these are tears of pride and stubbornness," sighed
her father, passing his hand caressingly over her hair, "and you will
never be happy until those evil passions are cast out of your heart. They
are foes which you must fight and conquer by the help of Him who is mighty
to save, or they will cost you the loss of your soul. Any sin unrepented
of and unforsaken will drag you down to eternal death; for the Bible says,
'Without holiness no man shall see the Lord.'"

"Papa," she said, "you are the only person God commands me to obey, and
I'm willing to do that."

"No, it seems not, when my command is that you obey some one else. My
little girl, you need something that I cannot give you; and that is a
change of heart. Go to Jesus for it, daughter; ask Him to wash away all
your sins in His precious blood and to create in you a clean heart and
renew a right spirit within you. He is able and willing to do it, for He
says, 'Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out.' We will kneel
down and ask Him now."

"Papa, I do love you so, I love you dearly, and I _will_ try to be a
better girl," Lulu said, clasping her arms tightly about his neck, as,
having laid her in her bed, he bent down to kiss her good-night.

"I hope so, my darling," he said; "nothing could make me happier than to
know you to be a truly good child, trying to live right that you may
please the dear Saviour who died that you might live."

Max, lying in his bed, was just saying to himself, "I wonder what keeps
papa so long," when he heard his step on the stairs.

"Are you awake, Max?" the captain asked, as he opened the door and came
in.

"Yes, sir," was the cheerful response; "it's early, you know, papa, and
I'm not at all sleepy."

"That is well, for I want a little talk with you," said his father,
sitting down on the side of the bed and taking Max's hand in his.

The talk was on the sin of profanity. Max was told to repeat the third
commandment, then his father called his attention to the words, "The Lord
will not hold him guiltless that taketh His name in vain."

"It is a dreadful and dangerous sin, my son," he said; "a most foolish
sin, too, for there is absolutely nothing to be gained by it; and the
meanest of sins, for what can be meaner than to abuse Him to whom we owe
our being and every blessing we enjoy?"

"Yes, papa, and I--I've done it a good many times. Do you think God will
ever forgive me?" Max asked in trembling tones.

"'He that covereth his sins shall not prosper; but whoso confesseth and
forsaketh them shall have mercy.' 'I, even I, am He that blotteth out thy
transgressions, for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins,'"
quoted the captain.

"Yes, my son, if you are truly sorry for your sins because committed
against God, and confess them with the determination to forsake them,
asking forgiveness and help to overcome the evil of your nature, for
Jesus' sake, it will be granted you. 'The blood of Jesus Christ, His Son,
cleanseth us from all sin.'"




CHAPTER IV.

    "No day discolored with domestic strife,
     No jealousy, but mutual truth believ'd,
     Secure repose and kindness undeceiv'd."
                             --Dryden.


They were a bright and cheery company in the other house. They had divided
into groups. Mrs. Elsie Travilla sat in a low rocking-chair, between her
father and his wife, with her little grandson on her lap. She doated on
the babe, and was often to be seen with it in her arms. She was now
calling her father's attention to its beauty, and talking of the time when
its mother was an infant, her own precious darling.

On a sofa on the farther side of the room the two sisters, Elsie and
Violet, sat side by side, cosily chatting of things past and present,
while a little removed from them Lester, Edward and Zoe formed another
group.

The two gentlemen were in animated conversation, to which Zoe was a silent
and absorbed listener, especially when her husband spoke; eagerly drinking
in every word that fell from his lips; her face glowing, her eyes
sparkling with proud delight.

"Look at Zoe; Ned certainly has one devoted admirer," remarked Elsie,
regarding her young sister-in-law with a pleased yet half-amused smile.

"Yes," said Violet, "he is a perfect oracle in her esteem; and I believe
everything she does is right in his eyes; indeed, their mutual devotion is
a pretty thing to see. They are scarcely ever apart."

"Don't you think your husband an oracle?" asked Elsie, with a quizzical
look.

"So you have found that out already, have you?" laughed Violet. "Yes, I
do, but then he is wiser than our Ned, you know. Tell me now, don't you
admire him? don't you think him worthy of all honor?"

"I do, indeed, and am proud to have him for a brother-in-law," Elsie said
with earnest sincerity; "but," she added with a smile, "I prefer Lester
for a husband."

"Yes, of course, but Levis is the best of husbands--of fathers, too."

"Rather more strict and stern than ours was, is he not?"

"Yes, but not more so than necessary with a child of Lulu's peculiar
disposition."

"Ah, Vi, I pity you for being a stepmother," Elsie said, with a
compassionate look at her sister.

"You needn't," returned Violet quickly.

"Lulu is the only one of the three that gives me any anxiety or trouble,
and to be Captain Raymond's wife more than compensates for that."

"I suppose so. And Gracie is a dear little thing."

"Yes, she's a darling. And Max is a noble fellow. I hope he will make just
such a man as his father. Don't you think he resembles the captain in
looks?"

"Yes, and I notice he is very chivalrous in his manner toward his young
stepmother."

"Yes," Violet said, with a happy smile, "and more or less to all ladies;
but especially those of this family. He is like his father in that. Zoe
is, I think, a particular favorite with him."

Evidently Zoe had overheard the remark, for she turned in their direction
with a bright look and smile; then springing up came quickly toward them,
and taking possession of a low chair near at hand, "Was it Max you were
talking of, Violet?" she said. "Yes, indeed, I am fond of him. I think
he's a splendid boy. But what was wrong with him to-night?"

"Nothing, so far as I know," said Violet "Why do you think there was?"

"Because he was so unusually quiet; and then his father took him away so
early. Ah, here comes the captain now," as the door opened and Captain
Raymond entered; "so I'll go away and let you have him to yourself."

"You needn't," said Violet, but Zoe was already by Edward's side again.

Elsie, too, rose and went to her mother to ask if she were not weary of
holding the babe.

Violet looked up a little anxiously into her husband's face as she made
room for him on the sofa by her side. "Is anything wrong with the
children, Levis?" she asked in an undertone.

"No, love," he said; "I took them away early that I might have a little
serious talk with the older two. You know I shall not long be afforded the
opportunity."

"But you look troubled," she said, in tenderly sympathizing accents. "May
I not share your care or sorrow, whatever it is?"

"I would rather share only joys and blessings with you, dearest, and keep
the cares and burdens to myself," he answered, smiling lovingly upon her,
and pressing with affectionate warmth the little hand she had placed in
his.

"No, I can't consent to that," she said. "I consider it one of my precious
privileges to be allowed to share your burdens and anxieties. Won't you
tell me what troubles you?"

"It is nothing new, little wife," he answered cheerfully; "but I am
doubting whether I do right to give your mother and grandfather so
troublesome a charge as Lulu. She is almost certain to be wilful and
rebellious occasionally, if not oftener."

Mrs. Travilla had resigned the babe to its mother, and was now standing
near the sofa where the captain and Violet sat.

"Mamma," said the latter, turning to her, "my husband is making himself
miserable with the fear that Lulu will prove too troublesome to you and
grandpa."

"Please do not, captain," Elsie said brightly, accepting the easy-chair he
hastened to bring forward for her. "Why should I not have a little trouble
as well as other people? Lulu is an attractive child to me, very bright
and original, a little headstrong, perhaps, but I shall lay siege to her
heart and try to rule her through her affections."

"I think that will be the better plan," he said, the look of care lifting
from his brow; "she is a warm-hearted child, and more easily led than
driven. But she is sometimes very impertinent, and I would by no means
have her indulged in that. I wish you would promise me never to let it
pass without punishment. She must be taught respect for authority and for
her superiors."

Elsie's face had grown very grave while he was speaking. "What punishment
do you prescribe?" she asked. "The child is yours."

"That should depend upon the heinousness of the offence," he replied. "I
can only say, please treat her exactly as if she were your own."

Mr. and Mrs. Dinsmore now joined them, and the question what studies the
children should pursue during the coming winter was discussed and settled.
Then the captain spoke of reading matter, asked advice in regard to
suitable books and periodicals, and begged his friends to have a careful
oversight of all the mental food of his children.

"You could not intrust that matter to a more wise and capable person than
papa," Elsie said, with an affectionate, smiling look at her father. "I
well remember how strict he was with me in my childhood; novels were
coveted but forbidden sweets."

"You must have been glad when you were old enough to read them, mamma,"
remarked Zoe, joining the circle.

"You read far too many, my little woman," said Mr. Dinsmore, pinching her
rosy cheek. "If I were Edward, I should curtail the supply, and try to
cultivate a taste for something better."

"But I'm a married woman and sha'n't submit to being treated like a child,
grandpa," she said, with a little pout and a toss of her pretty head.

"Not even by me?" asked Edward, leaning down over her as he stood behind
her chair.

"No, not even by you," she returned saucily, looking up into his face with
laughing eyes. "I'm your wife, sir, not your child."

"Both, I should say," laughed Edward. "I remember that I was considered a
mere child at your age. And whatever you are you belong to me, don't you?"

"Yes; and you to me just as much," she retorted, and at that there was a
general laugh.

The captain had said nothing of the objectionable reading matter found in
his children's hands that day, but when alone with Violet in their own
room, he told her all about it, blaming himself severely for not having
been so watchful over them as he ought, and expressing his distress over
the discovery that Max had sometimes been guilty of profanity.

"I do not know whether it has become a habit with him," he said, "but, my
dear, I beg of you to watch him closely when I am away, and if he is ever
known to offend in that way, see that he is properly punished."

"But how, Levis?" she asked, with a troubled look. "I don't know what I
can do but talk seriously to him about the wickedness of it."

"I hope you will do that, my dear. I have no doubt it would have an
excellent effect, for he loves and admires you greatly. But let him be
punished by being separated, for at least a week, from the rest of the
family, as unworthy to associate with them."

"Oh, that would be very hard, very humiliating for a proud, sensitive,
affectionate boy like Max!" she exclaimed. "May we not be a little more
lenient toward him?" and she looked up pleadingly into her husband's face.

"No," he said with decision; "but I strongly hope there will be no
occasion for such punishment, as he seems sincerely penitent and quite
determined not to offend in that way again. I really think my boy wants to
do right, but he is a heedless, thoughtless fellow, often going wrong from
mere carelessness and forgetfulness. But he must be taught to think and to
remember."

"I wish he could have his father's constant care and control," sighed
Violet.

"I wish he could indeed!" responded the captain; "but principally because
I fear he will prove a care and trouble to your grandfather and mother,
who, I am inclined to think, are more capable than I of giving him proper
training. I shall go away feeling easier in regard to my children's
welfare than I ever have before since they lost their mother."

"I am very glad of that, Levis," Violet said, her eyes shining with
pleasure, "and I do believe they will have a happy life at Ion."

"It will certainly be their own fault if they do not," he replied.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rose Travilla was somewhat less amiable in disposition than her mother and
older sisters, and had been much disgusted with Lulu's exhibition of
temper that evening.

Talking with her mother afterward in her dressing-room, "Mamma," she said,
"I wish you hadn't offered to let Lulu Raymond live with us at Ion. I
don't at all like the way she behaves, and I wish you and grandpa would
tell her father to send her off to boarding-school."

"That is an unkind wish, Rose," said her mother. "Perhaps if you had had
the same treatment Lulu has been subjected to since her mother's death,
you might have shown as bad a temper as hers. Haven't you some pity for
the little girl, when you reflect that she is motherless?"

"I don't think she could have a sweeter mother than our Vi," was the
unexpected rejoinder. "But she doesn't appreciate her in the least," Rose
went on, "but seems always on the watch against any effort on Vi's part to
control her."

"She seems to be naturally impatient of control by whomsoever exerted,"
Mrs. Travilla said, "but we will hope to see her improve in that respect,
and you must set her a good example, Rose.

"And I want you to think how sad it would be for her to be parted from the
brother and sister she loves so dearly and sent away alone to
boarding-school. I shall never forget how alarmed and distressed I was
when your grandpa threatened me with one."

"Did he, mamma?" asked Rosie, opening her eyes very wide with surprise.

"Yes, he was very much displeased with me at the time," her mother said
with a sigh. "But we will not talk about it; the recollection is very
painful to me."

"No, mamma; but I cannot get over my astonishment, for I thought you were
never naughty, even when you were a little child."

"Quite a mistake, Rosie; I had my naughty times as well as other
children," Mrs. Travilla said, smiling at Rosie's bewildered look. "But
now I want you to promise me, my child, that you will be kind and
forbearing toward poor little motherless Lulu."

"Well, mamma, to please you I will; but I hope she won't try me too much
by impertinence to you or Violet. I don't think I can stand it if she
does.

"Try to win her love, Rosie, and then you may be able to influence her
strongly for good."

"I don't know how to begin, mamma."

"Force your thoughts to dwell on the good points in her character, and
think compassionately of the respects in which she is less fortunate than
yourself, and you will soon find a feeling of love toward her springing up
in your heart; and love begets love. Do her some kindness, daughter, and
that will help you to love her and to gain her love."

"Well, mamma, I shall try if only to please you. But do tell me, did
grandpa punish you very severely when you were naughty?"

"His punishment was seldom anything more severe than the gentle rebuke, 'I
am not pleased with you,' but I think I felt it more than many a child
would a whipping; I did so dearly love my father that his displeasure was
terrible to me."

"Yes, I know you and he love each other dearly yet, and he often says you
were a very good, conscientious little girl."

"But to return to Lulu," said Mrs. Travilla, "I had thought she would be a
nice companion for you, and until this evening I have not seen her show
any naughty temper since the first week she was here."

"No, mamma, she has been quite well-behaved, I believe, and perhaps she
will prove a pleasant companion. I am sorry for her, too, because she
hasn't a dear, wise, kind mother like mine," Rosie added, putting her
arms about her mother's neck, "and because the father, I am sure she loves
very much, must soon go away and leave her."




CHAPTER V.

    "Farewell, God knows when we shall meet again."
                              --Shakespeare.


The next morning the captain and Max were out together on the beach before
Violet and the little girls had left their rooms. The lad liked to be
alone with his father sometimes. He had always been proud and fond of him,
and the past few months of constant intercourse had greatly strengthened
the bonds of affection between them. The boy's heart was sore at thought
of the parting that must soon come, the captain's hardly less so. He
talked very kindly with his son, urging him to make the best use of his
time, talents and opportunities, and grow up to be a good, honorable and
useful man.

"I want to be just such a man as you are, papa," Max said, with an
admiring, affectionate look up into his father's face, and slipping his
hand into his as he spoke.

The captain clasped the hand lovingly in his, and held it fast.

"I hope you will be a better and more talented man, my boy," he said,
"but always remember my most ardent wish is to see you a truly good man, a
Christian, serving God with all your powers."

At this moment a voice behind them said, "Good-mornin', cap'n. I'se got a
lettah hyah for you, sah."

"Ah, good-morning, Ben, and thank you for bringing it," said the captain,
turning round to receive it.

"You's bery welcom, sah," responded Ben, touching his hat respectfully,
then walking away toward Mr. Dinsmore's cottage.

"From Washington," the captain remarked, more to himself than to Max, as
he broke the seal.

Max watched him while he read, then asked, a little tremulously, "Must you
go very soon, papa?"

"Within three days, my boy. But we won't say anything about it until after
prayers, but let Mamma Vi and your sisters enjoy their breakfast in
peace."

"Yes, sir. Papa, I wish I was going with you!"

"But think how your sisters would miss you, Max."

"Yes, sir, I suppose they would. I hadn't thought of that."

"Besides, I want you to take my place to Mamma Vi as nearly as you can,"
added his father, looking smilingly at him.

"O papa, thank you!" cried the boy, his face growing bright with pleased
surprise. "I will try my very best and do all for her that I can."

"I don't doubt it, my son. And now let us go in, for it must be
breakfast-time, I think."

Lulu and Grace ran out to the veranda to meet them with a glad,
"Good-morning, papa," and holding up their faces for a kiss.

It was bestowed heartily, as he stooped and gathered them in his arms,
saying in tender tones, "Good-morning, my dear little daughters."

The breakfast bell was ringing, and they hastened to obey its summons.
They found Violet already in the dining-room, and looking sweet and fresh
as a rose, in a pretty, becoming morning dress.

The captain chatted cheerfully with her and the children while he ate,
seeming to enjoy his beefsteak, muffins and coffee; but Max scarcely
spoke, and occasionally had some difficulty in swallowing his food because
of the lump that would rise in his throat at the thought of the parting
now drawing so near.

Directly after breakfast came family worship. Then as Violet and her
husband stood together before the window looking out upon the sea, he
gave her his Washington letter to read.

She glanced over it, while he put his arm about her waist.

"O Levis, so soon!" she said tremulously, looking up at him with eyes full
of tears, then her head dropped upon his shoulder, and the tears began to
fall.

He soothed her with caresses and low-breathed words of endearment; of
hope, too, that the separation might not be a long one.

"What is it, Max?" whispered Lulu, "has papa got his orders?"

"Yes; and has to be off in less than three days," replied Max, in husky
tones, and hastily brushing away a tear.

Lulu's eyes filled, but by a great effort she kept the tears from falling.

The captain turned toward them. "We are going into the other house,
children," he said. "You can come with us if you wish."

"Yes, sir. Thank you, sir," they said, and Grace ran to her father and put
her hand in his.

They found the Dinsmore and Travilla family all assembled in the parlor,
discussing plans for the day, all of which were upset by the captain's
news.

His ship lay in Boston harbor, and it was promptly decided that they would
all leave to-day for that city, only a few hours' distant.

As the cottages had been rented furnished, and all had for days past held
themselves in readiness for sudden departure, this would afford ample time
for the necessary packing and other arrangements.

All was presently bustle and activity in both houses. Zoe and Edward, with
no painful parting in prospect, made themselves very merry over their
packing. They were much like two children, and except when overcome by the
recollection of her recent bereavement, Zoe was as playful and frolicsome
as a kitten.

"Can I help, Mamma Vi?" asked Lulu, following Violet into her
dressing-room.

Vi considered a moment. "You are a dear child to want to help," she said,
smiling kindly upon the little girl. "I don't think you can pack your
trunk, but you can be of use here by handing me things out of the bureau
drawers and wardrobe. There are so many trunks to pack that I cannot think
of leaving Agnes to do it all."

"My dear," said the captain, coming in at that moment, "you are not to do
anything but sit in that easy-chair and give directions. I flatter myself
that I am quite an expert in this line."

"Can you fold ladies' dresses so that they will carry without rumpling?"
asked Violet, looking up at him with a saucy smile.

"Perhaps not. I can't say I ever tried that. Agnes may do that part of the
work, and I will attend to the rest."

"And may I hand you the things, papa?" asked Lulu.

"Yes, daughter," he said, "I like to see you trying to be useful."

They set to work, Violet looking on with interest. "Why, you are an
excellent packer, Levis," she remarked presently, "far better than I or
Agnes either."

"Thank you," he said, "I am very glad to be able to save you the
exertion."

"And you do it so rapidly," she said. "It would have taken me twice as
long."

"That is partly because I am much stronger, and partly the result of a
good deal of practice. And Lulu is quite a help," he added, with an
affectionate look at her.

She flushed with pleasure. "Are you going to pack the other trunks, papa?
Max's and Grade's and mine? And may I help you with them?" she asked.

"Yes, is my answer to both questions," he returned.

"Where are Max and Gracie?" asked Violet.

"I told Max to take his little sister to the beach, and take care of and
amuse her," the captain said in answer to the question.

"Don't you want to be out at play, too, Lulu?" asked Violet. "I can help
your papa."

"No, ma'am, thank you," the child answered in a quick, emphatic way. "I'd
a great deal rather be with papa to-day than playing."

He gave her a pleased look and smile, and Violet said, "That is nice,
Lulu; I am very glad his children love him so."

"Indeed we do, Mamma Vi! every one of us!" exclaimed Lulu. "Papa knows we
do. Don't you, papa?"

"Yes, I am quite sure of it," he said. "And that my wife is fond of me
also," with a smiling glance at her, "and altogether it makes me a very
happy man."

"As you deserve to be," said Violet, gayly. "Please, sir, will you allow
me to fold my dresses?"

"No, for here comes Agnes," as the maid entered the room, "who, I dare
say, can do it better. Come, Lulu, we will go now to your room."

Violet stayed where she was to direct and assist Agnes, and Lulu was glad,
because she wanted to be alone with her father for a while.

When her trunk was packed he turned to leave the room, but she detained
him. "Papa," she said, clinging to his hand, "I--I want to speak to you."

He sat down and drew her to his side, putting an arm about her waist.
"Well, daughter, what is it?" he asked kindly, stroking the hair back from
her forehead with the other hand.

"Papa, I--I wanted to tell you that I'm sorry for----" she stammered, her
eyes drooping, her cheeks growing crimson.

"Sorry for your former naughtiness and rebellion?" he asked gently, as she
paused, leaving her sentence unfinished.

"Yes, papa, I couldn't bear to let you go away without telling you so
again."

"Well, daughter, it was all forgiven long ago, and you have been a pretty
good girl most of the time since that first sad week."

"Papa, I do want to be good," she said earnestly, "but somehow the badness
will get the better of me."

"Yes; each one of us has an evil nature to fight against," he said, "and
it will get the better of us unless we are very determined and battle with
it, not in our own strength only, but crying mightily for assistance to
Him who has said, 'In me is thine help.'

"We must watch and pray, my child. The Bible bids us keep our hearts with
all diligence, and set a watch at the door of our lips that we sin not
with our tongues. Also to pray without ceasing. We need to cry often to
God for help to overcome the evil that is in our own hearts, and the
snares of the world and the devil, 'who goeth about as a roaring lion
seeking whom he may devour.'"

"Papa," she said, looking up into his face, "do you find it hard to be
good sometimes?"

"Yes, my child; I have the same battle to fight that you have, and I am
the more sorry for you because I know by experience how difficult it
sometimes is to do right."

"And you have to help me by punishing me when I'm naughty, and making me
do as I ought?"

"Yes, and my battle is sometimes for patience with a naughty, disobedient
child."

"I think you were very patient with me that time you kept me shut up so
long in this room," she said. "If I'd been in your place I'd have got a
good switch and whipped my little girl till I made her obey me at once."

"Do you think that would have been the better plan?"

"No, sir. I think you'd have had to 'most kill me before I'd have given
up, but if I'd been in your place I couldn't have had patience to wait."

"You need to cultivate the grace of patience, then," he said gravely. "Now
come with me to Max's room, and let us see if we can pack up his goods and
chattels."

"Papa, I almost think I could pack it myself after watching you pack all
these others."

"Possibly; but I shall do it more quickly, with you to help in getting all
the things together."

Every one was ready in due season for departure, and that night the two
cottages that for months past had been so full of light and life, were
dark, silent and deserted.

Arriving in Boston, the whole party took rooms at one of the principal
hotels. There they spent the night, but the greater part of the next day
was passed on board the captain's vessel.

The day after the parting came; a very hard one for him, his young wife
and children. Little feeble Gracie cried herself sick, and Violet found it
necessary to put aside the indulgence of her own grief in order to comfort
the nearly heart-broken child, who clung to her as she might have done to
her own mother.

Max and Lulu made no loud lament, but their quiet, subdued manner and sad
countenances told of deep and sincere sorrow, and, in truth, they often
felt ready to join in Gracie's oft-repeated cry, "Oh, how can I do without
my dear, dear papa?"

But they were with kind friends. Every one in the party showed them
sympathy, pretty presents were made them, and they were taken to see all
the sights of the city likely to interest them.

Grandma Elsie particularly endeared herself to them at this time by her
motherly tenderness and care, treating them as if they were her own
children.

Their father had given each two parting gifts, a handsome pocket Bible,
with the injunction to commit at least one verse to memory every day, and
a pretty purse with some spending money in it; for he knew they would
enjoy making purchases for themselves when visiting the city stores with
the older people.

So they did; and Lulu, who was generous to a fault, had soon spent her all
in gifts for others; a lovely new doll for Gracie, some books for Max, a
bottle of perfumery for "Mamma Vi," and a toy for Walter.

Violet was much pleased with the present to herself as an evidence of
growing affection. She received it with warm thanks and a loving embrace.
"My dear child, it was very kind in you to think of me!" she said. "It
makes me hope you have really given me a little place in your heart,
dear."

"Oh, yes, Mamma Vi, indeed I have!" cried the little girl, returning the
embrace. "Surely we ought all to love you when you love our dear father so
much, and he loves you, too."

"Certainly," said Max, who was standing by; "we couldn't help loving so
sweet and pretty a lady if she was nothing at all to us and we lived in
the same house with her, and how can we think she's any less nice and
sweet just because she's married to our father?"

"And how can I help loving you because you are the children of my dear
husband?" responded Violet, taking the boy's hand and pressing it warmly
in hers.

Some hours later Violet accidentally overheard part of a conversation
between her little sister Rose and Lulu.

"Yes," Rosie was saying, "mamma gives me fifty cents a week for spending
money."

"Ah, how nice!" exclaimed Lulu. "Papa often gives us some money, but not
regularly, and Max and I have often talked together about how much we
would like to have a regular allowance. I'd be delighted, even if it
wasn't more than ten cents."

Violet had been wishing to give the children something, and trying to find
out what would be most acceptable, so was greatly pleased with the hint
given her by this little speech of Lulu's.

The child came presently to her side to bid her good-night. Violet put an
arm around her, and kissing her affectionately, said, "Lulu, I have been
thinking you might like to have an allowance of pocket money, as Rosie
has. Would you?"

"O Mamma Vi! I'd like it better than anything else I can think of!" cried
the little girl, her face sparkling with delight.

"Then you shall have it and begin now," Violet said, taking out her purse
and putting two bright silver quarters into Lulu's hand.

"Oh, thank you, mamma, how good and kind in you!" cried the child.

"Max shall have the same," said Violet, "and Gracie half as much for the
present. When she is a little older it shall be doubled. Don't you want
the pleasure of telling Max, and taking this to him?" she asked, putting
another half dollar into Lulu's hand.

"Oh yes, ma'am! Thank you very much!"

Max was on the farther side of the room--a good-sized parlor of the hotel
where they were staying--very much absorbed in a story-book; Lulu
approached him softly, a gleeful smile on her lips and in her eyes, and
laid his half dollar on the open page.

"What's that for?" he asked, looking round at her.

"For you; and you're to have as much every week, Mamma Vi says."

"O Lu! am I, really?"

"Yes; I too; and Gracie's to have a quarter."

"Oh, isn't it splendid!" he cried, and hurried to Violet to pour out his
thanks.

Grandma Elsie, seated on the sofa by Violet's side, shared with her the
pleasure of witnessing the children's delight.

Our friends had now spent several days in Boston, and the next morning
they left for Philadelphia, where they paid a short visit to relatives.
This was their last halt on the journey home to Ion.




CHAPTER VI.

    "--to the guiltless heart, where'er we roam,
     No scenes delight us like our much-loved home."
                          --Robert Hillhouse.


Elsie and her children had greatly enjoyed their summer at the North, but
now were filled with content and happiness at the thought of soon seeing
again their loved home at Ion, while Max and Lulu looked forward with
pleasing anticipations and eager curiosity to their first sight of it,
having heard various glowing descriptions of it from "Mamma Vi" and Rosie.

Their father, too, had spoken of it as a home so delightful that they
ought to feel the liveliest gratitude for having been invited to share its
blessings.

It was looking very beautiful, very inviting, on the arrival of our
travellers late in the afternoon of a warm, bright October day.

The woods and the trees that bordered the avenue were in the height of
their autumn glory, the gardens gay with many flowers of the most varied
and brilliant hues, and the lengthening shadows slept on a still green
and velvety lawn.

As their carriage turned into the avenue, Elsie bent an affectionate,
smiling look upon Max and Lulu, and taking a hand of each, said in
sweetest tones, "Welcome to your new home, my dears, and may it prove to
you a very, very happy one."

"Thank you, ma'am," they both responded, Max adding, "I am very glad,
Grandma Elsie, that I am to live with you and Mamma Vi."

"I, too," said Lulu; "and in such a pretty place. Oh, how lovely
everything does look!"

The air was delightful, and doors and windows stood wide open. On the
veranda a welcoming group was gathered. Elsie's brother and sister--Horace
Dinsmore, Jr., of the Oaks, and Mrs. Rose Lacey from the Laurels--and her
cousins Calhoun and Arthur Conly; while a little in the rear of them were
the servants, all--from old Uncle Joe, now in his ninety-fifth year, down
to Betty, his ten-year-old great-granddaughter--showing faces full of
eager delight.

They stood back respectfully till greetings had been exchanged between
relatives and friends, then pressed forward with their words of welcome,
sure of a shake of the hand and kind word from each member of the family.

Mr. Dinsmore held little Gracie in his arms. She was much fatigued and
exhausted by the long journey.

"Here is a patient for you, Arthur," he said, "and I am very glad you are
here to attend to her."

"Yes," said Violet, "her father charged me to put her in your care."

"Then let her be put immediately to bed," said Arthur, after a moment's
scrutiny of the child. "Give her to me, uncle, and I will carry her
up-stairs."

"To my room," added Violet.

But the child shrunk from the stranger, and clung to Mr. Dinsmore.

"No, thank you, I will take her up myself," he said. "I am fully equal to
it," and he moved on through the hall and up the broad stairway, Violet
and the doctor following.

The others presently scattered to their rooms to rid themselves of the
dust of travel and dress for the evening.

"Well, little wife, is it nice to be at home again?" Edward asked, with a
smiling look at Zoe, as they entered their apartments.

"Yes, indeed!" she cried, sending a swift glance around the neat and
tastefully furnished room, "especially such a home, and to be shared with
such nice people; one in particular who shall be nameless," she added,
with an arch look and smile.

"One who hopes you will never tire of his company, as he never expects to
of yours," returned Edward, catching her in his arms and snatching a kiss
from her full red lips.

"Now don't," she said, pushing him away, "just wait till I've washed the
dust from my face. Here come our trunks," as two of the men servants
brought them in, "and you must tell me what dress to put on."

"You look so lovely in any and every one of the dozen or more that I have
small choice in the matter," laughed the young husband.

"What gross flattery!" she exclaimed. "Well, then, I suppose I'll have to
choose for myself. But you mustn't complain if I do that some time when
you don't want me to."

The two Elsies had lingered a little behind the others--the old servants
had so many words of welcome to say to them--the younger one in especial,
because she had been so far and so long away.

And the babe must be handed about from one to another, kissed and blessed
and remarked upon as to his real or fancied resemblance to this or that
older member of the family.

"It do 'pear pow'ful strange, Miss Elsie, dat you went away young lady and
come back wid husband and baby," remarked Aunt Dicey. "And it don't seem
but yistiday dat you was a little bit ob a gal."

"Yes, I have come back a great deal richer than I went," Elsie returned,
with a glance of mingled love and joy, first at her husband, then at her
infant son. "I have great reason to be thankful."

At that moment Mrs. Travilla became aware that Max and Lulu were lingering
near, as if not knowing exactly what to do with themselves.

"Ah, my dears," she said, turning to them with a kind and pleasant look,
"has no one attended to you? Come with me, and I will show you your
rooms."

They followed her up the stairs, and each was shown into a very pleasant
room furnished tastefully and with every comfort and convenience.

Lulu's had two doors, one opening into the hall, the other into her
mamma's bedroom.

Elsie explained this, adding, "So, if you are in want of anything or
should feel frightened or lonely in the night, you can run right in to the
room where you will find your mamma and Gracie."

"Yes, ma'am, that is very nice; and oh, what a pretty room! How kind and
good you are to me! and to my brother and sister, too!" cried Lulu, her
eyes shining with gratitude and pleasure.

"I am very glad to be able to do it," Elsie said, taking the little
girl's hand in one of hers and smoothing her hair caressingly with the
other--for Lulu had taken off her hat. "I want to be a mother to you, dear
child, and to your brother and sister, since my dear daughter is too young
for so great care and responsibility. I love you all, and I want you to
come freely to me with all your troubles and perplexities, your joys and
sorrows, just as my own children have always done. I want you to feel that
you have a right to do so, because I have invited you."

She bent down and kissed Lulu's lips, and the little girl threw her arms
about her neck with impulsive warmth, saying, "Dear Grandma Elsie, I love
you and thank you ever so much! And I mean to try ever so hard to be
good," she added, with a blush and hanging her head shamefacedly. "I know
I'm often very naughty; papa said I gave him more anxiety than Max and
Gracie both put together; and I'm afraid I can't be good all the time, but
I do mean to try hard."

"Well, dear, if you try with all your might, asking help from on high, you
will succeed at last," Elsie said. "And now I will leave you to wash and
dress. I see your trunk has been brought up and opened, so that you will
have no difficulty."

With that she passed on into Violet's rooms to see how Gracie was. She
found her sleeping sweetly in Violet's bed, the latter bending over her
with a very tender, motherly look on her fair young face.

"Is she not a darling, mamma?" she whispered, turning her head at the
sound of her mother's light footstep.

"She is a very engaging child," replied Elsie. "I think we are all fond of
her, but you especially."

"Yes, mamma, I love her for herself--her gentle, affectionate
disposition--but still more because she is my husband's child, his dear
baby girl, as he so often called her."

"Ah, I can understand that," Elsie said, with a loving though rather sad
look and smile into Violet's azure eyes, "for I have often felt just so in
regard to my own children. What does Arthur say about her?"

"That she is more in need of rest and sleep than anything else at present.
He will see her again to-morrow, and will probably be able then to give me
full directions in regard to her diet and so forth."

"You will come down to supper? you will not think it necessary to stay
with her yourself?" Elsie said inquiringly.

"Oh, no, mamma! I shall dress at once. I should not like to miss being
with you all," Violet answered, moving away from the bedside. "Ah!" with
sudden recollection, "I have been quite forgetting Max and Lulu."

"I have seen them to their rooms," her mother said, "and now I must go and
attend to Rosie and Walter, and to my own toilet."

"Dear mamma, thank you!" Violet said heartily.

"My dear, I consider them quite as much my children, and therefore my
especial charge, as yours, perhaps a trifle more," Elsie returned with
sprightly look and tone as she left the room.

Agnes was in attendance on her young mistress, and was presently sent to
ask if Lulu was in need of help, and to say that her mamma would like to
see her before she went down-stairs.

"I don't need anything till I'm ready to have my sash tied," answered
Lulu, "and then I'll come in to Mamma Vi and you to have it done. She was
very good to send you, Agnes, and you to come."

"La! chile, it's jus' my business to mind Miss Wilet," returned Agnes.
"An' she's good to eberybody, ob cose--always was."

"What did you want to see me for, Mamma Vi?" asked Lulu, as she presently
entered her young stepmother's dressing-room.

"Just to make sure that your hair and dress are all right, dear. You know
we have company to-night, and I am particularly anxious that my little
Lulu shall look her very best."

The child's face flushed with pleasure. She liked to be well and
becomingly dressed, and it was gratifying to have Mamma Vi care that she
should be. Mrs. Scrimp was so different; she had never cared whether
Lulu's attire was tasteful and becoming or quite the reverse, but always
roused the child's indignation by telling her it was all sufficient if she
were only neat and clean.

"Am I all right?" she asked.

"Pretty nearly; we will have you quite so in a minute," Violet answered.
"Tie her sash Agnes, and smooth down the folds of her dress."

"Mamma Vi, is that strange lady any relation to you?" asked Lulu.

"Yes, she is my aunt, mamma's sister."

"She is pretty, but not nearly so pretty as Grandma Elsie."

"No; I have always thought no one else could be half so beautiful as
mamma."

"Why, Mamma Vi, you are yourself!" exclaimed Lulu in a tone of honest
sincerity that made Violet laugh.

"That is just your notion, little girl," she said, giving the child a
kiss.

"Oh, I have eyes and can see! besides, papa thinks so, too, and Max and
Gracie."

"Yes, my dear husband! he loves me, and love is very blind," murmured Vi,
half to herself, with a sigh and a far-off look in the lovely azure eyes.
Her thoughts were following him over the deep, wide, treacherous sea.

She stole on tiptoe into the next room for another peep at his sleeping
baby girl, Lulu going with her; then hearing the tea-bell, they went down
to the dining-room together.

They gathered about the table, a large cheerful party, the travellers full
of satisfaction in being at home again, the others so glad to have them
there once more.

Zoe was very merry and Rosie in almost wild spirits, but Max and Lulu, to
whom all was new and strange, were quite quiet and subdued, scarcely
speaking except when spoken to, "Mamma," Rosie said, when they had
adjourned to the parlor, "it's lovely out of doors, bright moonlight and
not a bit cold; mayn't I take Max and Lulu down to the lakelet?"

"Do you think the evening air would be injurious to them, Arthur?" Mrs.
Travilla asked, turning to her cousin.

"I think there is malaria in it, and would advise them to stay within
doors until after breakfast to-morrow morning," he answered, drawing Rose
to a seat upon his knee.

"Then you'd better let us go," she said archly, "so you can have some
more patients. Don't you like to have plenty of patients?"

"That's a leading question, little coz," he said laughingly, toying with
her curls. "When people are sick I like to have an opportunity to exercise
my skill in trying to relieve and cure them, but I hope I don't want them
made sick in order to furnish me with employment."

"I want to show Lulu and Max the beauties of Ion, and don't know how to
wait till to-morrow," she said.

"Then take them about from one room to another, and let them look out
through the windows upon its moonlit lawn, alleys, gardens and lakelet."

"Oh, yes, yes! that will do!" she cried, leaving his knee in haste to
carry out his suggestion.

Max and Lulu, nothing loath, accepted her invitation, and they ran in and
out, up stairs and down, the young strangers delighted with the views thus
obtained of their new home and its surroundings.

Rosie said she hoped they would not be required to begin lessons
immediately, but would be allowed a few days in which to enjoy walks,
rides, drives, and boating.

"I'll ask grandpa and mamma if we may," she added, as they re-entered the
parlor. She hastened to present her petition, and it was granted; the
children were told they should have a week in which to enjoy themselves
and recover from the fatigue of their journey, and would be expected to
show their appreciation of the indulgence by great industry afterward.

Lulu was standing a little apart from the rest, gazing out of the window
upon the moonlit lawn, when a step drew near; then some one took her by
the arm, and in a twinkling she found herself seated upon a gentleman's
knee.

Looking up into his face, she saw that it was Mr. Horace Dinsmore who had
thus taken possession of her.

"Well, my little dark-eyed lassie," he said, "no one has thought it worth
while to introduce us, but we won't let that hinder our making
acquaintance. Do you know who I am?"

"I heard Rosie call you Uncle Horace."

"Then suppose you follow Rosie's example. If you are as good as you are
bonny, I shall be proud to claim you as my niece."

"But I'm not," she said frankly. Then hastily correcting herself, "I don't
mean to say I'm bonny, but I'm not good. Aunt Beulah used to say I was the
worst child she ever saw."

"Indeed! you are honest, at all events," he said, with a look of
amusement. "And who is Aunt Beulah?"

"The person Gracie and I lived with before papa got married to Mamma Vi."

"Ah! well I shall not regard her opinion, but wait and form one for
myself, and I shall certainly be much surprised if you don't turn out a
pattern good girl, now that you are to live with my sweet sister Elsie. In
the mean while, will it please you to call me Uncle Horace?"

"Yes, sir, since you ask me to," Lulu replied, looking much gratified.

At this moment the door opened, and Mr. Lacey walked in. He had come for
his wife, and when he and the others had exchanged greetings, she rose to
make ready for departure.

Calhoun Conly rose also, saying to his brother, "Well, Art, perhaps it
would be as well for us to go, too; our friends must be tired after their
long journey, and will want to get to bed early."

"Suppose you all delay a little and unite with us in evening family
worship," said Mr. Dinsmore. "It is a good while since I have had all
three of my children present with me at such a service."

All complied with his request, and immediately afterward took leave. Then
with an exchange of affectionate good-nights the family separated and
scattered to their rooms.

Lulu was not quite ready for bed when Violet came in, and putting her arm
around her, asked, with a gentle kiss, "Do you feel strange and lonely in
this new place, little girl?"

"Oh, no, Mamma Vi! it seems such a nice home that I am very glad to be in
it."

"That is right," Violet said, repeating her caress. "I hope you will sleep
well and wake refreshed. I shall leave the door open between your room and
mine, so that you need not feel timid, and can run right in to me whenever
you wish. Good-night, dear."

"Good-night, Mamma Vi. Thank you for being so good to me, and to Gracie
and Max," Lulu said, clinging to her in an affectionate way.

"My child," returned Violet, "how could I be anything else to the children
of my dear husband? Ah, I must go! Mamma calls me," she added, hurrying
away as a soft, sweet voice was heard coming from the adjoining room.

Lulu finished undressing, said her prayers, and had just laid her head on
her pillow, when some one glided noiselessly to the bedside and a soft
hand passed caressingly over her hair.

The child opened her eyes, which had already closed in sleep, and saw by
the moonlight a sweet and beautiful face bending lovingly over her.

"Grandma Elsie," she murmured sleepily.

"Yes, dear. Rosie and Walter never like to go to sleep without a
good-night kiss from mamma, and you must have the same now, as you are to
be one of my dear children."

Lulu, now wide awake, started up to put both arms round the neck of her
visitor. "Oh, I do love you!" she said, "and I'll try hard to be a good
child to you."

"I believe it, dear," Elsie said, pressing the child to her heart. "Will
you join my children in their half-hour with mamma in her dressing-room
before breakfast? I shall be glad to have you, but you must do just as you
please about it."

"Thank you, ma'am; I'll come," said Lulu.

"That is right. Now lie down and go to sleep. You need a long night's
rest."




CHAPTER VII.

    "Her fancy followed him through foaming wares
     To distant shores."
                                --Cowper.


Violet in her night-dress and with her beautiful hair unbound and hanging
about her like a golden cloud, stood before her dressing-table, gazing
through a mist of unshed tears upon a miniature which she held in her
hand.

"Ah, where are you now, love?" she sighed half aloud.

Her mother's voice answered close at her side, in gentle, tender accents,
"In God's keeping, my darling. He is the God of the sea as well as of the
land."

"Yes, mamma, and his God as well as mine," Violet responded, looking up
and smiling through her tears. "Ah, what comfort in both assurances, and
in the precious promise, 'Behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in
all places whither thou goest.' It is his and it is mine."

"Yes, dearest. I feel for you in your loneliness," her mother said,
putting her arms around her. "Elsie is very happy in her husband and
baby, Edward in his wife; they need me but little, comparatively, but you
and I must draw close together and be a comfort and support to each other;
shall we not, my love?"

"Yes, indeed, dearest mamma. Oh, what a comfort and blessing you are to
me, and always have been! And I am happier and less lonely for having my
husband's children with me, especially my darling little Gracie. I feel
that in caring for her and nursing her back to health I shall be adding to
his happiness."

"As no doubt you will," her mother said. "It will be a pleasure to me to
help you care for her, and the others also. Now, good-night, daughter; we
both ought to be in bed."

Violet presently stretched herself beside the sleeping Gracie with a
murmured word of endearment drew the child closer to her, and in another
moment was sharing her slumbers.

When she awoke the sun was shining, and the first object her eyes rested
upon was the little face by her side. The pallor and look of exhaustion it
had worn the night before were quite gone, a faint tinge of pink had even
stolen into the cheeks.

Violet noted the change with a feeling of relief and thankfulness, and
raising herself upon her elbow, touched her lips lightly to the white
forehead.

The child's eyes flew open and with a sweet engaging smile, she asked,
"Have you been lying beside me all night, mamma?"

"Yes, Gracie. You have had a long sleep, dear; do you feel quite rested?"

"Yes, mamma, I feel very well. This is such a nice soft bed, and I like to
sleep with you. May I always?"

"For all winter, I think, dear. I like to have your papa's baby girl by my
side."

"I'm very much obliged to him for finding me such a sweet, pretty new
mamma. I told him so one day," remarked the child innocently, putting an
arm about Vi's neck.

"Did you?" Violet asked with an amused smile; "and what did he say?"

"Nothing; he just smiled and hugged me tight and kissed me ever so many
times. Do you know what made him do that, mamma?"

"Because he likes to have us love one another. And so we will, won't we,
dear?"

"Yes, indeed! Mamma, I feel a little hungry."

"I'm glad to hear it, for here comes Agnes with a glass of nice rich milk
for you. And when you have drunk it she will wash and dress you. We will
all have to hurry a little to be ready in good time for breakfast," she
added, springing from the bed and beginning her toilet. "Grandpa Dinsmore
never likes to have us late."

"Miss Rosie and Miss Lulu's up and dressed and gone into Miss Elsie's
room, Miss Wilet," remarked Agnes, holding the tumbler she had brought to
Gracie's lips.

"Ah, that is well," said Violet, with a pleased look. "Lulu has stolen a
march on us, Gracie."

The week that followed their arrival at Ion was a delightful one to all,
especially the children, who had scarce anything to do but enjoy
themselves. The weather was all that could be desired, and they walked,
rode, drove, boated, fished, and went nutting.

Mr. Dinsmore and Edward were every day more or less busied with the
affairs of the plantation, but some one of the older people could always
find time to be with the children, while Zoe never failed to make one of
the party, and seemed almost as much a child as any of the younger ones.

Every nook on the plantation and in its neighborhood was explored, and
visits were paid to Fairview, the Laurels, the Pines, the Oaks, Roselands
and Ashlands; the dwellers at each place having first called upon the
family at Ion.

Both Max and Lulu had long desired to learn to ride on horseback, and
great was their delight on learning that now this wish could be gratified.

A pony was always at the service of each, and lessons in the art of
sitting and managing it were given them, now by Mr. Dinsmore and now by
Edward, who was a great admirer of his brother-in-law, Captain Raymond,
had become much attached to him, and took a very kindly interest in his
children.

Gracie was given a share in all the pleasures for which she was considered
strong enough, and when not able to go with the others on their
expeditions, was well entertained at home with toys and books filled with
pictures and stories suited to her age.

Both Elsie and Violet watched over the little girl with true motherly love
and care; she warmly returning the affection of both, but clinging
especially to Violet, her "pretty new mamma."

Gracie was a docile little creature, and seemed very happy in her new
life. She was deeply interested in the riding lessons of her brother and
sister, and when, near the end of the week, Dr. Arthur, to whom she was
becoming much attached, set her on the back of a Shetland pony and led it
about the grounds for a few minutes, promising her longer rides as her
strength increased, she was almost speechless with happiness.

With the second week lessons began for the children. Each task had its
appointed hour, and they were required to be as systematic, punctual and
well prepared for recitations as pupils in an ordinary school, but at the
same time great care was taken that neither mind nor body should be
overtaxed, and they enjoyed many liberties and indulgences which could not
have been granted elsewhere than at home.

The mornings were spent by Rosie and Lulu in the school-room in study and
recitation, under the supervision of either "Grandma Elsie" or "Mamma Vi."

Grace and Walter would be there also at the start, but their short and
easy tasks having been attended to, they might stay and amuse themselves
quietly, or if inclined for noisy sport, go to the nursery or play-room to
enjoy it there.

Max conned his lessons alone in his own room, joining the others only when
the hour arrived for reciting to Mr. Dinsmore, who took sole charge of his
education, and of the two little girls, so far as concerned Latin and
arithmetic. Rosie and Max were together in both these studies, but
Lulu--because of being younger and not so far advanced--was alone in both,
much to her dissatisfaction, for she was by no means desirous to have Mr.
Dinsmore's attention concentrated upon herself for even a short space of
time.

His keen dark eyes seemed to look her through and through, and though he
had never shown her any sternness, she was quite sure he could and would
if she gave him any occasion.

But for that there was no necessity, his requirements being always
reasonable and only such as she was fully capable of meeting. She had a
good mind, quick discernment and retentive memory, and she was quite
resolved to be industrious and to keep her promise to her father to be a
good girl in every way. Also her ambition was aroused to attempt to
overtake her brother and Rosie.

She was moderately fond of study, but had a decided repugnance to plain
sewing, therefore looked ill-pleased enough upon discovering that it was
to be numbered among her daily tasks.

"I hate sewing!" she said with a scowl, "and when I'm old enough to do as
I please, I'll never touch a needle and thread."

It was afternoon of their first school day, and the little girls had just
repaired to the school-room in obedience to directions given them on their
dismissal for the morning.

All the ladies of the family were there, gathered cosily about the fire
and the table at which Grandma Elsie was busily cutting out garments that
seemed to be intended for a child, yet were of coarser, heavier material
than any of the family were accustomed to wearing.

"Perhaps you may change your mind by that time," she answered Lulu, with
pleasant tone and smile; "and I hope you will find it more agreeable now
than you expect. You are a kind-hearted little girl, I know, and when I
tell you these clothes are for a little Indian girl who needs them sadly,
I am quite sure you will be glad to help in making them."

Lulu's brow cleared. "Yes, ma'am," she said with a little hesitation, "if
I could sew nicely, but I can't."

"The more need to learn then, dear. Mamma Vi is basting a seam for you,
and will show you how to sew it."

"And when we all get started there'll be some nice story read aloud, won't
there, mamma?" asked Rosie.

"Yes; your sister Elsie will be the reader to-day, and the book Scott's
'Lady of the Lake.'"

"Oh, how nice!" cried Rosie in delight; "it's such a lovely book, and
sister Elsie's such a beautiful reader."

"In my little sister's opinion," laughed Mrs. Leland.

"And that of all present, I presume," said "Grandma Rose."

"I am fortunate in having so appreciative an audience," returned Elsie
gayly.

Lulu had accepted a mute invitation to take a seat by Violet's side.

"Mamma Vi," she whispered with heightened color, "I can't sew as well as
Gracie, and I'm ashamed to have anybody see my poor work."

"Never mind, dear, we won't show your first attempts, and you will find
this coarse, soft muslin easy to learn on," Violet answered in the same
low tone. "See, this is the way," taking a few stitches. "Your father told
me he wanted his dear little girls to learn every womanly accomplishment,
and I feel sure you will do your best to please him. Take pains, and you
may be able to send him some specimen of your work as a Christmas gift.
Would you not enjoy that?"

"Yes, ma'am, yes indeed!" returned the little girl, setting resolutely to
work.

"Mamma," said Gracie, coming to Violet's other side, "mayn't I have some
work, too? I like sewing better than Lulu does. Aunt Beulah taught me to
overseam and to hem."

"Then you may help us, little girlie," Violet said, kissing the little
fair cheek, "but must stop the minute you begin to feel fatigued; for I
must not let papa's baby girl wear out her small strength."

Presently, all having been supplied with work, the reading began. Every
one seemed able to listen with enjoyment except Lulu, who bent over her
task with frowning face, making her needle go in and out with impatient
pushes and jerks.

Violet watched the performance furtively for a few minutes, then gently
taking the work from her, said in a pleasant undertone, "You are getting
your stitches too long and too far apart, dear. We will take them out, and
you shall try again."

"I can't do it right! I'll never succeed, if I try ever so hard!" muttered
Lulu, impatiently.

"Oh, yes, you will," returned Violet with an encouraging smile. "Keep
trying, and you will be surprised to find how easy it will grow."

The second attempt was quite an improvement upon the first, and under
Violet's pleased look and warm praise Lulu's ruffled temper smoothed down,
and the ugly frown left her face.

In the mean while Gracie was handling her needle with the quiet ease of
one accustomed to its use, making tiny even stitches that quite surprised
her new mamma.

With all her faults Lulu was incapable of envy or jealousy, especially
toward her dearly loved brother and sister, and when at the close of the
sewing hour Gracie's work was handed about from one to another, receiving
hearty commendation, no one was better pleased than Lulu.

"Isn't it nice, Grandma Elsie?" she said, glancing at her little sister
with a flush of pride in her skill, "a great deal better than I can do,
though she's two years younger."

"It's only because I couldn't run about and play like Lulu, and so I just
sat beside Aunt Beulah and learned to hem and back-stitch and run and
overseam," said Gracie. "But Lulu can do everything else better than I
can."

"And she will soon equal you in that, I trust," said Violet, with an
affectionate glance from one to the other; "I am quite sure she will if
she continues to try as she has done to-day. And it makes my heart rejoice
to see how you love one another, dear children."

"I think everybody loves Gracie, because she's hardly ever naughty," said
Lulu; "I wish I'd been made so."




CHAPTER VIII.

    "Where'er I roam, whatever realms to see,
     My heart untravelled fondly turns to thee."
                            --Goldsmith.


"How very pretty, Zoe!" said Violet, examining her young sister-in-law's
work, a piece of black satin upon which she was embroidering leaves and
flowers in bright-colored silks.

"Oh, isn't it!" cried Lulu, in delighted admiration. "Mamma Vi, I'd like
to learn that kind of sewing."

"So you shall, dear, some day; but mamma's theory is that plain sewing
should be thoroughly mastered first. That has been her plan with all her
children, and Rosie has done scarcely any fancy work yet."

"But mamma has promised to let me learn all I can about it this winter,"
remarked Rosie, with much satisfaction.

"Mamma," Zoe said, with a blush, "I'm afraid I ought to join your
plain-sewing class. I should be really ashamed to exhibit any of my work
in that line."

"Well, dear child, I shall be glad to receive you as a pupil if you
desire it," Elsie returned, giving her a motherly glance and smile.

"Hark!" exclaimed Zoe, hastily gathering up her work, her cheeks rosy and
eyes sparkling with pleasure. "I hear Edward's step and voice," and she
tripped out of the room.

"How fond she is of him!" Violet remarked, looking after her with a
pleased smile.

"Yes," said her mother, "it does my heart good to see how they love each
other. And I think we are all growing fond of Zoe."

"Yes, indeed, mamma!" came in chorus from her three daughters.

"I'm sure we are; my husband and I as well as the rest," added Mrs.
Dinsmore.

"And, Vi," said Elsie Leland laughingly, "I really think mamma's new sons
are as highly appreciated in the family as her new daughter, and that all
three doat upon their new mother. Mamma, Lester says you are a pattern
mother-in-law, and I answer, 'Of course; mamma is a pattern in every
relation in life.'"

"My child, don't allow yourself to become a flatterer," returned her
mother gravely.

"Zoe, Zoe, where are you?" Edward was calling from below.

"Here," she answered, running down to meet him. "I've been in the
school-room with mamma and the others," she added, as she gained his
side, and looking up brightly into his face as she spoke.

"Ah," he said, bending down to kiss the ruby lips. "I thought you were to
be my pupil."

"Oh, so I am! except in purely feminine accomplishments. See!" holding up
her work. "I've been busy with this. It was the sewing hour, and sister
Elsie read aloud to us while we worked."

"Ah, yes! I have been reader many a time while mamma and sisters plied the
needle."

"How nice! you are such a beautiful reader! But she is almost as good."

"Not only almost, but altogether," he returned gayly as he held open the
door of her boudoir for her to enter, then followed her in. "I've come now
to hear your recitations. I suppose you are quite prepared," he added,
drawing up a chair for her, and glancing at a pile of books lying on the
table.

"No," she said, coloring and dropping her eyes with a slightly mortified
air. "I meant to be, but so many things happened to interfere. I had a
letter to write, then some ladies called, and then----"

"Well?" he said interrogatively, as she paused, coloring still more
deeply.

"I wanted to finish the book I was reading last night. I really couldn't
fix my thoughts on stupid lessons until I knew what became of the
heroine."

Edward, standing by her side and looking down at her, shook his head
gravely. "Duties should be attended to first, Zoe, pleasures indulged in
afterward."

"You are talking to me as if I were nothing but a child!" she cried
indignantly, her cheeks growing hot.

"The dearest, most lovable child in the world," he said, bending down to
stroke her hair and look into her face with laughing eyes.

"No, sir, I'm your wife. What did you marry me for if you considered me
such a child?" she cried with a half pout on her lip, but love-light in
the eyes lifted to his.

"Because I loved you and wanted the right to take care of you, my bonny
belle," he said, repeating his caress.

"And you do, the best care in the world, you dear boy!" she exclaimed
impulsively, throwing her arms about his neck. "And if it will please you,
I'll set to work at the lessons now."

"Then do, love; I have letters to write, and we will sit here and work
side by side."

Both worked diligently for an hour or more; they had a merry time over the
recitations, then drove together to the nearest village to post Edward's
letters and get the afternoon mail for Ion.

Violet was made happy by a long letter from her husband.

She had barely time to glance over it, learning when and where it was
written, and that he was well at the time of writing, when the tea-bell
rang.

She slipped the precious missive into her pocket with a little sigh of
satisfaction, and joined the others at the table with a very bright and
happy face.

She had not been the only fortunate one; her mother had cheering news from
Herbert and Harold, Mrs. Dinsmore some sprightly, gossipy letters from her
sisters Adelaide and May, whose contents furnished topics of lively
discourse, in which Violet took part.

She had not mentioned her own letter, but at length Edward, noting the
brightness of her countenance, asked, "Good news from the captain, Vi?"

"Yes, thank you," she said; "he was well and seemingly in excellent
spirits at the time of writing, though he says he misses wife and children
sorely."

All three of his children turned toward her with eager, questioning looks,
Max and Lulu asking, "Didn't papa write to us, too?"

"He sends you a message, dears," Violet said. "I have not really read the
letter yet, but shall do so after supper, and you shall all surely have
your share of it."

On leaving the table they followed her to the door of her boudoir.

"May we come in, Mamma Vi?" Max asked, with a wistful look.

"Certainly," she answered in a pleasant tone, though longing to be quite
alone while giving her precious letter its first perusal; "I would have
you feel as free to come into my apartments as I always have felt to go
into mamma's. Sit down and make yourselves comfortable, dears, and you
shall hear presently what your papa says.

"The letter was written on shipboard, brought into New York by another
vessel and there mailed to me."

Max politely drew up a chair near the light for Violet, another for Lulu,
placed Gracie's own little rocker close to her mamma's side, then stood
behind it prepared to give close attention to the reading of his father's
letter.

Violet omitted a little here and there--expressions of tender affection
for herself, or something else evidently intended for her eye alone. The
captain wrote delightful letters; at least they were such in the esteem of
his wife and children. This one provoked to both laughter and tears, he
had so amusing a way of relating trivial incidents, and some passages were
so tenderly affectionate.

But something near the close brought an anxious, troubled look to Max's
face, a frown to Lulu's brow.

It was this: "Tell Max and Lulu I wish each of them to keep a diary for my
inspection, writing down every evening what have been the doings and
happenings of the day as regards themselves--their studies, their
pleasures, their conduct also. Max telling of himself, Lulu of herself,
just as they would if sitting on my knee and answering the questions,
'What have you been busy about to-day? Have you been attentive to your
studies, respectful and obedient to those in charge of you? Have you tried
to do your duty toward God and man?'

"They need not show any one at Ion what they write. I shall trust to their
truthfulness and honesty not to represent themselves as better than they
are, not to hide their faults from the father who cares to know of them,
only that he may help his dear children to live right and be happy. Ah, if
they but knew how I love them! and how it grieves and troubles me when
they go astray!"

Max's face brightened at those closing sentences, Lulu's softened for a
moment, but then, as Violet folded the letter, "I don't want to!" she
burst out. "Why does papa say we must do such things?"

"He tells you, dear; did you not notice?" said Violet. "He says he wishes
to know your faults in order to help you to correct them. And don't you
think it will help you to avoid wrongdoing? to resist temptation? the
remembrance that it must be confessed to your dear father and will grieve
him very much? Is it not kind in him to be willing to bear that pain for
the sake of doing you good?"

Lulu did not answer, but Max said, "Yes, indeed, Mamma Vi! and oh, I hope
I'll never have to make his heart ache over my wrongdoings! But I don't
know how to keep a diary."

"Nor I either," added Lulu.

"But you can learn, dears," Violet said. "I will help you at the start.
You can each give a very good report of to-day's conduct, I am sure.

"The keeping of a diary will be very improving to you in a literary way,
teaching you to express your thoughts readily in writing, and that, I
presume, is one thing your father has in view."

"But it will be just like writing compositions; and that I always did
_hate_!" cried Lulu vehemently.

"No, not exactly," said Max; "because you don't have to make up anything,
only to tell real happenings and doings that you haven't had time to
forget."

"And I think you will soon find it making the writing of compositions
easier," remarked Violet, with an encouraging smile.

"It'll be just the same as having to write a composition every day,"
grumbled Lulu. "I wish papa wouldn't be so hard on us. I have to study
lessons a whole hour every evening, and then it'll take ever so long to
write that, and I shall not have a bit of time to play."

"I wish I could write," little Gracie said, with a half sigh. "If I could,
I'd like to talk that way to papa."

"You shall learn, darling," Violet said, caressing her with gentle
fondness. "Would you like to begin now?"

"Oh, yes, mamma!" cried the child eagerly.

"Then bring me your slate, and I will set you a copy. Max and Lulu, would
you like to bring your writing-desks in here, and let me give you any help
you may need?"

Both assented to the proposal with thanks, and were presently seated near
her, each with open desk, a fresh sheet of paper spread out upon it, and
pen in hand.

"I think that until you are a little used to the business, it would be
well to compose first with a pencil, then copy in ink," remarked Violet.
"And here," taking it from a drawer in her writing-desk, as she spoke,
"is some printing paper which takes pencil mark much better than the more
highly glazed paper which we use ordinarily in writing letters."

She gave each of them a pile of neatly cut sheets and a nicely sharpened
pencil.

They thanked her, and Max set to work at once.

Lulu sat playing with her pencil, her eyes on the carpet. "I don't know
how to begin!" she exclaimed presently in an impatient tone. "What shall I
say first, Mamma Vi?"

"Write down the date and then--Suppose you dictate to me, if that will be
any easier."

"Thank you, ma'am, I think it would till I get into the way of it," Lulu
said, handing over her paper and pencil with a sigh of relief.

"Now," said Violet, encouragingly, "just imagine that you are sitting on
your papa's knee and answering the question, 'What have you been doing all
day?'"

"As soon as I was dressed and ready for breakfast, I went to Grandma
Elsie's dressing-room, along with Rosie and the others, to say Bible
verses, and hear Grandma Elsie talk about them and pray. Will that do,
Mamma Vi?"

"Very nicely, dear; it is just what your papa wants, I think."

Lulu's brow cleared, and she went on stating briefly the doings of the now
closing day in the due order of their succession, Violet's pen nearly
keeping pace with her tongue.

"And here we are--Max and Gracie and I--sitting with Mamma Vi in her
boudoir, and she is writing for me the words I tell her, and I'm to copy
them off to-morrow," was the concluding sentence of this first entry in
the little girl's diary.

"Will you hear mine, Mamma Vi, and tell me if it will do?" asked Max; and
receiving permission read it aloud.

"It is very good indeed, Max," Violet said; "a good and true report, and
well expressed. Now, if you and Lulu choose you may bring your books here
and study your lessons for to-morrow, and if you need help from me I shall
give it with pleasure."

"But, Mamma Vi, it will be very dull for you to stay up here with us while
the rest of the grown-up people are having a nice time together in the
parlor," said Max.

"You are very kindly thoughtful, Max," returned Violet, with a pleased
look, "but I don't care to go down-stairs for some time yet; Gracie begins
to look weary, so I shall help her to bed and then answer your father's
letter. Can't you imagine that I may prefer to talk to Mm for a little
rather than to any one else, even if only with pen, ink and paper?" she
added, with a charming blush and smile.

"Oh, yes, indeed! for I know you're very fond of him. And I don't wonder,
for I think he's the very best and handsomest man in the world," cried Max
enthusiastically, and both Lulu and Gracie said, "So do I."

"Then we are all agreed so far," laughed Vi. "Come, Gracie, darling, I
will be your maid to-night."

"No, no! not my maid, but my dear, sweet, pretty mamma!" returned the
little one, throwing her arms around Violet's neck and kissing her with
ardent affection.

Lulu had risen to go for her books, but paused to say with a slight effort
and heightened color, "Yes, Mamma Vi, you are sweet and pretty, and very,
very kind to us."

The child was by no means devoid of gratitude, though her pride and
prejudice were hard to conquer. Expressions of gratitude and affection
toward their young stepmother were far less frequent from her than from
her brother and sister, but were perhaps all the more valued because of
their rarity.

"Thank you, dear," returned Violet, happy tears glistening in her eyes;
"if I am, it is because I love you for both your own and your father's
sake."

She knew his heart always rejoiced in every demonstration of affection
from his children toward her, and in the letter she presently began
writing she recounted all that had been shown her that evening, and also
others carefully treasured up in her memory for that purpose.




CHAPTER IX.

    "The sober comfort, all the peace which springs
     From the large aggregate of little things,
     On these small cares of--daughter--wife--or friend,
     The almost sacred joys of home depend."
                                 --Hannah More.


Mrs. Elsie Travilla and her family were greatly beloved in their own
neighborhood, and as there had been no opportunity hitherto for showing
attention to the three young married ladies, or any one of them, there was
quite an influx of callers for a week or two after the return to Ion, and
these calls were presently succeeded by a round of dinner and evening
parties given in their honor.

The death of Mr. Love having occurred within the year, Zoe, of course,
declined all such invitations; and it was only occasionally that Edward
could be persuaded to go without her.

Violet accepted when it would have been deemed impolite or unkind to
decline, but scarcely yet more than a bride, she felt a trifle forlorn
going into society without her husband, and much preferred the quiet and
seclusion of home.

This was to the advantage of the children, Max and Lulu thereby gaining
much assistance with their evening studies, Gracie a great deal of
motherly care and petting.

So the duty of representing the family at these social gatherings devolved
largely upon Lester and Elsie Leland, who laughingly declared themselves
martyrs to the social reputation of the family.

"A very nice way to be martyred, I think," said Rosie. "I only wish they'd
have the politeness to include me in their invitations."

"It would do you little good," remarked Mr. Dinsmore, "since you would not
be allowed to accept."

"Are you quite sure, grandpa, that mamma wouldn't allow it?" she asked,
with an arch look up into his face.

"Quite; since she never allows anything which I do not approve."

"Well," Rosie said, seating herself upon his knee and putting an arm
around his neck, "I believe it isn't worth while to fret about it, since,
as I'm not invited, I couldn't go any how."

"A sensible conclusion," he returned laughingly. "Fretting is an
unprofitable business at any time."

"Ordinarily I should be very much of Rosie's opinion," Zoe said aside to
her husband, "for I was always fond of parties; but of course, just now I
couldn't take the least pleasure in them," and she hastily brushed away a
tear.

"No, love, I'm sure you could not," he said, tenderly clasping the little
hand she had laid in his. "But the truest, purest happiness is found at
home. And," he added with a smile, "it is quite to the advantage of your
plans for study that society can claim so little of your time and strength
at present. You are doing so nicely that I am very proud of my pupil."

She flushed with pleasure, but with a roguish smile, and shaking her
finger warningly at him, "Take care," she said, "don't let the husband be
lost in the tutor, or I shall----"

"What? go over to grandpa?"

"Oh, no, no!" she cried, snatching her hand from his grasp, and lifting
both in mimic horror.

"What are you two chatting so cosily about in that far-off corner?" asked
Mrs. Leland's cheery voice from the midst of the larger group at the
farther side of the room.

"It's merely a little private confab between man and wife, in which the
public can have no interest," returned Edward.

"Quite a mistake, so far as this part of the public is concerned," said
his mother, her soft brown eyes gazing lovingly upon them, "but we won't
pry into your secrets, only invite you to join our circle when you have
finished your private chat."

For some weeks all went well with our friends at Ion; the family machinery
worked smoothly, with no jarring or jostling; everybody in good humor and
behaving kindly toward everybody else.

Max and Lulu made good progress in their studies, and were able to give a
good report of each day in their diaries, which, of their own accord, they
brought each evening to Violet for her inspection.

She reminded them that they were not required to do so; but they answered
that they preferred it; they wanted to know if she thought they were
representing themselves as better than they really were.

She was glad to be able to answer with truth that she did not think so,
and that she could report them to their father as worthy of all praise in
regard to both conduct and diligence in study.

"You have both been so pleasant tempered," she remarked in conclusion,
"Lulu neither grumbling nor so much as looking sour over her tasks, or
even the sewing lessons, which I know are particularly distasteful to her.
Dear child, you have been very good, and I know it will rejoice your
father's heart to hear it," she added, kissing the little girl's cheek.

Lulu's face flushed and her eyes shone, Mrs. Scrimp had been always ready
to blame, never to praise, but with Mamma Vi it was just the other way.
She was almost blind to faults, but particularly keen-sighted where
virtues were concerned.

Violet turned toward Max to find him regarding her with wistful, longing
looks.

"Well, what is it, Max, my dear boy?" she asked, half laughingly.

"Don't be partial, Mamma Vi," he answered. "I do believe a boy likes a
kiss from a sweet, pretty lady that he has a right to care for, quite as
well as a girl does."

"Then come and get it," she said, offering her lips. "Max, you may feel as
free always to ask for it as if I were your own mother or sister."

Edward had, perhaps, the most trying pupil of all; she had done well at
first, but as the novelty of the undertaking wore off, lost her interest,
and now found so many excuses for not being prepared at the proper time
for recitation; and if he so much as looked grave over the failure, was so
hurt, and felt herself so ill-used, that an extra amount of coaxing and
petting became necessary to restore her to cheerfulness and good humor.

He was growing very weary of it all, and at times felt tempted to cease
trying to improve the mind of his little wife; but no, he could not do
that if he would have her a fit companion for him intellectually as well
as in other respects, for though she had naturally a fine mind, its
cultivation had been sadly neglected.

He opened his heart to his mother on the subject, entreating her advice
and assistance, but without finding fault with Zoe (Elsie would hardly
have listened for a moment to that), and she comforted him with words of
encouragement to persevere in his own efforts, and promises to aid him in
every way in her power.

In pursuance of that object she put in Zoe's way, and recommended to her
notice, books that would be likely to interest and at the same time
instruct her. Also considered her needs, as well as those of her own
pupils, in making her selections for the afternoon readings in the
school-room.

There was much gained by the child wife in these ways, and also from the
conversation of the highly educated and intelligent older members of the
family, of which she had now become a part.

She was very desirous to become their equal in these respects, especially
for Edward's sake, but she was so much used to self-indulgence, so
unaccustomed to self-control, that her good resolutions were made only to
be broken till she herself was nearly ready to give up in despair.

Elsie was alone in her own apartments one afternoon, an hour or more after
dismissing her pupils to their play, when Zoe came to her with flushed
cheeks, quivering lips, and eyes full of tears.

"What is wrong with you, my dear little daughter?" Elsie asked in tender,
motherly tones, as she looked up into the troubled face.

"O mamma, I don't know what to do! I wish you could help me!" cried Zoe,
dropping upon her knees at Elsie's feet, and hiding her face on her lap,
the tears falling fast now, mingled with sobs.

"Only tell me what is wrong, dear, and you shall have all the help I can
give," Elsie said, smoothing the weeper's fair hair with soft, caressing
hand.

"Edward is vexed with me," sobbed Zoe. "I know he is, though he didn't say
a word; but he looked so grave, and walked away without speaking."

"Perhaps he was not vexed with you, dear; it may have been merely that he
was deep in thought about something that had no connection with the little
wife, whom, as I very well know, he loves very dearly."

"No, mamma, it wasn't that; he had come in to hear me recite, and I was so
interested in my fancy work that I'd forgotten to watch the time and
hadn't looked at the lessons. So I told him, and said I was sorry I
wasn't ready for him, and he didn't answer a word, but just looked at me
as grave as a judge, and turned round and walked out of the room."

"Surely, my dear Zoe, Edward does not insist upon his little wife learning
lessons whether she is willing or not?" Elsie said inquiringly, and with a
gentle caress.

"Oh, no, no, mamma! it has been my own choice, and I've no wish to give it
up; but somehow there is always something interfering with my studying.
Somebody calls, or I'm inclined for a ride, a drive or a walk, or I get
engaged in sewing or fancy work, or my music, or a story-book that's too
interesting to lay down till I reach the end. Mamma, I often wonder how it
is that you find time for all these things and many others beside."

"Shall I tell you the secret of managing it, dear?" Elsie asked, with an
affectionate look and smile into the tear-stained face now uplifted to
hers.

Zoe gave an eager assent, and Elsie went on:

"It lies in doing things systematically, always putting duties first,
giving to each its set time, and letting the pleasures come in afterward.
If I were you, my dear, I should have a regular study hour, putting it
early in the day, before callers begin to come, and I should not allow it
to be lightly interfered with; no stitch should be taken in fancy work,
no novel opened, no story paper glanced at, until each lesson for the day
was fully prepared."

Zoe's face had brightened very much as she listened.

"O mamma, I see that that is just the way to do it!" she cried, clapping
her hands with glee, "and I'll begin at once. I'll think over all the
daily duties and make out a regular programme, and----"

"Strive earnestly to carry it out, you would say, yet not in your own
strength alone," Elsie added, as Zoe paused, leaving her sentence
unfinished.

"Yes, mamma," she responded in a more serious tone. "And now, I'll run
back to my room and try to be ready for Edward when he comes in again."

She set herself to her tasks with unwonted determination to give her whole
mind to them. Edward came in at length, and was greeted with a bright look
and the announcement in a tone of great satisfaction, "I'm quite ready for
you now."

"I've been thinking we might perhaps as well give it up, Zoe," he answered
gravely, "at least for the present, until you are done working upon those
very fascinating Christmas things."

"Oh no, don't!" she said, flushing and looking ready to cry, "try me a
little longer, Ned; I've been talking with mamma, and I'm really going to
turn over a new leaf and do just as she advises."

"Ah, if you have taken mamma into your counsels there is some hope," he
said in a tone of hearty approval. "But we will have to put off the
recitations until after tea. I must drive over to the Oaks to see Uncle
Horace about a business matter, and I just came up to ask you to go
along."

"Oh, I'll be happy to!" she cried joyously, pushing the books aside and
starting to her feet, "and it won't take me a minute to don hat and
cloak."

He caught her in his arms as she was rushing past him, and kissing her on
cheek and lips, asked in tender tones, "Have I made you unhappy this
afternoon, my love, my darling?"

"Yes, for a little while; but I deserved it, Ned, and I don't mind it now
if--if only you love your foolish, careless little wife as well as ever in
spite of all her faults."

"I love you dearly, dearly, my one own peculiar treasure," he responded,
with another caress of ardent affection, as he let her go.

She was gay and happy as a bird during their drive, and full of enthusiasm
in regard to her new plan, explaining it to Edward, and asking his advice
about the best division of her time, how much should be allotted to this
duty and how much to that.

"I mean to rise earlier," she said, "and if I can't get time in that way
for all I want to do, I'll shorten my rides and walks."

"No," he said, "I'm not going to have your health sacrificed even to
mental improvement; and certainly not to fancy work; I shall insist on
plenty of rest and sleep and abundance of exercise in the open air for the
dear little woman I have taken charge of."

"Then, sir, you're not to be cross if the studies are not attended to."

"They will be if put before novels, fancy work, and other equally
unnecessary employments."

"Well, I've said they shall be in future. O Ned," and she nestled closer
to his side, looking up lovingly into his face, "it's ever so nice to have
somebody to take care of me and love me as you do! How could I ever do
without papa, who always petted me so, if I hadn't you?"

"I hope you may never find out. I hope I may be spared to take care of
you, as long as you need me, little wife," he said, pressing her closer to
his side.

Rosie met them in the hall on their return to Ion.

"It's most tea time, Zoe," she said; "I think you'll not have any too much
time for changing your dress."

"Then I must needs make haste," returned Zoe, tripping up the stairs.

Edward, who was taking off his overcoat, turned a rather surprised,
inquiring glance upon his little sister.

"Oh, yes," she said laughingly, "I had a reason for hurrying her away,
because I want to tell you something. Cousin Ronald Lilburn is coming.
Maybe he will be here by to-morrow. Mamma heard he wasn't well, and she
wrote and invited him to come and spend the winter with us, and she's just
had a letter saying he will come. Aren't you glad, Ned?"

"I'm very well pleased, Rosie, but why shouldn't Zoe have heard your
announcement?"

"Because I wanted to warn you first not to tell her or the Raymonds
something (you know what) that must be kept secret at first, if we want to
have some fun."

"Oh, yes!" he said, with a good-humored laugh. "Well, I think you may
trust me not to tell. But how about all the others? Walter, especially?"

"Oh, he doesn't remember anything about it; and grandpa and mamma and all
the rest have promised not to tell."

"And you are quite sure Rosie may be trusted not to let the secret slip
out unintentionally?" he asked, pinching her round rosy cheek.

"I hope so," she said, laughing and running away.

Opening the library door and seeing Lulu there curled up in the corner of
a sofa with a book, she stepped in, shutting the door behind her.

Lulu looked up.

"Shall I disturb you if I talk?" asked Rose.

"I'm ready to listen," answered Lulu, half closing her book. "What have
you to say?"

"Oh, that Cousin Ronald Lilburn is coming, and I'm ever so glad, as you
would be, too, if you knew him."

"I never heard of him," said Lulu. "Is he a boy? is he older than Max?"

"I should think so!" cried Rosie, with a merry laugh. "He has grown-up
sons, and he looks a good deal older than grandpa."

"Pooh! then why should I care about his coming!" exclaimed Lulu, in a tone
of mingled impatience and contempt.

"Why, because he's very nice and kind to us children, and tells us the
loveliest stories about the brownies in Scotland and about Bruce and
Wallace and the black Douglass and Robin Hood and his merry men, and--oh,
I can't tell you what all!"

"Oh, that must be ever so nice!" cried Lulu, now as much pleased and
interested in the news of the expected arrival as Rosie could desire.




CHAPTER X.

IN WHICH THE CHILDREN HAVE SOME FUN.


In the uppermost story of the house at Ion was a large play-room furnished
with a great variety of toys and games--indeed almost everything that
could be thought of for the amusement of the young folks, from Walter up
to Max.

But the greatest delight of the last named was in the deft handling of the
tools in an adjoining apartment, called the boys' work-room. There he
found abundance of material to work upon, holly scroll and fret saws, and
a well-stocked tool chest.

Edward had given him a few lessons at the start, and now he had become so
expert as to be turning out some really beautiful pieces of carving, which
he intended to give to his friends at Christmas.

Lulu, too, was learning scroll-sawing, and thought it far preferable to
any sort of needle-work; sometimes more enjoyable than playing with her
dolls.

They were there together one afternoon, both very busy and chatting and
laughing as they worked.

"Max," said Lulu, "I'm determined to learn to do scroll-sawing and carving
just as well as ever I can, and make lovely things! Maybe I can contrive
new patterns or designs, or whatever they call 'em, and after a while make
ever so much money, enough to pay for my clothes and everything, so that
papa won't have to spend any of his money on me."

"Why, Lu!" exclaimed her brother, "do you think papa grudges the money he
spends on you, or any of us?"

"No, I know he doesn't," she returned vehemently, "but can't you
understand that I'd like him to have more to spend on himself?"

"Oh," said Max. "Well, that's right, I'm sure, and very thoughtful for a
little girl like you. I do think you're splendid in some ways, Lu."

"And whether you make money by it or not, it will be a good thing to learn
to do this work well. Papa says, 'knowledge is power,' and the more things
we know how to do, the more independent and useful we will be."

Just then the door opened, and Zoe, in riding hat and habit, put in her
head.

"Max, I'm going to ride into the village," she said, "and Edward can't go
with me, as he intended. Will you?"

"Yes, Aunt Zoe, of course, if you want me," answered the boy promptly,
stopping his saw and springing to his feet, for he was much gratified by
the invitation. "I'll get ready as fast as I can; 'twon't take over five
minutes."

"Thank you. I'll wait for you in the parlor," said Zoe, "Lulu, would you
like to go, too?"

"No, thank you, I had a ride this morning, and now I want to finish this."

Max had left the room, and Zoe, drawing nearer to Lulu, exclaimed at the
beauty of her work.

"Why, I never should have dreamed you could do it so well!" she said. "I
don't believe I could."

Lulu's face flushed with pleasure, but she said modestly, "Perhaps you'd
find, if you should try, that you could do it better; you do everything
else better than I do."

"Quite a mistake," returned Zoe, "though I ought to, as I'm so much older.
But there, I dare say Max is ready and waiting for me, so good-by."

They met in the lower hall. "All ready, Max?" she asked.

"Yes--no; I must ask leave," and he ran into the parlor where the ladies
of the family were sitting.

It was of Grandma Elsie he asked permission, and it was given at once.

"Thank you, ma'am," he said. "Can I do anything for you in the town,
ladies?"

"Yes," said Violet, "I have just broken a crochet needle. You may get me
one to replace it."

She went on to give him directions about the size and where he would be
likely to find it; then taking some money from her purse, "This is sure to
be more than enough," she said, "but you may keep the change."

"Mamma Vi, I don't want pay for doing an errand for you," returned the boy
coloring; "it is a great pleasure, it would be even if papa had not told
me to wait on you and do all I could to fill his place."

"I don't mean it as pay, my dear boy," Violet answered, with a pleased
look, "but haven't I a right to make a little present now and then to the
children who call me mamma?"

Max's face brightened.

"Yes, ma'am, I suppose so," he said. "Thank you; I'll take it willingly
enough if it isn't pay, and I'm very proud to be trusted to buy something
for you."

Edward was helping Zoe into the saddle as Max came hurrying out.

"Take good care of her, Max," he said, "I'm trusting you and Tom there
with my chiefest treasure."

"I'll do my best," Max said, mounting his pony, which Tom the colored boy
was holding.

"Me, too, Marse Ed'ard, dere shan't nuffin hurt Miss Zoe," added the
latter, giving Max the bridle, then mounting a third horse and falling
behind the others as they cantered down the avenue.

A little beyond the gate the family carriage passed them, Mr. Dinsmore and
a strange gentleman inside.

"Company," remarked Zoe. "I wonder who he is, and if he's come to stay any
time? I think grandpa drove into the city in season to meet the afternoon
train."

"Yes, I know he did," said Max.

Max had now learned to ride quite well, and felt himself very nearly a man
as he escorted Zoe to the village, and, arrived there, went with her from
store to store, executed Violet's commission, then having assisted Zoe
into the saddle remounted, and returned with her to Ion.

It was very near the tea hour when they reached home. Zoe went directly to
her own apartments to change her dress, but Max, without even waiting to
take off his overcoat, hastened into the parlor to hand the crochet needle
to Violet.

The ladies were all there, Rosie, too, and Mr. Dinsmore, and an elderly
gentleman, whom Max at once recognized as the one he had seen in the
carriage that afternoon.

He shook hands very kindly with the boy as Mr. Dinsmore introduced them,
"Cousin Ronald this is Max Raymond--Mr. Lilburn, Max."

"Ah ha, ah ha! um, h'm! ah ha! A fine-looking lad," Mr. Lilburn said,
still holding the boy's hand in a kindly grasp, and gazing with evident
interest into the bright young face. "I trust you and I are going to be
good friends, Max. I'm no so young myself as I once was, but I like the
company of the blithe young lads and lasses."

"Thank you, sir," said Max, coloring with pleasure. "Rosie says you tell
splendid stories about Wallace and the Bruce and Robin Hood and his merry
men; and I know I shall enjoy them ever so much."

As he finished his sentence Max colored more deeply than before, at the
same time hastily thrusting his right hand deep into the pocket on that
side of his overcoat, for a peculiar sound like the cry of a young puppy
seemed to come from it at that instant, much to the boy's discomfiture and
astonishment.

"What is that? What have you got there, Max?" asked little Walter,
pricking up his ears, while Violet asked with an amused look, "Have you
been making an investment in livestock, Max?"

A query that seemed all the more natural and appropriate as the cluck of a
hen came from the pocket on the other side of the overcoat.

Down went the left hand into that. "No, Mamma Vi, they're not in my
pockets," returned the boy, with a look of great bewilderment.

"No, to be sure not," said Mr. Lilburn, and the hen clucked behind
Violet's chair and the pup's cry was heard coming from underneath a heap
of crocheting in Mrs. Dinsmore's lap, fairly startling her into uttering a
little cry of surprise and dismay and springing to her feet.

Then everybody laughed, Rosie clapping her hands with delight, and Max
glanced from one to another more mystified than ever.

"Never mind, Max," said Violet, "it's plain you are not the culprit who
brought such unwelcome intruders here. Run up to your room now and make
yourself ready for tea."

Max obeyed, but looking back from the doorway, asked, "Shall I send one of
the servants to turn out the hen and carry away the pup?"

"Never mind, we'll attend to it," said Mr. Dinsmore.

"I'll find 'em. I can carry that pup out," said Walter, getting down from
his grandpa's knee and beginning a vigorous search for it, the older
people watching him with much amusement.

At length, having satisfied himself that neither it nor the hen was in the
room, he concluded that they must be in Max's overcoat pockets, and told
him so the moment he returned.

"No, they are not, unless some one has put them there since I went
up-stairs," said Max. "But I don't believe in them, Walter. I think they
were only make believe."

"How make believe?" asked the little fellow in perplexity.

"Ask Mr. Lilburn."

"Come, explain yourself, young man," said that gentleman laughingly.

"I've heard of ventriloquists, sir," said Max. "I don't know if you are
one, but as pup and hen could only be heard and not seen, I think it must
have been a ventriloquist's work."

"But you don't know for certain," said Rosie, coming to his side, "and
please don't say anything to Zoe, or Lulu, or Gracie about it."

"I won't," he said, as the door opened and the three entered, Zoe having
overtaken the two little girls on their way down-stairs after being
dressed for the evening by the careful and expert Agnes.

"Mamma, do I look nice enough for your little girl?" asked Gracie, going
to Violet's side.

"Very nice and sweet, my darling," was the whispered reply, accompanied by
a tender caress.

Walter, hardly waiting until the necessary introductions were over, burst
out eagerly, "Zoe, do you know where that pup is?"

"What pup?" she asked.

"I don't know his name."

"Well, what about him?"

"I thought he was in Max's pocket, but he wasn't, and neither was the
hen."

The tea-bell rang at that instant, and Rosie, putting her lips to Walter's
ear, whispered, "Do keep quiet about it, and we'll have some fun."

"Will we?" he asked with a look of mingled wonder and pleasure; "then I'll
keep quiet."

All through the meal Walter was on the _qui vive_ for the fun, but there
was none beyond a few jests and pleasantries which were by no means
unusual in their cheerful family circle.

"There wasn't a bit of fun, Rosie," he complained to her after all had
returned to the parlor.

"Wait a little," she answered, "perhaps it will come yet."

"Before I have to go to bed?"

"I hope so. Suppose you go and tell Cousin Ronald you want some fun. He
knows how to make it. But be sure to whisper it in his ear."

Walter did as directed.

"Wait a wee, bairnie, and see what will happen," Cousin Ronald answered in
an undertone, and with a low pleasant laugh as he lifted the little fellow
to his knee.

Mr. Dinsmore sat near at hand, the ladies had gathered about the
centre-table with their work, while Lester Leland and Edward Travilla
hovered near their wives, the one with a newspaper, the other merely
watching the busy fingers of the fair workers and making jesting comments
upon what they were doing.

But presently there was a sudden commotion in their midst, one after
another springing from her chair with a little startled cry and trying to
dodge what, from the sound, seemed to be an enormous bumble bee circling
round and round their heads and in and out among them. "Buzz! buzz! buzz!"
surely never bumble bee buzzed so loud before.

"Oh, catch it! kill it, Edward!" cried Zoe, with a half frantic rush to
the farther side of the room. "Oh, here it comes after me! It's settling
on my hair! Oh!"

"No, dear, it isn't, there is really nothing there," Edward said
soothingly, yet with a laugh, for a second thought had told him the real
cause of the disturbance.

"I believe it's gone," she said, drawing a long breath of relief, as she
turned her head this way and that, "but where did it go to? and how
strange for one to be flying about this time of year!"

The other ladies exchanging amused glances and smiles, were drawing round
the table again when a loud "cluck, cluck" came from beneath it.

"Oh, there she is! there's the old hen Max brought!" cried Walter,
springing from Mr. Lilburn's knee to run to the table.

Stooping down he peeped under it. "Why, no, she's not there!" he said in
wonder and disappointment. "Ah, yonder she is! behind that window
curtain," as "cluck, cluck cluck," came from a distant corner. "Max, Max,
catch her quick, 'fore she gets away!"

Max ran and hastily drew aside the curtain.

There was nothing there, as Walter, Lulu and Gracie, who had all rushed to
the spot, perceived with amazement.

"Hark!" said Mr. Dinsmore, and as a death-like silence fell upon the room
the "cluck, cluck, cluck" was distinctly heard from the hall.

Out rushed the children and searched its whole length, but without finding
the intruder.

Back they came to report their failure. Then dogs, big and little, barked
and growled, now here, now there, little pigs squealed, cats meowed, and
mice squealed from the corners, under sofas and chairs, in the ladies'
laps, in the gentlemen's pockets, yet not one could be seen.

For a while it made a great deal of sport, but at length little feeble
Gracie grew frightened and nervous, and running to "Mamma Vi" hid her head
in her lap with a burst of tears and sobs.

That put an end to the fun and frolic, everybody sobered down instantly
and kept very quiet, while Grandpa Dinsmore carefully explained to the
little weeper that Cousin Ronald had made all the sounds which had so
excited and alarmed her, and that there was really nothing in the room
that could hurt or annoy her.

She lifted her head at last, wiped away her tears, and with a laugh that
was half a sob, said, "I'll stop crying, then; but I'm afraid everybody
thinks I'm a great baby."

"Oh no, dear!" said Grandma Elsie, "we all know that if our little girlie
is easily troubled, it is because she is not well and strong like the rest
of us."

"And I must beg your pardon for frightening you so, my wee bit bonny
lassie," said Mr. Lilburn, stroking her hair. "I'll try to atone for it,
one o' these days, by telling you and the other bairns the finest stories
I know."

The promise called forth from the young folks a chorus of thanks and
exclamations of delight, Walter adding, "Won't you please tell one now,
Cousin Ronald, to comfort Gracie?"

"A very disinterested request, no doubt, my little son," Elsie said
laughingly, as she rose and took his hand to lead him from the room; "but
it is high time both you and Gracie were in your nests. So bid good-night,
and we will go."




CHAPTER XI.

    "At Christmas play, and make good cheer,
     For Christmas comes but once a year."
                           --Tusser.


It was the day before Christmas.

"When do our holidays begin, mamma?" asked Rosie, as she put her books
neatly away in her desk after the last morning recitation.

"Now, my child; we will have no tasks this afternoon. Instead, I give my
five little folks an invitation to drive into the city with me. How many
will accept?"

"I, thank you, ma'am," "and I," "and I," came in joyous tones from one and
another, for all were in the room, and not one indifferent to the delight
of a visit to the city, especially just at this time when the stores were
so full of pretty things. Besides, who could fail to enjoy a drive with
the kind, sweet lady some of them called mamma, others Grandma Elsie?

"Then you may all be ready to start immediately after dinner," she said,
glancing around upon them with a benign smile.

It was a still, bright day, mild for the season, no snow on the ground to
make a sleigh-ride possible, but the roads were good, they had fine
horses, plenty of wraps, and the ride in the softly-cushioned,
easy-rolling carriage, whose large plate-glass windows gave them a good
view of the country first, then of the streets and shop windows of the
city, was found very enjoyable.

They were not afraid to jest, laugh, and be as merry as health, freedom
from care, youthful spirits, and pleasing anticipations for the morrow
inclined them to be.

Most of the Christmas shopping had been done days before, but some orders
were left with grocers and confectioners, and Grandma Elsie treated
generously to bonbons.

She allowed her children much greater latitude in such matters than her
father had permitted her in her early years.

The Ion carriage had scarcely turned out of the avenue, on its way to the
city, when one of the parlors became the scene of great activity and
mirth. A large Christmas tree was brought in and set up by the men
servants; then Lester and his Elsie, Violet, Edward and Zoe proceeded to
trim it.

That done they gave their attention to the adorning with evergreens the
walls of that and several other rooms, completing their labors and closing
the doors upon the tree some time before the return of the children.

"We shall have scarcely more than time to dress for tea," Grandma Elsie
said, as the carriage drew up at the door; "so go directly to your rooms,
my dears. Are you very tired, little Gracie?"

"No, ma'am, just a wee bit," said the child. "I'm getting so much
stronger, and we've had such a nice time, Grandma Elsie."

"I'll carry you up-stairs, little missy," said Tom, the servant man, who
opened the door for them, picking her up as he spoke.

"Bring her in here, Tom," Violet said, speaking from the door of her
dressing-room. "And will you come in too, Lulu dear?"

Violet was very careful never to give Lulu an order; her wishes when
addressing her were always expressed in the form of a request.

Lulu complied at once, Tom stepping back for her to enter first.

She was in high good-humor, having enjoyed her drive extremely.

"Mamma Vi," she exclaimed, "we've had a splendid time! It's just
delightful to be taken out by Grandma Elsie."

"Yes; I have always found it so," said Violet. "And how has your papa's
baby girl enjoyed herself?" drawing Gracie toward her, as Tom set her
down, and taking off her hat.

"Oh, ever so much! Mamma how beautiful you look! I wish papa was here to
see you."

"That's just what I was thinking," said Lulu. "You _are_ beautiful, Mamma
Vi, and then you always wear such very pretty and becoming things."

"I am glad you approve my taste in dress," Violet said, laughing. "And
what do you think of those?" with a slight motion of her hand in the
direction of the bed.

Both little girls turned to look, then with a little cry of surprise and
delight hastened to give a closer inspection to what they saw there--two
pretty dresses of soft, fine white cashmere, evidently intended for them,
each with sash and ribbons lying on it, Lulu's of rose pink, Gracie's a
delicate shade of blue.

"O Mamma Vi! are they for us?" exclaimed Lulu.

"They were bought and made expressly for my two dear little girls; for
them to wear to-night," said Violet. "Do they suit your taste, dears?"

"They are just beautiful, my dear, sweet, pretty mamma," cried Gracie,
running to her and half smothering her with hugs and kisses.

"There, pet, that will do," said Violet, laughing, as she returned a
hearty kiss, then gently disengaged the child's arms from her neck; "we
must make haste to array you in them before the tea-bell rings," and
taking Gracie's hand, she led her toward the bed.

Lulu was standing there smoothing down the folds of her new dress, and
noting, with a thrill of pleasure, how prettily the rich sash and ribbons
contrasted with its creamy whiteness. "Mamma Vi," she said, looking up
into her young stepmother's face, her expression a mixture of penitence
and gratitude, "how good you and Grandma Elsie are to me! Indeed,
everybody here is good to me; though I--I'm so bad-tempered."

"You have been very good of late, dear," Violet said, bending down to kiss
her forehead, "and it is a dear delight to me to do all I can to make my
husband's children happy."

Agnes now came to Violet's assistance, and when the tea-bell rang, a few
minutes later, the two little girls were quite ready to descend with their
mamma to the supper-room.

Grandma Elsie looked in on her way down, and Violet said, sportively,
"See, mamma, I have my dolls dressed."

"Yes," Elsie returned, with a smile, "you were always fond of dressing
dolls," and, passing a hand over Gracie's curls and touching Lulu's cheek
caressingly with the other, "these are better worth it than any you have
had heretofore."

"Grandma Elsie," said Lulu in her fearless, straightforward way, and
gazing with earnest, affectionate scrutiny into the fair face, "you don't
look as if you could be mother to Mamma Vi and Aunt Elsie and Uncle
Edward."

"Why, my child?" laughed the lady addressed; "can't you see a
resemblance?"

"Oh, yes, ma'am! but you look so young, not so very much older than they
do."

They were now passing through the upper hall. Walter had hold of his
mother's hand, and Rosie had just joined them.

"That is true," she remarked, and I am so glad of it! I couldn't bear to
have my dear, beautiful mamma grow old, and wrinkled, and gray."

"Yet it will have to be some day, Rosie, unless she is laid away out of
sight before the time comes for those changes," the mother answered with
gentle gravity.

There were various exclamations of surprise and pleasure from the children
as they entered the supper-room. Its walls were beautifully trimmed with
evergreens, and bouquets of hot-house flowers adorned the table, filling
the air with delicious fragrance.

When the meal was over, all adjourned to the parlor usually occupied by
them when not entertaining company. This, too, they found trimmed with
evergreens, and while the children were looking about and commenting upon
the taste displayed in their arrangement, the folding doors communicating
with another parlor were suddenly thrown open, disclosing the grand
achievement of the afternoon--the beautiful Christmas tree--tall,
wide-spreading, glittering with lights and tinsel ornaments, gorgeous with
gay colors, and every branch loaded down with gifts.

It was greeted with a burst of admiration and applause.

"What a beauty!" cried Rosie and Lulu, clapping their hands.

"And how large!" exclaimed Max, "three times as big as any I ever saw
before."

Walter and Gracie were no less enthusiastic in their admiration. "May we
go close up, mamma?" asked the latter.

"Yes, 'course we may," said Walter, seizing her hand, "we'll walk round it
and look hard at the things, but not touch 'em."

Older people followed the lead of the little ones, and the tree was
thoroughly examined by many pairs of eyes, gazed at from every point of
view, and highly extolled, before the work of despoiling it was begun.

The gifts were far too many to mention in detail. The older people seemed
much pleased with some easels, brackets, and picture-frames carved for
them by Max and Lulu, and with specimens of Zoe's and Rosie's handiwork in
another line; also with some little gems of art from the pencils or
brushes of Lester, Elsie, and Violet, while the children were made happy
with presents suited to the years and taste of each.

Lulu was almost wild with delight over a set of pink coral, as nearly like
that she had lost by her misconduct some months before, as Grandma Elsie
had been able to find.

Then there was a beautiful, thoroughly furnished work-box from Mamma Vi,
with "actually a gold thimble in it," to encourage her in learning to sew.
One for Gracie also exactly like it, except that Lulu's was lined with red
satin and Gracie's with blue. Each had beside a new doll with a neat
little trunk packed full of clothes made to fit it, and a box filled with
pretty things to make up into doll clothes.

Max was greatly surprised and delighted by finding himself the possessor
of a watch, doubly valuable to him as his father's gift.

The gold thimbles of the little girls were also from papa.

They had a number of other presents, but these were what they valued most
highly.

It took quite a good while to distribute the gifts and for each to examine
and admire all his own and those of his neighbors; then Gracie, tired with
excitement and the long drive of the afternoon, was ready to go to bed.

Mamma Vi went with her, as was her custom, and Max and Lulu followed. They
had grown quite fond of Violet's half-sisterly, half-motherly talks with
them at the close of the day, and to her it was a source of deep joy and
thankfulness that she could perceive that she was influencing them--her
dear husband's tenderly loved offspring--for good.

She warmly sympathized in their pleasure to-night, chatted with them about
what they had given and received, praising highly the picture-frame and
easel they had presented her--and in regard to the entries to be made in
each of their diaries.

She left them in her boudoir busy with these when she returned to the
parlor.

"O Max," said Lulu, "how different Mamma Vi is from Aunt Beulah."

"Humph, I should think so," said Max, "must have been made of a different
kind o' dust. We weren't so well off and happy last Christmas eve, Lu."

"No, indeed! Gracie and I wanted a Christmas tree ever so much, and begged
and coaxed for one, even if it was but a wee bit of a thing; but she
wouldn't let us have it, said it was just nonsense and a wicked waste."

"Just like her," remarked Max, in a tone of mingled aversion and contempt;
"but don't let's talk about her. I'd rather think of pleasanter subjects.
Wasn't it splendid in papa to give me this watch?" pulling it out and
gazing on it with pride and delight. "Isn't it a beauty?"

"Yes; and I'm as glad as I can be that you have it, Max," Lulu responded
affectionately. "And wasn't it good in him to give gold thimbles to Gracie
and me? I shall try very hard to learn to sew nicely, to show him I'm
grateful for it and all he does for me."

"That's right, Lu; let's both do our best to improve all our
opportunities, so that we will make his heart glad. And we can do that in
another way, too."

"How?"

"By loving Mamma Vi, and being as good to her as ever we know how."

"I do mean to, for she is good and kind to us," said Lulu, in a frankly
cordial tone.

"You were vexed at papa at first for marrying her," remarked Max, with a
roguish look; "but just suppose he'd taken Mrs. Scrimp instead."

"O Max!" cried Lulu, her eyes flashing, "how can you talk so? You know
papa would never have thought of such a thing."

"I don't believe he would, but Ann told me once she knew Mrs. Scrimp would
be glad enough to take him if he'd give her the chance. What would you
have done if he had?"

"I don't know, and it isn't worth while to consider," replied Lulu, with a
grown-up air she occasionally assumed, much to Max's amusement. "But my
writing's done, and I'm going to bed, for I'm tired and sleepy. So
good-night."

"Good-night," returned Max. "I sha'n't be in a hurry to get to bed, for it
won't be worth while to get up early to catch other folks, as all the
things have been given to-night. I almost wish they had let us wait till
to-morrow morning."

Perhaps the remark was intended to throw Lulu off her guard; at all events
he was at her door with a "Merry Christmas," before any one else was
stirring but the servants.

Lulu was awake, too, sitting up in bed and trying, in the dim light of the
early dawn, to undo a small paper parcel she had found on her pillow.

Max had opened the door and given his greeting in a subdued tone that
there might be no danger of disturbing any sleeper in the vicinity.

"Oh!" cried Lulu, in a voice of suppressed eagerness, "the same to you!
Come in and see what Santa Claus has brought me."

Max stepped in, closed the door, and tiptoeing to a window, raised the
blind and drew back the curtain.

"O Max, Max; just see!" cried Lulu, as he turned toward her again.

She had succeeded in her efforts, and was now holding up her hand in a way
to display to advantage a very pretty gold ring.

"Yes; oh, I'm glad, Lu! And there's something else, isn't there?"

"Money! a good deal, isn't it, Max?" she asked, holding out a crisp new
bank-note.

"Five dollars," he answered, taking it to the light. "And I have just the
same; found it on my pillow, from papa; and s'pose yours is, too. A gold
pencil from Mamma Vi was there also."

"Yes; from papa," she said, examining the writing on the back of the
envelope from which she had taken the note, "and the ring's from Mamma Vi.
She always finds out just what I want. I'd rather have had a ring than
almost anything else."

"There, we have waked her and Gracie, I'm afraid," said Max, in a tone of
self-reproach, as the voices of the two were heard coming from the next
room.

"Merry Christmas, Max and Lulu," both called out in cheery tones, and the
greeting was returned with added thanks to Violet for her gifts.

"I have some, too," Gracie said; "a lovely picture-book and two kinds of
money. I think I'm the richest."

She had received a one-dollar bill, crisp and new like the others, and a
quarter eagle in gold, and could not be convinced that the two did not
amount to more than Max's or Lulu's five-dollar note.

The other members of the family had fared quite as well. The children had
a very merry day; the older people were quietly happy.

There were fresh flowers on the graves in the family burial-ground, even
the dead had not been forgotten. Elsie Travilla had been early bending
over the lowly mound that covered all that was mortal of her heart's best
earthly treasure, and though the sweet face was calm and serene as was its
wont, bearing no traces of tears, the cheery words and bright smile came
readily in sympathy with the mirth of the younger ones; her father and
older children, noting the occasional far-off look in the soft brown eyes,
knew that her thoughts were ever and anon with the husband of her youth.




CHAPTER XII.

                            "Oh! only those
    Whose souls have felt this one idolatry,
    Can tell how precious is the slightest thing
    Affection gives and hallows! A dead flower
    Will long be kept, remembrancer of looks
    That made each leaf a treasure."
                        --Miss Landon.


The whole family connection living in the neighborhood had dined at Ion
that Christmas day, and several had stayed to tea. But all had now gone,
the good-nights had been said among the members of the home circle, and
Elsie Travilla was alone in her own apartments.

A little weary with the cares and excitement of the day, she was half
reclining on a sofa, in dressing-gown and slippers, her beautiful hair
unbound and rippling over her shoulders, beside her a jewel-box of ebony
inlaid with mother-of-pearl.

It stood open, and the lamplight falling upon its contents was flashed
back from many a costly gem set in rings, brooches, lockets and chains of
gold.

She took them up, one by one, gazing upon each for a minute or more with a
smile, a sigh, or a falling tear, ere she laid it almost tenderly back in
its place.

So absorbed was she in the contemplation of these mementoes of the past
and the memories called up by them, that she did not hear an approaching
footstep, and deemed herself quite alone, till a hand was laid gently on
her head, and a voice said tenderly, "My darling!"

"Dear papa!" she responded, glancing up into his face with tear-dimmed
eyes, as he stood at the back of her sofa, bending over her. "Let me give
you a chair," and she would have risen to do so, but he forced her gently
back.

"No; lie still. I will help myself." And coming round in front of her, he
seated himself close at her side.

"Why look at these, if it makes you sad, my child?" he asked, noticing her
occupation.

"There is sometimes a sweetness in the tears called forth by pleasant
memories of loved ones gone before, papa," she said. "These anniversaries
will recall the dear husband who always remembered his little wife so
kindly upon each, and there is a melancholy pleasure in looking over his
Christmas gifts, I have them all here, beginning with this--the very
first. Do you remember it, papa? And this Christmas day when he gave it to
me? the first Christmas that you were with me."

She was holding up a tiny gold thimble.

"Yes, I think I do," he said. "I certainly remember the day, the first
Christmas after my return from Europe, the first on which I heard myself
addressed as papa--the sweetest of child voices calling me that, and
wishing me a merry Christmas, as the dearest, loveliest of little girls
ran into my arms. Dear daughter, what a priceless treasure you have been
to me ever since!" he added, bending over her and softly smoothing her
hair. "It has always been a joy to call you mine."

She caught his hand in hers and pressed it to her lips. "Yes, dear, dear
father! and to me to be so called. We loved one another very dearly then,
each was all the other had, and I think our mutual love has never been
less because of the other many tender ties God has given us since."

"I am sure you are right, daughter, but at that time," he added with a
smile, "you were not willing to share your father's love with another; at
least with one other whom you suspected of trying to win it. Do you
remember how you slipped away to your bed without bidding your papa
good-night, and cried yourself to sleep?"

"Yes, foolish child that I was!" she said, with a low musical laugh; "and
how you surprised me the next morning by your knowledge of my fears, and
then set them all at rest, like the dear, kind father that you were and
always have been."

"No, not always," he sighed.

"Yes, papa, always," she said with playful tenderness. "I will insist upon
that; because even when most severe with me, you did what at the time you
deemed your duty, and believed to be for my good."

"Yes, that is true, my dear, forgiving child! and yet I can never think of
the suffering you endured during the summer that succeeded the Christmas
we have been talking of, without keen remorse."

"Yet, long before the next Christmas came I was happier than ever," she
said, looking up into his face with a smile full of filial love. "It was
the first in our own dear home at the Oaks, you remember, papa. You gave
me a lovely set of pearls--necklace and bracelets--and this," taking up a
pearl ring, "was Edward's gift. Mr. Travilla he was to me then, and no
thought of one day becoming his wife even so much as entered my head. But
years afterward he told me he had it in his mind even then; had already
resolved to wait till I grew up and win me for his wife if he could."

"Yes, he told me after you were grown and he had offered himself, that it
had been love at first sight with him, little child that you were when he
first made your acquaintance. That surprised me, though less than the
discovery that you fancied one so many years your senior."

"But so good, so noble, so lovable!" she said. "Surely, it was not half so
strange, papa, as that he should fancy a foolish young thing such as I was
then; not meaning that I am yet very greatly improved," she added, with a
half tearful smile.

"I am fully satisfied with you just as you are," he said, bending down
over her and touching his lips two or three times to her forehead, "My
darling, my first-born and best-beloved child! no words can express the
love and tenderness I feel for you, or my pity for the grief which is
beyond my power to relieve."

"Dear papa, your sympathy is very sweet," she said in tremulous tones,
"very, very sweet in itself, and it helps me to a fuller realization of
the depth of meaning in those sweet words, 'Like as a father pitieth his
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear Him.'"

"You cannot be wholly miserable while that precious love and pity are
yours, my dear child, even if all earthly loves should be taken from you,
which may God forbid should ever happen."

"No, papa; dearly as I loved my husband, I am happy in that divine love
still mine, though parted from him; and dearly as I love you and my
children, I know that were you all taken from me, I could still rejoice in
the love of Him who died for me, and who has said, 'I am with you alway,
even unto the end of the world.' 'I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee.' 'I have loved thee with an everlasting love.'"

Silence fell between them for some moments, both seemingly wrapped in
thought; then Mr. Dinsmore said inquiringly, "You will go to Roselands
to-morrow?"

"Yes, papa, if you go, as I heard you say you intended, and nothing
happens to prevent. Rosie was particularly delighted with Cal's
invitation," she added, smiling up at him, "because I had been telling the
story of those Christmas holidays that we have been discussing, to her and
the other children, and naturally she wants to look upon the scene of all
those important events."

"It will not be by any means her first visit to Roselands," he remarked in
a tone of surprise.

"Oh, no, sir! only the first after hearing of those interesting episodes
in her mother's life."

"But the house is not the same."

"No, sir; yet the hall and parlors, your rooms and mine are about where
and what they were in the old house."

"Ah! well I hope Rosie will enjoy it. And that you may do so, I shall
leave you now, begging you to go at once to bed. Good-night, daughter."

"Good-night, my dearest, best of fathers," she responded, putting her arms
round his neck as he stooped to give her a parting caress.

Calhoun and Arthur Conly were now joint proprietors at Roselands. "Aunt
Maria," an old negress born and bred on the estate, was their housekeeper,
and managed so well that they found themselves as comfortable as in the
days of their mother's administration.

They, with one younger sister and brother, were all of the once large
family now left to occupy the old home, and these younger two were there
now only for the Christmas holidays, and at their close would return to
distant boarding-schools. Ella, the sister, was eighteen; Ralph two years
younger.

The house whence the mother and grandfather had been carried out to their
last long home but a few months before, could not be made the scene of
mirth and jollity, but to a day of quiet social intercourse with near and
dear relatives and friends none could object; so the family at Ion had
been invited to dine there the next day, and had accepted the invitation.

Lulu had been greatly interested in Grandma Elsie's party of children as
it told of had been invited to Ion for these holidays; but she did not
covet such a father as Mr. Dinsmore; he was much too strict and severe,
she thought, with all his petting and caressing, and she would far rather
have her own papa. Still Grandma Elsie's lot, when a little girl, seemed
to her an enviable one, so beautiful and so rich, and with a nice old
mammy always ready to wait on and do everything for her; and she (Lulu)
was sure she wouldn't have minded much when such a father as Mr. Dinsmore
was vexed with her; he wouldn't have found it so easy to manage her; no
indeed! She almost thought she should enjoy trying her strength in a tilt
with him even now.

Lulu was a rebel by nature, and ever found it difficult to combat the
inclination to defy authority and assert her entire independence of
control.

But fortunately this inclination was in great measure counterbalanced by
the warmth of her affections. She was ready to love all who treated her
with justice and kindness, and her love for her father was intense. To
please him she would do or endure almost anything; that more than any
other influence had kept her on her good behavior all these weeks.

She had sometimes rebelled inwardly, but there had been no greater
outward show of it than a frown or a pout, which soon vanished under the
kind and gentle treatment she received at the hands of Grandma Elsie and
Mamma Vi.

Captain Raymond would have been much gratified could he have seen how, not
only she, but all his children, were improving morally, mentally and
physically in the wholesome atmosphere of their new home.

Gracie had gained largely in strength and vivacity, her cheeks were
rounder and rosier than when she came to Ion, her eyes brighter; and
though not yet equal to violent exercise, she could enjoy quiet plays, and
would often laugh right merrily.

She had grown very fond of Dr. Conly, or Cousin Arthur as he told her to
call him, and he of his little patient. She was frequently hovering about
him during Christmas day; and received a special invitation to Roselands.

"You and your mamma are to be my particular guests," he said, "and if you
fail to enjoy yourselves it shall be from no fault of mine."

"We shall not fail," Violet said with confidence. "How could we with Cal
and yourself for our hosts?"

The day proved propitious, all went and all enjoyed their visit, though to
the older ones there was at first a feeling of subdued sadness in
thinking of the old grandfather, whose chair was now vacant, and who had
been wont to greet their coming with words of cordial welcome.

It was after dinner that Rose claimed her mother's promise.

"Well," said Elsie, glancing dreamily about, "this parlor where we are all
sitting occupies the same part of the house, and is almost exactly like
the one where the scenes I told you of took place."

"What scenes?" asked Dr. Conly, drawing near, with a look of interest.

Mr. Dinsmore, too, turned to listen.

"I have been telling the children about the Christmas holidays at
Roselands the first winter after my father's return from Europe," she
answered. "It was before you were born, Cousin Arthur, while your mother
was still a very young girl."

"Mamma," asked Rosie, "where was grandpa sitting when you went to him and
confessed that you had let Carry Howard cut off one of your curls?"

"Near yonder window. Do you remember it, papa?" she asked, looking
smilingly at him.

"Yes, I think I have forgotten very little that ever passed between us.
You were a remarkably honest, conscientious child--would come and confess
wrong-doing that I should never have known or suspected, even when you
thought it likely I should punish you severely for it."

"Now, mamma," said Rosie, "won't you go into the hall with us and show us
just where papa caught you, and kissed you, and gave you the gold thimble?
And then your room and grandpa's?"

"Arthur, have we your permission to roam over the house?" Elsie asked,
turning to him.

"Yes; provided you will let me go along, for I am as much interested as
the children."

"Come, then," she said, rising and taking Walter's hand, Rosie, Lulu, and
Gracie keeping close to her, and Mr. Dinsmore and Arthur following.

Pausing in the hall, she pointed out the precise spot where the little
scene had been enacted between herself and him who was afterward her
husband, telling the story between a smile and a tear, then moved on up
the stairs with her little procession.

Opening a door, "This was my room," she said, "or rather my room was here
before the old house was burned down. It looks just the same, except that
the furniture is different."

Then passing on to another, "This was papa's dressing-room. I have passed
many happy hours here, sitting by his side or on his knee. It was here I
opened the trunk full of finery and toys that he brought me a few days
before that Christmas.

"Papa," turning smilingly to him, and pointing to a closed door on the
farther side of the room, "do you remember my imprisonment in that
closet?"

"Yes," he answered, with a remorseful look, "but don't speak of it. How
very ready I was to punish you for the most trifling fault."

"Indeed, papa," she answered earnestly, "it was no such trifle, for I had
disobeyed a plain order not to ask a second time for permission to do what
you had once forbidden."

"True; but I now see that a child so sensitive, conscientious and
affectionate as you were, would have been sufficiently punished by a mild
rebuke."

"A year or two later you discovered and acted upon that," she said, with
an affectionate look up into his face. "But at this time you were a very
young father; and when I remember how you took me on your knee, by the
fire there, and warmed my hands and feet, petting and fondling me, and
what a nice evening I had with you afterward, I could almost wish to go
through it all again."

"Hark! what was that?" exclaimed Rosie.

Every one paused to listen.

There was a sound of sobbing as of a child in sore distress, and it
seemed to come from the closet.

"There's somebody shut up there now," Walter said in a loud, excited
whisper. "Grandpa, can't she be let out?"

Arthur strode hastily across the room and threw the closet door wide open.

There was no one there. They glanced at each other in surprise and
perplexity.

"Ah, ha, ah, ha! um, h'm! ah, ah! the lassie's no there, eh?" said a voice
behind them, and turning quickly at the sound, whom should they see but
Mr. Lilburn standing in the open doorway leading to the hall.

"But we know all about her now, sir," said Arthur with a laugh, in which
he was joined by every one present.




CHAPTER XIII.

    "Evil communications corrupt good manners."
                             --1 _Cor._ 15:33.


The one drawback upon Max's perfect enjoyment of his new home was the lack
of a companion of his own age and sex; the only boys in the family
connection, or among the near neighbors, were nearly grown to manhood or
very little fellows.

Therefore, when Ralph Conly came home for the Christmas holidays, and
though four years older than himself, at once admitted him to a footing of
intimacy, Max was both pleased and flattered.

Ralph's manner, to be sure, was more condescending than was altogether
agreeable, but that seemed not inexcusable, considering his superiority in
years and knowledge of the world.

At Ion, Max played the part of host, taking Ralph up to his own bedroom to
show him his books and other treasures, to the boys' work-room, out to the
stables to see the horses, and about the grounds.

To-day, at Roselands, it was Ralph's turn to entertain. He soon drew Max
away from the company in the parlors, showed him the horses and dogs, then
invited him to take a walk.

It was near dinner time when they returned. After dinner he took him to
his room, and producing a pack of cards, invited him to play.

"Cards!" exclaimed Max. "I don't know anything about playing with them,
and don't want to."

"Why not? are you too pious?" Ralph asked with a sneer, tumbling them out
in a heap upon the table.

"I've always been taught that men gamble with cards, and that gambling is
very wicked and disgraceful, quite as bad as getting drunk."

"Pooh! you're a muff!"

"I'd rather be a muff than a gambler, any day," returned Max with spirit.

"Pshaw! 'tisn't gambling, unless you play for money, and I haven't asked
you to do that, and don't propose to. Come now, take a hand," urged Ralph
persuasively. "There isn't a bit more harm in it than in a game of ball."

"But I don't know how," objected Max.

"I'll teach you," said Ralph. "You'll soon learn and will find it good
sport."

At length Max yielded, though not without some qualms of conscience which
he tried to quiet by saying to himself, "Papa never said I shouldn't play
in this way; only that gambling was very wicked, and I must never go where
it was done."

"Have a cigar?" said Ralph, producing two, handing one to Max, and
proceeding to light the other. "You smoke, of course; every gentleman
does."

Max never had, and did not care to, but was so foolish as to be ashamed to
refuse after that last remark of Ralph's; beside having seen his father
smoke a cigar occasionally, he thought there could be no harm in it.

"Thank you, I don't care if I do," he said, and was soon puffing away as
if quite accustomed to it.

But it was not many minutes before he began to feel sick and faint, then
to find himself trembling and growing giddy.

He tried to conceal his sensations, and fought against them as long as
possible. But at length, finding he could endure it no longer, he threw
the stump of the cigar into the fire, and rising, said, "I--I feel sick. I
must get out into the air."

He took a step forward, staggered, and would have fallen, if Ralph had not
jumped up and caught him.

"Here, I'll help you to the bed and open the window," he said. "Never
smoked before? Well, don't be discouraged; I was deathly sick first time
myself."

"I'm half blind and awfully sick," groaned Max, as he stretched himself on
the bed. "Does it last long? can a fellow get over it without taking any
medicine?"

"Oh, yes; you'll be all right after a little."

But Max was not all right when a servant came to the door to say that he
was wanted down-stairs, as the party from Ion were about to return home.

"Think you can get down with the help of my arm?" asked Ralph.

"Don't b'lieve he kin, Marse Ralph," remarked the servant, gazing
earnestly at Max. "What's de mattah wid de young gentleman? He's white as
de wall, and his eyes looks like glass."

"Hush, Sam! you'll frighten him," whispered Ralph. "Run down and ask my
brother Arthur to come up. Don't let anybody else hear you."

Max had tried to rise, but only to fall back again sicker than ever.

"Oh, but I'm sick, and how my heart beats!" he said. "I can't possibly sit
up, much less walk down-stairs. What will Mamma Vi and the rest say? I'm
afraid Grandpa Dinsmore will be very angry with me."

"He hasn't any right to be," said Ralph; "'tisn't wicked to smoke. But
I'll tell Art not to let him know what made you sick."

Just then the doctor came in. Sam had met him in the hall.

"What's the matter?" he asked; "sick, Max? Ah, you've been smoking?"
sniffing the air of the room and glancing at the boy's pallid face.

"Tell him it isn't dangerous. Art," laughed Ralph, "for I do believe he's
dreadfully scared."

"No, I'm not!" protested Max indignantly, "but I'm sick, and giddy, and
half blind. I never smoked before, and didn't know it would sicken me so."

"How many cigars have you smoked?" asked Arthur, taking hold of his wrist.

"Only half a one," said Ralph; "he threw the rest of it in the fire."

"The best place for it," said Arthur. "Don't be alarmed, my boy, the
sickness and all the other bad effects will pass off after a while; all
the sooner if you are breathing pure air. Ralph, open the door into the
hall and the one opposite. Then ring for Sam to kindle a fire in that
room."

As he spoke he took Max in his arms, and, Ralph preceding them to open the
doors, carried him into an unoccupied bedroom, laid him on a couch, and
covered him up carefully to guard against his taking cold.

"No need to ring for Sam; fire's laid all ready to kindle," remarked
Ralph, glancing at the open grate.

He struck a match, and in another minute the flames were leaping up right
merrily.

Meantime a report that Max was sick had reached the parlor, and Mr.
Dinsmore, his daughter, and granddaughter came up to express their
sympathy and see for themselves how serious the illness was. Their faces
were full of anxiety and concern till they learned the cause of the
sickness, when they evidently felt much relieved.

"Dear boy, I'm sorry you are suffering," Violet said, leaning over him,
"but I hope you will never try it again."

"Papa smokes," he said, "so I thought it was all right for me."

"No," said Mr. Dinsmore; "a grown person may sometimes do safely what is
dangerous for a younger one. You have my sympathy this time, Max, but if
ever you make yourself sick in the same way again, I don't think I shall
pity you at all. He will hardly be able to go home to-day, Arthur?"

"No, sir; leave him here in my care. To-morrow he will probably be quite
recovered, and I will drive him over in my gig."

"Would you like me to stay with you, Max?" Violet asked, laying her cool
hand on his forehead.

"Or me?" asked her mother.

"No, thank you, Grandma Elsie and Mamma Vi," he said. "You are both very
kind, but Walter and Gracie wouldn't know what to do without you; and I
shall do very well."

"Yes," said Ralph, "I'll help Art take care of him. I ought to, as I gave
him the cigar that sickened him so."

Mr. Dinsmore and the ladies then bade good-by and went down-stairs, the
doctor accompanying them, leaving the two boys alone together.

"Do you begin to get over it, old fellow?" asked Ralph.

"No; I'm wretchedly sick," said Max. "I think I've had enough tobacco to
last me all my days."

"O pshaw! it won't be half so bad next time, and pretty soon won't sicken
you at all."

"But what should I gain to pay me for all the suffering?"

"Well, it seems sort o' babyish not to smoke."

"Does it? I've never seen Grandpa Dinsmore smoke, and I don't believe he
ever does, nor Uncle Edward, nor Uncle Horace either."

"No, they don't, and Art doesn't, but they're all sort o' pious old
fogies," Ralph said, with a coarse laugh.

"I wouldn't talk so about my own relations, if I were you," returned Max,
in a tone of disgust.

"Of course I shouldn't let anybody else say a word against them," said
Ralph.

Arthur's entrance put an end to the conversation. He inquired of Max if
the sickness were abating; then sitting down beside him, "Boys," he said,
"I want to talk to you a little about this silly business of smoking and
chewing."

"I've never chewed," said Max.

"I'm glad to hear it, and I hope you never will, or smoke again either.
How would you like, Max, to have a cancer on your lip?"

"Cancer, sir? I wouldn't choose to have one for anything in the world."

"Then don't smoke, especially a short pipe, for it often causes cancer of
the lip. I cut one out of a man's lip the other day; and not long ago saw
a man die from one after months of agonizing pain. Tobacco contains a
great deal of virulent poison, and though some persons use it for many
years without much apparent injury, it costs many others loss of health
and even of life. It weakens the nerves and the action of the heart, and
is a fruitful source of dyspepsia."

"Pooh! I don't believe it will ever hurt me," said Ralph.

"I think it will," said Arthur; "you have not yet attained your growth,
and therefore are the more certain to be injured by its use.

"Max, my boy, I admire your father greatly, particularly his magnificent
physique."

Max flushed with pleasure.

"Do you not wish to be like him in that? as tall and finely developed?"

"Yes, sir; yes, indeed! I want to be like papa in everything!"

"Then eschew tobacco, for it will stunt your growth!"

"But papa smokes," repeated Max.

"Now, but probably he did not until grown," said Arthur. "And very likely
he sometimes wishes he had never contracted the habit. Now I must leave
you for a time, as I have some other patients to visit."

"I told you he was an old fogy," said Ralph, as the door closed on his
brother, adding with an oath, "I believe he wouldn't allow a fellow a bit
of pleasure if he could help it."

Max started, and looked at Ralph with troubled eyes. "I didn't think you
would swear," he said. "If you do, I--I can't be intimate with you,
because my father won't allow it."

"I don't often," said Ralph, looking ashamed, "I won't again in your
company."




CHAPTER XIV.

    "Be sure your sin will find you out."
                     --_Num._ 32:33.


Gracie and Walter were in the play-room. They had been building
block-houses for an hour or more, when Gracie, saying, "I'm tired, Walter,
I'm going in yonder to see the things Max and Lulu are making," rose and
sauntered into the work-room.

She watched the busy carvers for some minutes, then went down to Violet's
apartments in search of her.

She found no one there but Agnes busied in putting away some clean
clothes, fresh from the iron.

"Where's mamma?" asked the little girl.

"In de drawin'-room, Miss Gracie. Comp'ny dar."

"Oh, dear!" sighed Gracie, "I just wanted her to talk to me."

"'Spect you hab to wait till de comp'ny am gone," returned Agnes, picking
up her empty clothes-basket and leaving the room.

Gracie wandered disconsolately about the rooms, wishing that the callers
would go and mamma come up. Presently she paused before the bureau in
Violet's dressing-room, and began fingering the pretty things on it.

She was not usually a meddlesome child, but just now was tempted to
mischief from the lack of something else to interest and employ her.

She handled the articles carefully, however, and did them no damage till
she came to a beautiful cut-glass bottle filled with a costly perfume of
which she was extravagantly fond.

Violet had frequently given her a few drops on her handkerchief without
being asked, and never refused a request for it.

Gracie, seized with a desire for it, took a clean handkerchief from a
drawer and helped herself, saying half aloud, by way of quieting her
conscience, "Mamma would give it to me if she was here, she always does,
and I'll be careful not to break the bottle."

She was pouring from it as she spoke. Just at that instant she heard a
step in the hall without, and a sound as if a hand was laid on the
door-knob.

It so startled her that the bottle slipped from her fingers, and striking
the bureau as it fell, lay in fragments at her feet; its contents were
spilled upon the carpet, and the air of the room was redolent of the
delicious perfume.

Gracie, naturally a timid child, shrinking from everything like reproof or
punishment, stood aghast at the mischief she had wrought.

"What will mamma say?" was her first thought. "Oh, I'm afraid she will be
so vexed with me that she'll never love me any more!" And the tears came
thick and fast, for mamma's love was very sweet to the little feeble
child, who had been so long without a mother's care and tenderness.

Then arose the wish to hide her fault. Oh, if she could only replace the
bottle! but that was quite impossible. Perhaps, though, there might be a
way found to conceal the fact that she was the author of the mishap; she
did not want to have any one else blamed for her fault, but she would like
not to be suspected of it herself.

A bright thought struck her. She had seen the cat jump on that bureau a
few days before and walk back and forth over it. If she (pussy) had been
left in the room alone there that afternoon she might have done the same
thing again, and knocked the bottle off upon the floor.

It would be no great harm, the little girl reasoned, trying to stifle the
warnings and reproaches of conscience, if she should let pussy take the
blame.

Mamma was kind, and wouldn't have pussy beaten, and pussy's feelings
wouldn't be hurt, either, by the suspicion.

She hurried out in search of the cat, found her in the hall, pounced on
her, carried her into the dressing-room, and left her there with all the
doors shut, so that she could not escape, till some one going in would
find the bottle broken, and think the cat had done it.

This accomplished, Gracie went back to the play-room and tried to forget
her wrong-doing in the interesting employment of dressing her dolls.

Lulu presently left her carving and joined her. Max had gone for a ride.

While chasing the cat Gracie had not perceived a little woolly head thrust
out of a door at the farther end of the hall, its keen black eyes closely
watching her movements.

"He, he, he!" giggled the owner of the head, as Gracie secured pussy and
hurried into the dressing-room with her, "wondah what she done dat fer!"

"What you talkin' 'bout, you sassy niggah?" asked Agnes, coming up behind
her on her way to Mrs. Raymond's apartments with another basket of clean
clothes, just as Gracie reappeared and hurried up the stairs to the story
above."

"Why, Miss Gracie done come pounce on ole Tab while she paradin' down de
hall, and ketch her up an' tote her off into Miss Wilet's dressin'-room,
an's lef her dar wid de do' shut on her. What for you s'pose she done do
dat?"

"Oh, go 'long! I don' b'lieve Miss Gracie didn't do no sich ting!"
returned Agnes.

"She did den, I seed her," asserted the little maid positively. "Mebbe she
heerd de mices runnin' 'round an want ole Tab for to ketch 'em."

"You go 'long and 'tend to yo' wuk. Bet, you lazy niggah," responded
Agnes, pushing past her. "Miss Wilet an Miss Gracie dey'll min' dere own
consarns widout none o' yo' help."

The child made no reply, but stole on tiptoe after Agnes.

Violet was coming up the front stairway, and reached the door of her
dressing-room, just in advance of the girl. Opening it she exclaimed at
the powerful perfume which greeted her nostrils, then catching sight of
the bottle lying in fragments on the floor.

"Who can have done this?" she asked in a tone of surprise not wholly free
from displeasure.

"De cat, mos' likely, Miss Wilet," said Agnes, setting down her basket and
glancing at puss who was stretched comfortably on the rug before the fire.
"I s'pect she's been running ober de bureau, like I see her do, mor'n
once 'fo' dis."

"She looks very quiet now," remarked Violet, "and if she did the mischief
it was certainly not intentional. But don't leave her shut up here again,
Agnes."

"She didn't do it, Agnes didn't," volunteered Betty, who had stolen in
after them; "it was Miss Gracie, Miss Wilet, I seed her ketch ole Tab out
in de hall dere, and put her in hyar, an' shut de do onto her, an' go off
up-stairs."

A suspicion of the truth flashed into Violet's mind; but she put it
resolutely from her; she would not believe Gracie capable of slyness and
deceit.

But she wanted the little girl, and sent Betty up with a message to that
effect, bidding her make haste, and as soon as she had attended to that
errand, brush up the broken glass and put it in the fire.

Betty ran nimbly up to the play-room, and putting her head in at the door,
said with a grin, "Miss Gracie, yo' ma wants you down in de
dressin'-room."

"What for?" asked Gracie, with a frightened look.

"Dunno, s'pect you fin' out when you gits dar."

"Betty, you're a saucy thing," said Lulu.

"S'pect mebbe I is, Miss Lu," returned the little maid with a broader grin
than before, apparently considering the remark quite complimentary, while
she held the door open for Gracie to pass out.

"Miss Gracie," she asked, as she followed Grace down the stairs, "what fo'
you shut ole Tab up in de dressin'-room? She's done gone an' broke Miss
Wilet's bottle what hab de stuff dat smell so nice, an' cose Miss Wilet
she don' like dat ar."

"What makes you say I put her in there, Betty?" said Gracie.

"Kase I seed you, he, he, he!"

"Did you?" asked Gracie, looking still more alarmed than at the summons to
the dressing-room. "Don't tell mamma, Betty. I'll give you a penny and
help you make a frock for your doll if you won't."

Betty's only answer was a broad grin and a chuckle as she sprang past
Gracie and opened the door for her.

Violet, seated on the farther side of the room, looked up with her usual
sweet smile. "See, Gracie dear, I am making a lace collar for you, and I
want to try it on to see if it fits."

"Now, Betty, get a dust-pan and brush and sweep up that glass. Don't leave
the least bit of it on the carpet, lest some one should tramp on it and
cut her foot."

"Some one has broken that cut-glass perfume bottle you have always admired
so much, Gracie. Aren't you sorry?"

"Yes, I am, mamma. I never touch your things when you're not here."

The words were out almost before Grace knew she meant to speak them, and
she was terribly frightened and ashamed. She had never thought she would
be guilty of telling a lie. She hung her head, her cheeks aflame.

Violet noted the child's confusion with a sorely troubled heart.

"No, dear," she said very gently, "I did not suspect you, but if ever you
should meet with an accident, or yield to temptation to do some mischief,
I hope you will come and tell me about it at once. You need not fear that
I will be severe with you, for I love you very dearly, little Gracie."

"Perhaps it was the cat knocked it off the bureau, mamma," said the child,
speaking low and hesitatingly. "I've seen her jump up there several
times."

"Yes; so have I, and she must not be left alone in here any more."

Betty had finished her work and was sent away. Agnes, too, had left the
room, so that Violet and Gracie were quite alone.

"Come, dear, I am quite ready to try this on." Violet said, holding up the
collar. "There, it fits very nicely," as she put it on the child and
gently smoothed it down over her shoulders. "But what is the matter, my
darling?" for tears were trembling on the long silken lashes that swept
Gracie's flushed cheeks.

At the question they began to fall in streams, while the little bosom
heaved with sobs. She pulled out a handkerchief from her pocket to wipe
her eyes, and a strong whiff of perfume greeted Violet's nostrils, telling
a tale that sent a pang to her heart.

Gracie was instantly conscious of it, as she, too, smelled the tell-tale
perfume, and stole a glance at her young stepmother's face.

"O mamma!" she sobbed, covering her face with her hands, "I did pour a
little on my handkerchief 'cause I knew you always let me have it, but I
didn't mean to break the bottle; it just slipped out o' my hands and fell
and broke."

Violet clasped her in her arms and wept bitterly over her.

"Mamma, don't cry," sobbed the child, "I'll save up all my money till I
can buy you another bottle, just like that."

"O Gracie, Gracie, it is not that!" Violet said, when emotion would let
her speak. "I valued the bottle as the gift of my dear dead father, but I
would rather have lost it a hundred times over than have my darling tell a
lie. It is so wicked, so wicked! God hates lying. He says, 'All liars
shall have their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone.'
'He that speaketh lies shall not escape.' He says that Satan is the father
of lies, and that those who are guilty of lying are the children of that
wicked one.

"Have you forgotten how God punished Gehazi for lying by making him a
leper, and struck Ananias and Sapphira dead for the same sin? O my
darling, my darling, it breaks my heart to think you have both acted and
spoken a falsehood!" she cried, clasping the child still closer to her
bosom and weeping over her afresh.

Gracie, too, cried bitterly. "Mamma, mamma," she said, "will God never
forgive me? will He send me to that dreadful place?"

"He will forgive you if you are truly sorry for your sin because it is
dishonoring and displeasing to Him, and if you ask Him to pardon you for
Jesus' sake; and He will take away the evil nature that leads you to
commit sin, giving you a new and good heart, and take you to heaven when
you die.

"But no one can go to heaven who is not first made holy. The Bible bids us
follow 'holiness without which no man shall see the Lord.' And Jesus is a
Saviour from sin. 'Thou shalt call His name Jesus, for He shall save His
people from their sins.' Shall we kneel down now and ask Him to save you
from yours?"

"Yes, mamma," sobbed the child.

Violet's prayer was short and to the point. Then she held Gracie for some
time in her arms, while they mingled their tears together.

At length, "Gracie dear," she said, "I believe God has heard our prayer
and forgiven you. I am sure He has if you are truly sorry in your heart
and asked with it, and not only with your lips, for forgiveness; but I
want you to stay here alone for an hour and think it all over quietly, I
mean about your wrongdoing and God's willingness to forgive for Jesus'
sake, and that we could not have been forgiven and saved from sin and hell
if the dear Saviour had not died for us the cruel death of the cross.

"Oh, think what a dreadful thing sin must be that it could not be blotted
out except by Jesus suffering and dying in our stead! And think how great
was His love for us, when He was willing to lay down His own life that we
might live!"

Then with a kiss of tender motherly love, she went out and left the child
alone.

Gracie was sincerely penitent. She had always been taught that lying was a
dreadful sin, and had never before told a direct falsehood; but while in
her former home, Mrs. Scrimp's faulty management, joined to her own
natural timidity, had tempted her to occasional slyness and deceit, and
from these the descent to positive untruth was easy.

Violet's faithful dealing, and even more her evident deep distress because
of the sin against God of which her darling had been guilty, had so
convinced the child of the heinousness of her conduct that she was sorely
distressed because of it, and on being left alone, knelt down again and
pleaded for pardon with many bitter tears and sobs.

She had risen from her knees and was lying on a couch, still weeping, when
Lulu came into the room.

"Why, Gracie, what is the matter?" she asked, running to the couch and
bending over her little sister in tender concern.

"Don't ask me, Lulu, I don't want to tell you," sobbed Gracie, turning
away her blushing, tear-stained face.

"Mamma Vi has been scolding or punishing you for some little naughtiness,
I suppose," said Lulu, frowning.

"No, she hasn't!" cried Gracie indignantly; then hastily correcting
herself, "except that she said she wanted me to stay here alone for a
while. So you must go and leave me."

"I won't till you tell me what it was all about. What did you do? or was
it something you didn't do?"

"I don't want to tell you, 'cause you wouldn't ever do such a wicked
thing, and you--you'd despise me if you knew I'd done it," sobbed Gracie.

"No, I wouldn't. You are better than I am. Papa said I was worse than you
and Max both put together. So you needn't mind my knowing."

"I meddled and broke mamma's pretty bottle that her dead father gave her;
but she didn't scold me for that; not a bit; but--but 'cause I tried to
put the blame on puss, and--and said I--I never touched her things when
she wasn't here."

"O Gracie, that _was_ wicked! to say what wasn't true! I think papa would
have whipped you, for I've heard him say if there was anything he would
punish severely in one of his children, it was falsehood. But don't cry
so. I'm sure you're sorry and won't ever do it again."

"No, no! never, never! Mamma hugged me up in her arms and cried hard
'cause I'd been so wicked. And she asked Jesus to forgive me and make me
good, so I shouldn't have to go to that dreadful place. Now go away, Lu,
'cause she said I must stay alone."

"Yes, I will; but stop crying or you'll be sick," Lulu said, kissing
Gracie, then left the room and went to her own to make herself neat before
going down to join the family at tea.

Her thoughts were busy with Gracie and her trouble while she brushed her
hair, washed her hands, and changed her dress. "Poor, little weak thing,
she was frightened into it, of course, for it's the very first time she
ever told an untruth. I suppose Mamma Vi must have looked very cross about
the broken bottle; and she needn't, I'm sure, for she has plenty of money
to buy more. Such a shame! but I just knew she wouldn't always be kind to
us."

Thus Lulu worked herself up into a passion, quite forgetting, in her
unreasonable anger, how very mild was the punishment Violet had decreed to
Gracie (if indeed it was meant as such at all); so much less severe than
the one she herself had said their father would have been likely to
administer.

Max was riding without companion or attendant. He had taken the direction
of the village, but not with any thought of going there until, as he
reached its outskirts, it occurred to him that he was nearly out of wood
for carving, and that this would be a good opportunity for laying in a
supply.

The only difficulty was that he had not asked leave before starting, and
it was well understood that he was not at liberty to go
anywhere--visiting or shopping--without permission.

"How provoking!" he exclaimed half aloud. "I haven't time to go back and
ask leave, and a long storm may set in before to-morrow, and so my work be
stopped for two or three days. I'll just go on, for what's the difference,
anyhow? I'm almost there, and I know I'd have got leave if I'd only
thought of asking."

So on he went, made his purchase, and set off home with it.

He was rather late: a storm seemed brewing, and as he rode up the avenue
Violet was at the window looking out a little anxiously for him.

Mr. Dinsmore, hearing her relieved exclamation, "Ah, there he is!" came to
her side as Max was in the act of dismounting.

"The boy has evidently been into the town making a purchase," he said.
"Had he permission from you or any one, Violet?"

"Not from me, grandpa," she answered with reluctance.

"Did you give him leave, Elsie?" he asked, turning to his daughter. "Or
you, wife?"

Both answered in the negative, and with a very stern countenance Mr.
Dinsmore went out to the hall to meet the delinquent.

"Where have you been, Max?" he asked, in no honeyed accents.

"For a ride, sir," returned the lad respectfully.

"Not merely for a ride," Mr. Dinsmore said, pointing to the package in the
boy's hand; "you did not pick that up by the roadside. Where have you
been?"

"I stopped at Turner's just long enough to buy this wood that I shall need
for carving to-morrow. I should have asked leave, but forgot to do so."

"Then you should have come home and left the errand for another day. You
were well aware that in going without permission you were breaking rules.
You will go immediately to your room and stay there until this time
to-morrow."

"I think you're very hard on a fellow," muttered Max, flushing with
mortification and anger as he turned to obey.

Lulu, coming down the stairs, had heard and seen it all. She stood still
for a moment at the foot of the stairway, giving Mr. Dinsmore a look that,
had it been a dagger, would have stabbed him to the heart, but which he
did not see; then, just as the tea-bell rang, turned and began the ascent
again.

"Why are you going back, Lulu? did you not hear the supper bell?" asked
Mr. Dinsmore.

"Yes, sir," she answered, facing him again with flashing eyes, "but if my
brother is not to go to the table neither will I."

"Oh, very well," he said; "you certainly do not deserve a seat there after
such a speech as that. Go to your own room and stay there until you find
yourself in a more amiable and respectful mood."

It was exactly what she had intended to do, but because he ordered it, it
instantly became the thing she did not want to do.

However, she went into her room, and closing the door after her, not too
gently, said aloud with a stamp of her foot, "Hateful old tyrant!" then
walked on into Violet's dressing-room, where her sister still was.

Gracie had lain down upon a sofa and wept herself to sleep, but the supper
bell had waked her, and she was crying again. Catching sight of Lulu's
flushed, angry face, she asked what was the matter.

"I wish we could go away from these people and never, never come back
again!" cried Lulu in her vehement way.

"I don't," said Gracie. "I love mamma and Grandma Elsie, and Grandma Rose,
and Grandpa Dinsmore, too, and----"

"I hate him! I'd like to beat him! the old tyrant!" interrupted Lulu, in a
burst of passion.

"O Lu! I'm sure he's been kind to us; they're all kind to us when we're
good," expostulated Grace. "But what has happened to make you so angry,
and why aren't you eating your supper with the rest?"

"Do you think I'd go and sit at the table with them when they won't have
you and Max there, too?"

"What about Max? did he do something wrong, too?"

"No; it wasn't anything wicked; he just bought some wood for his carving
with some of his own money."

"But maybe he went without leave?" Gracie said, half inquiringly.

"Yes, that was it; he forgot to ask. A very little thing to punish him
for, I'm sure; but Mr. Dinsmore (I sha'n't call him grandpa) says he must
stay in his own room till this time to-morrow."

"Why," said Gracie, "that's worse than mamma's punishment to me for--for
doing such a wicked, wicked thing!"

"Yes, she's not such a cruel tyrant. He'd have beaten you black and blue.
I hope she won't tell him about it."

A terrified look came into Gracie's eyes, and she burst out crying again.

"O Gracie, don't!" Lulu entreated, kneeling down beside the sofa and
clasping her arms about her. "I didn't mean to frighten you so. Of
course, Mamma Vi won't; if she meant to she'd have done it before now, and
you'd have heard from him, too."

A step came along the hall, the door opened, and Agnes appeared bearing a
large silver waiter.

"Ise brung yo' suppah, chillens," she said, setting it down on a table.

Then lifting a stand and placing it near Gracie's couch, she presently had
it covered with a snowy cloth and a dainty little meal arranged upon it:
broiled chicken, stewed oysters, delicate rolls, hot buttered muffins and
waffles, canned peaches with sugar and rich cream, sponge cake, nice and
fresh, and abundance of rich sweet milk.

The little girls viewed these dainties with great satisfaction, and
suddenly discovered that they were very hungry.

Agnes set up a chair for each, saw them begin their meal, then left the
room, saying she would be back again directly with more hot cakes.

"There, Gracie, you needn't be the least bit afraid you're to be punished
any more," remarked Lulu. "They'd never have sent us such a supper as this
if they wanted to punish us."

"Do you want to run away from them now?" asked Gracie. "Do you think
Grandpa Dinsmore is so very, very cross to us?"

"He's too hard on Max," returned Lulu, "though not so hard as he used to
be on Grandma Elsie when she was his own little girl; and perhaps papa
would be just as hard as he is with Max."

"But 'tisn't 'cause they like to make us sorry, except for being naughty,
so that we'll grow up good, you know," said Grace. "I'm sure our dear papa
loves us, every one, and wouldn't ever make us sorry except just to make
us good. And you know we can't be happy here, or go to heaven when we die,
if we're not good."

"Yes, I know," said Lulu; "I'm not a bit happy when I'm angry and
stubborn, but for all that I can't help it."




CHAPTER XV.

    "Happy in this, she is not yet so old
     But she may learn."
                     --Shakespeare.


Violet, meeting her grandfather on the way to the supper-room, gave him an
anxious, troubled inquiring look, which he answered by a brief statement,
given in an undertone, of what had just passed between himself and Max and
Lulu.

"All of them!" sighed the young stepmother to herself, "all three of them
at once! Ah me!"

Though Mr. Dinsmore had spoken low, both his daughter and Zoe had heard
nearly all he said, and as they sat down to the table the one looked
grieved and distressed, the other angry.

During the meal Zoe never once addressed Mr. Dinsmore, and when he spoke
to her she answered as briefly as possible, and not in a very pleasant or
respectful tone.

Edward noticed it, and looked at her in displeased surprise; then,
becoming aware of the absence of the Raymonds, asked, "Where are Max,
Lulu, and Gracie?"

He had not heard the story of their disgrace, having come to the
supper-room a little later than the others, and directly from his own.

For a moment the question, addressed to no one in particular, remained
unanswered; then Mr. Dinsmore said, "Max and Lulu are in disgrace. I know
nothing about Gracie, but presume she is not feeling well enough to come
down."

Zoe darted an angry glance at him.

Violet looked slightly relieved. She had not spoken at all of Gracie's
wrongdoing, and did not want any one to know of it.

"I may send the children their supper, grandpa?" she said inquiringly,
with a pleading look.

"Do just as you please about it," he answered. "Of course I would not have
growing children go fasting for any length of time; certainly not all
night, for that would be to the injury of their health; and I leave it to
you to decide how luxurious their meal shall be."

"Thank you, grandpa," she said, and at once gave the requisite order.

Meanwhile Max had obeyed the order to go to his room in almost as angry
and rebellious a mood as Lulu's own. He shut the door, threw down his
package, tore off his overcoat and stamped about the floor for a minute
or two, fuming and raging.

"I say it's just shameful! abominable treatment! I'm tired being treated
like a baby, and I won't stand it! The idea of being shut up here for
twenty-four hours for such a trifle! Oh, dear!" he added, dropping into a
chair, "I'm as hungry as a bear. I wonder if he doesn't mean to let me
have any supper? I don't believe Mamma Vi would approve of his starving me
altogether; no, nor Grandma Elsie, either; I hope they'll manage to give
me something to eat before bedtime. If they don't, I believe I'll try to
bribe Tom when he comes to see to the fire."

It was not long before he heard Tom's step on the stairs, then his knock
on the door.

"Come in," he answered, in cheerful tones; then, as he caught sight of a
waiter full of good things, such as his sisters were supping upon,
"Hurrah! Tom, you're a brick! But who sent it?"

"Miss Wilet; and she says if dars not nuff ob it to satisfy yo' appetite,
you's to ring for mo'."

"All right; tell Mamma Vi I'm much obliged," said Max.

"Very good prison fare," he added to himself, as he fell to work, Tom
having withdrawn, "I've good reason to be fond of Mamma Vi, and as she's
fond of her grandfather, I s'pose I'll have to forgive him for her sake,"
he concluded, quite restored to good humor, and laughing gleefully at his
own jest.

"O Lulu," exclaimed Gracie, struck with a sudden recollection, and laying
down the spoon with which she was eating her oysters, "you know I was to
stay alone. You oughtn't to have come in here."

"Pooh! your time was up a good while ago," returned Lulu, "and Mamma Vi
must have expected me to come in here to eat supper along with you. I hope
she has sent as good a one to poor Maxie."

Violet went directly from the supper-room to her own apartments, where she
found the two little girls quietly talking together, while Agnes gathered
up the remainder of their repast and carried it and the dishes away.

"I hope you enjoyed your supper, dears," she said.

They both said they had, and thanked her for it.

"And I didn't deserve it, mamma," added Gracie, her tears beginning to
fall again; "but oh, I'm sorry, very sorry! Please, mamma, forgive me."

"I have entirely forgiven the sin against me, darling," whispered Violet,
folding her close to her heart, "and I trust God has forgiven your far
greater sin against Him. Now do not cry any more, or you will make
yourself sick, and that would make me very sad."

Lulu was sitting near fighting a battle with pride and passion, in which
ere-long she came off conqueror.

"Mamma Vi," she said with determination, "I didn't deserve it either, and
I'm sorry, too, for being angry at your grandfather and saucy to him."

"Dear child," said Violet, drawing her to her side and kissing her with
affectionate warmth, "how glad I am to hear you say that. May I repeat
your words to grandpa as a message from you?"

Again Lulu had a struggle with herself, and perhaps it was only the
thought that this was the easiest way to make an apology, which would
probably be required of her sooner or later, that helped her to conquer.

Her entry in her diary in regard to the occurrence was, "I was a little
saucy to Grandpa Dinsmore because he was hard on Max for just a little bit
of a trifle, but I've said I'm sorry, and it's all right now."

       *       *       *       *       *

Edward and his grandfather having a business matter to talk over together,
repaired to the library on leaving the table, and Zoe, instead of going,
as usual, to the parlor with the others, went to her own rooms.

She had seen Violet, who was a little in advance of her, going into hers,
and only waiting to take a little package from a closet, she ran lightly
up to Max's door, tapped gently on it, then in her eagerness, opened it
slightly, with a whispered, "It's only I, Max. May I come in?"

"Yes, indeed," he answered, springing forward to admit her and hand her a
chair. "How good in you to come, Aunt Zoe!"

"No, I did it to please myself. You know you've always been a favorite
with me, Max, and I want to know what this is all about."

Max told her.

"It's a perfect shame!" she exclaimed indignantly. "I can't see the least
bit of harm in your going to the store and buying what you did. You
weren't even wasting the pocket money that you had a right to spend as you
pleased. Grandpa Dinsmore is a--a--rather tyrannical, I think."

"It does seem hard to have so little liberty," Max said, discontentedly,
"but I don't know that he's any more strict, after all, than papa."

"Well, I must run away now," said Zoe, jumping up. "Here's something to
sweeten your imprisonment," putting a box of confectionery into his hand.
"Good-by," and she tripped away.

She met her husband in the hall upon which their rooms opened. "Where have
you been?" he asked coldly, and with a suspicious look.

"That's my affair," she returned, flushing, and with a saucy little toss
of her pretty head.

He gave her a glance of mingled surprise and displeasure. "What has come
over you, Zoe?" he asked. "Can't you give a civil answer to a simple
question?"

"Of course I can, Mr. Travilla, but I think it's a pretty story if I'm to
be called to account as to where I go even about the house."

"Nothing but a guilty conscience could have made you look at my question
in that light," he said, leaning against the mantel and looking down
severely at her as she stood before him, for they were now in her boudoir.
"I presume you have been in Max's room, condoling with and encouraging him
in his defiance of grandpa's authority; and let me tell you, I won't allow
it."

"It makes no difference whether you allow it or not," she said, turning
away with a contemptuous sniff. "I'm my own mistress."

"Do you mean to defy my authority, Zoe?" he asked, with suppressed anger.

"Yes, I do. I'll do anything in the world for love and coaxing, but I
won't be driven. I'm your wife, sir, not your slave."

"I have no desire to enslave you, Zoe," he said, his tone softening, "but
you are so young, so very young for a married woman, that you surely ought
to be willing to submit to a little loving guidance and control."

"I didn't perceive much love in the attempt you made just now," she said,
seating herself and opening a book.

He watched her for a moment. She seemed absorbed in reading, and he could
not see that the downcast eyes were too full of tears to distinguish one
letter from another.

He left the room without another word, and hardly had the door closed on
him when she flung the book from her, ran into the dressing-room, and
throwing herself on a couch, cried as if her heart would break.

"He's all I have, all I have!" she moaned, "and he's beginning to be cruel
to me! Oh, what shall I do! what shall I do! Papa, papa, why did you die
and leave your darling all alone in this cold world?"

She hoped Edward would come back presently, say he was sorry for his
brutal behavior, and try to make his peace with her by coaxing and
petting; but he did not, and after a while she gave up expecting him,
undressed, went to bed and cried herself to sleep, feeling that she was a
sadly ill-used wife.

Meanwhile Edward had returned to the library for a time, then gone into
the family parlor, hoping and half expecting to find Zoe there with the
rest; but the first glance showed him that she was not in the room.

He made no remark about it, but sitting down beside his mother, tried to
interest himself in the evening paper handed him by his grandfather.

"What have you done with your wife, young man?" asked his sister Elsie
sportively. "We have seen nothing of her since supper."

"I left her in her room," he answered in a tone in which there seemed a
shade of annoyance.

"Have you locked her up there for bad behavior?" asked Rosie, laughing.

"Why, what do you mean, Rosie?" he returned, giving the child a half-angry
glance, and coloring deeply.

"Oh, I was only funning, of course, Ned. So you needn't look so vexed
about it; that's the very way to excite suspicion that you have done
something to her," and Rosie laughed gleefully.

But to the surprise of mother and sisters, Edward's brow darkened, and he
made no reply.

"Rosie," said Violet, lightly, "you are an incorrigible tease. Let the
poor boy alone, can't you?"

"Thank you, Mrs. Raymond," he said, with a forced laugh, "but I wouldn't
have Rosie deprived of her sport."

"I hope," remarked Mrs. Travilla, with a kindly though grave look at her
youngest daughter, "that my Rosie does not find it sport to inflict
annoyance upon others."

"No, mamma, not by any means, but how could I suppose my wise oldest
brother would care for such a trifle?" returned the little girl in a
sprightly tone.

"My dear," said her mother, "it is the little things--little pleasures,
little vexations--that far more than the great make up the sum total of
our happiness or misery in this life."

Edward was very silent during the rest of the evening, and his mother,
watching him furtively and putting that and that together, felt sure that
something had gone wrong between him and his young wife.

When the good-nights had been said and the family had scattered to their
rooms, he lingered behind, and his mother, who had left the room,
perceiving it, returned to find him standing on the hearth, gazing moodily
into the fire.

She went to him, and laying her hand gently on his shoulder. "My dear
boy," she said, in her sweet low tones, "I cannot help seeing that
something has gone wrong with you; I don't ask what it is, but you have
your mother's sympathy in every trouble."

"It is unfortunately something you would not want me to repeat even to
you, my best and dearest of mothers, but your assurance of sympathy is
sweet and comforting, nevertheless," he said, taking her in his arms with
a look and manner so like his father's, that tears sprang unbidden to her
eyes.

"Ah," he said presently, with a sigh that betrayed more than he was aware
of, "my father was a happy man in having such a woman for his wife!"

"A good husband makes a good wife, my boy," she returned, gazing
searchingly yet tenderly into his eyes; "and I think no woman with any
heart at all could have failed to be such to him."

"I am not worthy to be his son," he murmured, the hot blood mounting to
his very hair.

There was a moment or more of silence, then she said, softly caressing his
hair and cheek as she spoke, "Edward, my son, be very patient, very
gentle, forbearing and loving toward the orphan child, the care of whom
you assumed of your own free will, the little wife you have promised to
love and cherish to life's end."

"Yes, mother, I have tried very earnestly to be all that to her--but she
is such a child that she needs guidance and control, and I cannot let her
show disrespect to you or my grandfather."

"She has always been both dutiful and affectionate to me, Ned, and I have
never known her to say a disrespectful word to or about your grandfather."

"Did you not notice the looks she gave him at the table, to-night? the
tone in which she replied when he spoke to her?"

"I tried not to do so," she said with a smile. "I learned when my first
children were young that it was the part of wisdom to be sometimes blind
to venial faults. Not," she added more gravely, "that I would ever put
disrespect to my father in that category, but we must not make too much of
a little girlish petulance, especially when excited by a generous sympathy
with the troubles of another."

The cloud lifted from his brow. "How kind in you to say it, mother dear!
kind to her and to me. Yes, she is very fond of Max, quite as if he were a
younger brother, and it is very natural that she should sympathize with
him when in disgrace."

"And having been so petted and indulged by her father, allowed to have her
own way in almost everything, and seldom, if ever, called to account for
her doings, comings and goings, she can hardly fail to think my father's
rule strict and severe."

"True," Edward responded with a sigh, "and grandpa is a strict
disciplinarian, yet so kind and affectionate with it all that one cannot
help loving him."

"So I think. And now, good-night, my dear son. I must go; and perhaps your
little wife is looking and longing for your coming. She is very fond and
proud of her young husband," and with a motherly kiss and smile she left
him.

Edward paced the floor for several minutes with thoughtful air, then went
up-stairs to Zoe's boudoir.

She was not there or in the dressing-room. He took up a lamp and went on
into the adjoining bedroom. Shading the light with his hand, he drew near
the bed with noiseless step.

She lay there sleeping, tears on her eyelashes and her pillow wet with
them. His heart smote him at the sight. She looked such a mere child and
so sweet and innocent that he could hardly refrain from imprinting a kiss
upon the round rosy cheek and the full red lips.

And he longed for a reconciliation, but it seemed cruel to wake her, so it
should be the first thing in the morning, he said to himself.

He set the lamp down in a distant part of the room, and prepared for rest.

       *       *       *       *       *

Max had spent the evening over his books and diary. His entry in that was
a brief statement of his delinquency, its punishment, and his resolve to
be more obedient in future.

He had just wiped his pen and put it away, when Grandma Elsie came for a
little motherly talk with him, as she often did at bedtime.

He received her with a mortified, embarrassed air, but her kind, gentle
manner quickly restored his self-possession.

"I was sorry, indeed," she said, "to hear that our boy Max had become a
breaker of rules, and so caused us the loss of his society at the table
and in the parlor."

"I thought the loss was all on my side. Grandma Elsie," he returned with a
bright, pleased look. "I didn't suppose anybody would miss me
unpleasantly."

"Ah, you were quite mistaken in that; we are all fond of you, Max."

"Not Grandpa Dinsmore, I'm sure," he said, dropping his eyes and frowning.

"Why, Max, what else could induce him to give you a home here and be at
the trouble of teaching you every day?"

"I thought it was you who gave me a home, Grandma Elsie," Max said in a
softened tone, and with an affectionate look at her.

"This is my house," she said, "but my father is the head of the family,
and without his approval I should never have asked you and your sisters
here, much as I desire your happiness, and fond of you as I certainly am."

"You are very, very good to us!" he exclaimed with warmth; "you do so much
for us! I wish I could do something for you!"

"Do you, my dear boy?" she said, smiling and softly patting his hand,
which she had taken in hers; "then be respectful and obedient to my
father. And to your mamma--my dear daughter. Nothing else could give me so
much pleasure."

"I love Mamma Vi!" exclaimed Max. 'I'm sure there couldn't be a sweeter
lady. And I like Grandpa Dinsmore, too, but--don't you think now he's very
strict and ready to punish a fellow for a mere trifle, Grandma Elsie?"

"I dare say it seems but a trifle to you for a boy of your age to go into
town and do an errand for himself without asking leave," she replied, "but
that might lead to much worse things; the boy might take to loitering
about the town and fall into bad company and so be led into I know not
what wickedness. For that reason parents and guardians should know all
about a boy's comings and goings."

"That's so, Grandma Elsie," Max said reflectively. "I don't mean to get
into bad company ever, but papa says I'm a heedless fellow, so perhaps I
might do it before I thought. I'll try to keep to rules after this."

"I hope so, for both your own sake and ours," she said; then with a
motherly kiss bade him good-night.




CHAPTER XVI.

    "O jealousy! thou merciless destroyer,
     More cruel than the grave! what ravages
     Does thy wild war make in the noblest bosoms!"
                                  --Mullet.


Edward stretched himself beside Zoe, but not to sleep for hours, for ever
and anon she drew a sobbing breath that went to his very heart.

"Poor little thing!" he sighed, "I must have acted like a brute to grieve
her so deeply, I should not have undertaken the care of a child who I knew
had been spoiled by unlimited petting and indulgence, if I could not be
more forbearing and tender with her. If, instead of a show of authority, I
had tried reasoning and coaxing, doubtless the result would have been very
different, and she would have been saved all this. I am ashamed of myself!
Grandpa might possibly have acted so toward a wife, but my father never, I
am sure."

He was really very fond of his little wife, loving her with a protecting
love as something peculiarly his own, to be guided and moulded to suit his
ideas and wishes, so that she might eventually become the perfectly
congenial companion, capable of understanding and sympathizing in all his
views and feelings, which he desired, but found that she was not yet.

He began to fear she might never attain to that; that perhaps his sudden
marriage was a mistake that would ruin the happiness of both for life.

Tormented thus, he turned restlessly on his pillow with many a groan and
sigh, nor closed an eye in sleep till long past midnight.

He was sleeping very soundly when, about sunrise, Zoe opened her eyes.

She lay still for a moment listening to his breathing, while memory
recalled what had passed between them previous to her retiring.

"And there he lies and sleeps just as soundly as if he hadn't been playing
the tyrant to the woman he promised to love and cherish to life's end,"
she said to herself, with a flash of anger and scorn in her eyes. "Well, I
don't mean to be here when he wakes; I'll keep out of his way till he's
had his breakfast; for they say men are always savage on an empty
stomach."

She slipped cautiously out of the bed, stole quietly into the next room,
made her toilet, arraying herself in riding habit and hat, went
down-stairs, ordered her pony saddled and brought to the door, and was
presently galloping away down the avenue.

Edward had requested her never to go alone, always to take a servant as an
attendant, even if she had one of the children with her, and especially if
she had not; but she disregarded his wishes in this instance, partly from
a spirit of defiance, partly because she much preferred a solitary ride,
and could not see that there was any danger in it.

It was a bright spring morning, the air just cold enough to be
delightfully bracing; men were at work in the fields, orchards were full
of bloom and fragrance, forest trees leafing out, and springing grass and
flowers making the roadsides lovely.

Zoe's spirits rose with every mile she travelled, the perfume of flowers,
the songs of birds, and all the sweet sights and sounds of nature that
greeted eye, and ear, and every sense, filled her with joy. How could she,
so young and full of life and health, be unhappy in so beautiful a world?

So keen was her enjoyment that she rode farther than she had intended.
Time passed so quickly that, on looking at her watch, she was surprised to
find that she would hardly be able, even at a gallop, to reach Ion by the
breakfast hour.

She was a little disturbed at that, for everybody was expected to be
punctual at meals. Grandpa Dinsmore was particular about it, and she did
not wish to give Edward fresh cause for displeasure.

As she galloped swiftly up the avenue, she was surprised to see him pacing
the veranda to and fro, watch in hand, while his horse stood near ready
saddled and bridled.

As she drew rein close by the veranda steps, Edward hastily returned his
watch to its fob, sprang forward, and lifted her from the saddle.

"Good-morning, little wife," he said with an affectionate kiss as he set
her down, yet still keeping his arm about her. "I was not so kind as I
might, or should have been last night, but you will not lay it up against
your husband, love?"

"No, of course not, Ned," she returned, looking up into his face flushed
and happy, that so loving an apology had been given her in place of the
reproof she expected; "and you won't hate me because I was cross when you
were?"

"Hate you, love! No, never! I shall love you as long as we both live. But
I must say good-by. I am summoned away on important business, and shall
have hardly time to catch the next train."

"You might have told me last night," she pouted, as with another kiss he
took his arm from her waist and turned to leave her.

"I did not receive the summons till half an hour ago," he answered,
hastily mounting his steed.

"When will you come back?" she asked.

"I hope to be with you by tea-time, this evening. Au revoir, darling."

He threw her a kiss and was gone, galloping so rapidly away that in a
minute or two he was out of sight; all the more speedily to her because
her eyes were blinded with tears as she stood motionless, gazing after
him.

It was their first parting, and there came over her a feeling that, should
he never come back, the world would be a desert, nothing left worth living
for.

"Never mind, dear child, it is for only a few hours, if all goes well,"
said a kind sweet voice at her side.

"Yes, mamma, but--oh, I wish he never had to go away without me! And why
couldn't I have gone with him this time?" she sobbed, beginning to feel
herself quite aggrieved, though the idea of going with Edward had but just
occurred to her.

"Well, dear, there really was not time to arrange that," Elsie said,
embracing her with motherly affection. "But come now and get some
breakfast. You must be hungry after your ride."

"Is Grandpa vexed because I was not here in season?" Zoe asked, following
her mother-in-law on her way to the breakfast-room.

"He has not shown any vexation," Elsie answered lightly; "and you are not
much behind time; they are all still at the table. Edward took his
breakfast early in order to catch his train."

Zoe's apprehensions were relieved immediately on entering the
breakfast-room, as Mr. Dinsmore and all the others greeted her with the
usual pleasant "Good-morning."

Reconciled to her husband and smiled upon by all the rest of the family,
she grew quite happy.

In saying she was not to be driven, but would do anything for love and
coaxing, she had spoken truly; and now her great desire was to do
something to please Edward.

She had been rather remiss in her studies of late, and though he had
administered no reproof, she knew that he felt discouraged over it. She
determined to surprise him on his return with carefully prepared lessons.

After giving due attention to them, she spent hours at the piano learning
a song he admired and had lately bought for her, saying he thought it
suited to her voice, and wanted to hear her play and sing it.

"What a dear, industrious little woman," Elsie said, meeting her in the
hall as she left the music-room, and bestowing upon her a motherly smile
and caress. "I know whom you are trying so hard to please, and if he does
not show appreciation of your efforts, I shall think him unworthy of so
good a little wife."

Zoe colored with pleasure. "O mamma," she said, "though I have been cross
and wilful sometimes, I would do anything in the world to please my
husband when he is loving and kind to me. But do you know, I can't bear to
be driven. I won't; if anybody tries it with me, it just rouses all that
is evil in me."

"Well, dear, I don't think any one in this house wants to drive you,"
Elsie said, repeating her caress, "not even your husband; though he is,
perhaps, a trifle masterful by nature. You and he will need to take the
two bears into your counsels," she added sportively.

"Two bears, mamma?" and Zoe looked up in surprise and perplexity.

"Yes, dear; bear and forbear, as the poet sings--

    "'The kindest and the happiest pair
        Will find occasion to forbear,
      And something every day they live
        To pity and perhaps forgive.'"

Zoe went slowly up to her own rooms and sat down to meditate upon her
mother-in-law's words.

"'Bear and forbear.' Well, when Edward reproves me as if he were my father
instead of my husband, and talks about what he will and won't allow, I
must bear with him, I suppose; and when I want to answer back that I'm my
own mistress and not under his control, I must forbear and deny myself the
pleasure. Hard for me to do, but then it isn't to be all on one side; and
if he will only forbear lecturing me in the beginning, all will go right.

"I mean to tell him so. If he wants me to be very good, he should set me
the example. Good! when he scolds me again, I'll just remind him that
example is better than precept.

"No, I won't either; I'll forbear. Ned is good to me, and I don't want to
provoke him. I mean to be a good little wife to him, and I know he wants
to be the best of husbands to me.

"Oh, how kind and good he was to me when papa died, and I hadn't another
friend in the world! how he took me to his heart and comforted and loved
me! I must never make him wish he hadn't. I'll do everything I can to
prove that I'm not ungrateful for all his love and kindness."

Tears sprang to her eyes, and she was seized with a longing desire for his
presence, for an opportunity to pour out her love and gratitude, and have
him clasp her to his heart with tenderest caresses, as was his wont.

She glanced at the clock. Oh joy! he might, he probably would, return in
an hour or perhaps a trifle sooner.

She sprang up and began her toilet for the evening, paying close attention
to his taste in the arrangement of her hair and the selection of her dress
and ornaments.

"I want to look just as beautiful in his sight as I possibly can, that he
may be pleased with me and love me better than ever," was the thought in
her heart. "I am his own wife, and who has a better right to his love than
I? Dear Ned! I hope we'll never quarrel, but always keep the two bears
with us in our home."

Her labors completed, she turned herself about before the pier-glass,
mentally pronounced her attire faultless from the knot of ribbon in her
hair to the dainty boots on the shapely little feet, and her cheek flushed
with pleasure as the mirror told her that face and form were even prettier
than the dress and ornaments that formed a fit setting to their charms.

The hour was almost up. She glanced from the window to see if he were yet
in sight.

He was not, but she wanted a walk, so would go to meet him; he would
dismount at sight of her, and they would walk home together.

Tying on a garden hat and throwing a light shawl about her shoulders, she
hastened down-stairs and out into the grounds.

She had walked more than half the length of the avenue, when she saw the
family carriage turning in at the gates, Edward riding beside it.

The flutter of a veil from its window caused her to change her plans. He
was not returning alone, but bringing lady visitors; therefore, she would
not go to meet him.

And no one had told her visitors were expected. She felt aggrieved, and
somehow, unreasonable as she knew it to be, she was angry at Edward's look
of interest and pleasure as he leaned from the saddle in a listening
attitude, as if hearkening to the talk of some one within the carriage.

Zoe had stepped behind a clump of bushes, whose leafy screen hid her from
the view of the approaching party, while through its interstices she could
see them very plainly.

As they drew nearer, she saw that the carriage contained two young,
pretty, ladylike girls, one of whom was talking to Edward with much
animation and earnestness, he listening with evident interest and
amusement.

When the carriage had passed her, Zoe glided away through the shrubbery,
gained the house by a circuitous route and a side entrance, and her own
rooms by a back stairway.

She fully expected to find Edward there, but he was not.

"Where can he be?" she asked herself half aloud, then sat down and waited
for him--not very patiently.

After some little time, which, to Zoe's impatience, seemed very long, she
heard the opening and shutting of a door, then the voices of Mr. Dinsmore,
his daughter, and Edward in conversation, as they came down the hall
together.

"He has been to see his mother first," she pouted. "I think a man ought
always to put his wife first." And turning her back to the door, she took
up a book and made a pretence of being deeply interested in its perusal.

Edward's step, however, passed on into the dressing-room, and as she heard
him moving about there, she grew more and more vexed. It seemed that he
was in no great haste to greet her after this their first day's
separation; he could put it off, not only for a visit to his mother in her
private apartments, but also until he had gone through the somewhat
lengthened duties of the toilet.

Well, she would show him that she, too, could wait--could be as cool and
indifferent as himself. She assumed a graceful attitude in an easy-chair,
her pretty little feet upon a velvet-cushioned stool, and with her book
lying in her lap listened intently to every sound coming from the
adjoining room.

At last she heard his step approach the door, then his hand upon the knob,
when she instantly took up her book and fixed her eyes upon its open page,
as though unconscious of everything but what was printed there, yet really
not taking in the meaning of a single word.

Edward came in, came close to her side. Still she neither moved nor lifted
her eyes. But she could not control her color, and he saw through her
pretences.

He knelt down beside her chair, bent his head and looked up into her face
with laughing eyes.

"What can it be that so interests my little wife that she does not even
know that her husband has come home, after this their first day of
separation? Have you no kiss of welcome for him, little woman?"

The book was thrust hastily aside, and in an instant her arms were about
his neck, her lips pressed again and again to his.

"O Ned, I do love you!" she said softly, "but I began to think you didn't
care for me--going to see mamma first, and then waiting to dress."

"Mamma and grandpa were concerned in the business that took me away
to-day, and I owed them a prompt report upon it; yet I looked in here
first for my wife, but couldn't find her; then I asked for her, and was
told that she had been seen going out for a walk. So I thought I would
dress and be ready for her when she came in."

"Was that it?" she asked, looking a little ashamed. "But," regarding him
with critical eyes, "you'd better always let me help with your dressing;
your cravat isn't tied nicely, and your hair doesn't look half so well as
when I brush it for you."

"Can't you set matters straight, then?" he asked, releasing her from the
close embrace in which he had held her for the last few minutes.

"Yes; just keep still as you are, and I'll re-tie the cravat."

He held still, enjoying, as he always did, having her deft fingers at work
about him, and gazing the while into the pretty face, with eyes full of
loving admiration.

"There!" she said at length, leaning back a little to take in the full
effect, "I don't believe that can be improved upon."

"Much obliged," he said, getting up from his knees. "Now, what next?"

"Your hair, of course," she answered, jumping up and leading the way into
the dressing-room. "Sit down," arming herself with comb and brush, "you
know I'm not tall enough to reach your head while you're standing up."

He obeyed, asking, "What have you been doing to-day?"

"What a question!" she returned, laughing; "of course, I'd take my
pleasure when my lord and master was away."

"Don't call me that, dear," he said in a tone of gentle, half remorseful
expostulation.

"Why not? doesn't the Bible say Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord?"

"But it doesn't say master, and besides, these are very different times."

"We seem to have changed sides on that subject," she said, with a merry
little laugh, as she laid the brush away, and standing behind his chair,
put her arms around his neck and laid her cheek to his.

He drew her round to a seat upon his knee. "Darling, I don't mean to play
the tyrant, and am quite ashamed of some things I said last night."

"Then you won't say them any more, will you? I was really afraid you were
turning into a horrid tyrant. Oh, you haven't told me who the visitors are
who came in the carriage with you!"

"The daughter and niece of an old friend of my father's, Miss Fanny Deane
and Miss Susie Fleming."

"How long are they likely to stay?"

"I don't know; probably two or three weeks."

"You asked what I'd been doing. Studying hard part of the time, that I
might please this old tutor of mine," giving him another tug. "Will you be
pleased to hear me recite now?"

"There would not be time before tea, dear," he said, consulting his watch;
"so we will put it off till later in the evening. Come down to the
drawing-room with me and let me introduce you to the ladies."

"Very well; but first tell me if my toilet satisfies you."

He gave her a scrutinizing glance. "Entirely; you are as lovely as a
fairy," he said, with a proud, fond smile.

"Oh, you flatterer!" she returned with a pleased laugh, and slipping her
hand into his.

"Your wife!" exclaimed both ladies when the introduction was over. "She
looks so young!"

"So _very_ young that I should have taken her for a school-girl," added
Miss Deane, with a condescending smile that enraged Zoe.

"And I take you for an old maid of twenty-five," was her mental retort. "I
dare say you'd be glad enough to be as young as I am, and to have such a
handsome husband." But she merely made a demure little courtesy and
withdrew to a seat beside her mother-in-law on the farther side of the
room, her heightened color and flashing eyes alone telling how indignant
she felt.

"Never mind, dear, you are growing older every day," Elsie said in a
soothing undertone, "and are just the right age for Edward. We all think
that, and I that you are a dear little daughter for me."

"Thank you, dear mamma," whispered Zoe. "I think it was very rude and
unkind to liken me to a school-girl. I believe it was just because she
envies me my youth and my husband."

"Perhaps so," Elsie said, with difficulty restraining a smile, "but we
will try to be charitable and think the remark was not unkindly meant."

Edward took Miss Deane in to supper, which was presently announced. Zoe
did not like that, as Elsie perceived with some concern.

The young lady had very fine conversational powers and was very fond of
displaying them; she soon obtained and held the attention of all the older
people at the table, and Zoe felt herself more and more aggrieved. Edward
was positively careless of her wants, leaving her to be waited upon by the
servants.

When they returned to the drawing-room he seated himself beside Miss Deane
again, and the flow of talk recommenced, he continuing a delighted
listener.

Zoe feigned not to notice or care, but it was a very transparent pretence.
Edward had devoted himself so almost exclusively to her ever since their
marriage, that she could scarce endure to have it otherwise.

She could not refrain from watching him furtively and trying to catch his
every look, word and tone.

After a little she stole quietly from the room and went up to her own.

"He will miss me presently," she thought, "remember about the lessons, and
come up to hear them, and I'll have him all to myself for at least a
little while."

He did not come, but at length Rosie looked in to say, "Won't you come
down to the music-room, Zoe? Miss Fleming is going to play for us, and she
is said to be quite a wonderful performer."

Zoe accepted the invitation; she was fond of music, and it wasn't Miss
Fleming who had robbed her of Edward. Yet, when she saw him standing
beside her, a rapt and delighted listener, and assiduously turning her
music, she began to almost hate her, too.

The advent of these two strangers seemed to have rendered ineffectual all
the efforts she had put forth that day to gratify her husband; of what
use was it that she had so carefully prepared the lessons he would not
trouble himself to hear? or that she had spent hours of patient practice
at the piano in learning the song she was given no opportunity to play and
sing?

But womanly pride was awaking within her, and she made a tolerably
successful effort to control and hide her feelings.

When at length she found herself alone with Edward in their own
apartments, she moved silently about making her preparations for retiring,
seeming to have nothing to say.

He burst into enthusiastic praises of the talents of their guests--the
conversational gift of the one, the musical genius of the other.

Zoe, standing before the mirror, brushing out her soft shining tresses,
made no response.

"Why are you so silent, little woman?" Edward asked presently.

"Because I have nothing to say that you would want to hear."

"Nothing that I would want to hear? why, I am fond of the very sound of
your voice. But what's the matter?" for he had come to her side, and
perceived with surprise and concern that her eyes were full of tears.

"Oh, nothing! except that I'd looked forward to a delightful evening with
my husband, after being parted from him all day, and didn't get it."

"My dear Zoe," he said, "I owe you an apology! I actually forgot all about
those lessons."

"And me, too," she said bitterly. "My musical and conversational gifts
sink into utter insignificance beside those of these newcomers."

"Jealousy is a very mean and wicked passion, Zoe; I don't like to see you
indulging it," he said, turning away from her. "I am, of course, expected
to pay some attention to my mother's guests, and you will have to put up
with it."

"You are always right and I am always wrong," she said, half choking with
indignation; "but if you are always to do as _you_ please, I shall do as
_I_ please."

"In regard to what?" he asked coldly.

"Everything!" she answered in a defiant tone.

Edward strode angrily into the next room; but five minutes sufficed to
subdue his passion, and in tender tones he called softly to his wife,
"Zoe, love, will you please come here for a moment?"

She started with surprise at the kindness of his tones, her heart leaped
for joy, and she ran to him, smiling through her tears.

He had seated himself in a large easy-chair. "Come, darling," he said,
drawing her to a seat upon his knee. Then with his arm about her waist,
"Zoe, love, we are husband and wife, whom nothing but death can ever
separate. Let us be kind to one another, kind and forbearing, so that when
one is taken the other will have no cause for self-reproach."

"O Ned, don't talk of that," she sobbed with her arms about his neck, her
cheek laid to his. "I'm sure it would kill me to lose you. You are all I
have in the wide world."

"So I am, you poor little dear," he said, softly smoothing her hair, "and
I ought to be always kind to you. But, indeed, Zoe, you have no need to be
jealous of any other woman. I may like to talk with them and listen to
their music, but when I want some one to love and pet, my heart turns to
my own little wife."

"It was very foolish!" she said, penitently, "but I did so want you to
myself to-night, and I'd worked so busily all day learning the lessons and
that song you brought me, thinking to please you."

"Did you, dear? well, it was too bad in me to neglect you so, and even to
forget to give you this, which I bought expressly for my dear little wife,
while in the city to-day."

He took her hand as he spoke, and slipped a ring upon her finger.

"O Ned, thank you!" she exclaimed, lifting to his a face full of delight.
"It's very pretty, and so good in you to remember to bring me something."

"Then shall we kiss and be friends, and try not to quarrel any more?"

"Yes; oh yes!" she said, offering her lips.

"I must have that song to-morrow," he said, caressing her again and again.

"No, no! I can't think of singing before such a performer as Miss
Fleming."

"But you are an early bird, and she and Miss Deane will probably be late.
Can't you sing and play for me before they are down in the morning?"

"Well, perhaps," she answered coquettishly. "And the lessons? will you
hear them, too, before breakfast?"

"If you wish it, dear."




CHAPTER XVII.

    "The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water:
    therefore leave off contention, before it be meddled with."

                                          --_Proverbs_ 17:14.


Zoe went to bed that night and rose again the next morning a happy little
woman.

The song was sung, the performance eliciting warm praise from the solitary
listener.

Then they had a delightful ride together, all before breakfast, and she
brought to the table such dancing eyes and rosy cheeks that Mr. Lilburn
could not refrain from complimenting her upon them, while the rest of the
older people smiled in approval.

"She looks younger than ever," remarked Miss Deane, sweetly. "It is quite
impossible to realize that she is married."

"It is altogether possible for me to realize that she is my own dear
little wife," said Edward, regarding Zoe with loving, admiring eyes. "A
piece of personal property I would not part with for untold gold," he
added with a happy laugh.

"And we all think our Zoe is quite old for so young a husband," said
Elsie, bestowing upon the two a glance of smiling, motherly affection.

It was a busy season with Edward, and he was compelled to leave the
entertainment of the guests through the day to his mother and other
members of the family.

Zoe excused herself from any share in that work on the plea that she was
too young to be companionable to the ladies, spent some hours in diligent
study, then walked out with the children.

"I have two sets of lessons ready for you," was her greeting to Edward,
when he came in late in the afternoon.

"Have you, dear?" he returned, taking the easy-chair she drew forward for
him. "Then let me hear them. You must have been an industrious little
woman to-day."

"Tolerably; but you know one set was ready for you yesterday."

"Ah, yes; you were industrious then, also. And I dare say it is rather
stupid work studying alone."

"Not when one has such a nice teacher," she answered sportively. "Praise
from your lips is sweeter than it ever was from any other but papa's," she
added, tears trembling in her eyes.

He was glad to be able, on the conclusion of the recitation, to give it
without stint.

She flushed with pleasure, and helping herself to a seat upon his knee,
thanked him with a hug and kiss.

"Easter holidays begin next week," he remarked, putting an arm about her
and returning her caress; "do you wish to give up your studies during that
time?"

"No," she said; "I've wasted too much time during the past few weeks, and
I'd rather take my holidays in the very warm weather."

"That is what mamma's and grandpa's pupils are to do," he said. "They are
invited to both the Oaks and the Laurels in May and June, to spend some
weeks at each place. And you are included in both invitations."

"I shall not go unless you do," she said with decision. "Parted from my
husband for weeks? No, indeed! I can hardly stand it for a single day,"
she added, laying her cheek to his.

"Nor I, little wife," he said, passing his hand softly over her hair. "Do
you feel equal to a ride this afternoon?"

"Why, yes; of course! shall I get ready at once?"

"Yes, do, dearie. There is to be a party of us--grandpa, mamma, and Miss
Fleming, Miss Deane, you and I."

Zoe's brow clouded. "Riding three abreast, I suppose. But why did you ask
Miss Deane? She'll spoil all my enjoyment."

"Don't let her; I must show some attention to her as a guest in the house,
and really felt obliged to invite her. We are to call at Fairview, and see
how Lester and Elsie get on with their housekeeping. Now, do promise me
that you will be a good, sensible little woman, and not indulge in
jealousy."

"To please you I'll do the very best I can. I told you I would do anything
for love and coaxing," she answered in a sprightly tone, with her arm
still about his neck, her eyes gazing fondly into his.

He drew her closer. "I'll try always to remember and practice upon that,"
he said, "Now, darling, don that very becoming hat and habit you wore this
morning."

Miss Deane was an accomplished coquette, whose greatest delight was to
prove her power over every man who came in her way, whether married or
single, and perceiving Zoe's dislike to her, and jealousy of any attention
paid her by Edward, she took a malicious pleasure in drawing him to her
side whenever opportunity offered, and keeping him there as long as
possible.

Edward, with a heart entirely true to his young wife, endeavored to resist
the fascinations of the siren and avoid her when politeness would permit;
and Zoe struggled against her inclination to jealousy, yet Miss Deane
succeeded in the course of a few days in bringing about a slight coldness
between them.

They did not actually quarrel, but there was a cessation of loving looks
and endearing words and names. It was simply Zoe and Edward now instead of
dearest and love and darling, while they rather avoided than sought each
other's society.

Edward was too busy to walk or ride with his wife, and Max and Ralph
Conly, at home now for the Easter holidays and self-invited to Ion, became
the almost constant sharers of her outdoor exercise.

Edward saw it with displeasure, for Ralph was no favorite with him. When
things had gone on in that way for several days, he ventured upon a mild
remonstrance, telling Zoe he would rather she would not make a familiar
associate of Ralph.

"If I am debarred from my husband's society, I'm not to be blamed for
taking what I can get," she answered coldly.

"I don't blame you for what is past, Zoe," he said, "but request that in
future you will not have more to do with Ralph than is quite necessary."

Zoe was in a defiant mood. She walked away without making any reply, and
an hour later Edward met her riding out with Ralph by her side. Max was
not with them, as it was during his study hours, and they had not even an
attendant.

They had been laughing and chatting gayly, but at sight of Edward a sudden
silence fell on them.

Zoe's head drooped and her cheeks flushed hotly as she perceived the dark
frown on her husband's brow. She expected some cutting word of rebuke, but
he simply wheeled his horse about, placing himself on her other side, so
that she was between him and Ralph, and rode on with them.

Not a word was spoken until they drew rein at their own door, when Edward,
dismounting, lifted his wife from her pony, and as he set her down, said,
"I will be obliged to you, Zoe, if you will now prepare your lessons for
to-day."

Zoe had already begun to repent of her open disregard of his wishes, for
during the silent ride memory had been busy with the many expressions of
love and tenderness he had lavished upon her in their short married life,
and if there had been the least bit of either in his tones now, she would
have whispered in his ear that she was sorry and would not so offend
again; but the cold, stern accents made the request sound like a command,
and roused again the spirit of opposition that had almost died out.

She shook off his detaining hand, and walked away in silence, with head
erect and cheeks burning with indignation.

Ralph had not heard Edward's low-spoken words, but looking after Zoe, as
she disappeared within the doorway, "Seems to me you're a bit of a tyrant,
Ned," he remarked with a coarse, disagreeable laugh.

"I am not aware of having shown any evidence of being such," Edward
returned rather haughtily, as he remounted. Then, turning his horse's
head, he rode rapidly away.

Zoe went to her boudoir, gave vent to her anger in a hearty fit of crying,
then set to work at the lessons with a sincere desire to please the
husband she really loved with all her heart.

"I've been forgetting the two bears," she said to herself, "but I'll try
again, and when that hateful Miss Deane goes away, everything will be
right again. I know Ned has to be polite to her; and it's very silly in me
to get vexed when he talks to her; but I can't help it, because he's my
all."

She finished her tasks, dressed herself for dinner with care and taste,
and when she heard his step on the stairs ran to the door to meet him.

Her face was bright and eager, but changed at sight of his cold,
forbidding looks.

"I am ready for you," she said timidly, shrinking away from him.

"Very well, bring your books," he said with, she thought, the air of a
schoolmaster toward a pupil in disgrace, and seating himself as he spoke.

She brought them, keeping her eyes cast down to hide the tell-tale tears.
She controlled her emotion in another moment, and went through the
recitations very creditably to herself.

He made no comment upon that, though usually he would have bestowed warm
praise, but simply appointed the tasks for the next day, rose and left the
room.

Zoe looked after him with a swelling heart, wiped away a tear or two, and
assuming an air of indifference, went down to the parlor to join the rest
of the family.

"Where's Ned?" asked Rosie. "You two used never to be seen apart; but of
late----"

The sentence was suddenly broken off because of a warning look from her
mamma.

"Don't you know, little girl," said Miss Deane in a soft, purring tone,
"that nobody expects married people to remain lovers always?"

"It is what they should do," Elsie said with gentle decision. "It was so
with my husband and myself, and I trust will be with all my children."

"Allow me to advise you to deliver Ned a lecture on the subject, cousin,"
laughed Ralph.

"He doesn't need it," Zoe exclaimed with spirit, turning on Ralph with
flashing eyes.

"Oh," he said, with a loud guffaw, "I should have remembered that any one
taking the part of an abused wife is sure to have her wrath turned upon
himself."

"What do you mean by that, sir? I am _not_ an abused wife," said Zoe,
tears springing to her eyes; "there never was a kinder, tenderer husband
than mine, and I know he loves me dearly."

"He does, indeed, dear; we none of us doubt that in the least; and so you
can well afford to let Ralph enjoy his forlorn joke," remarked Mrs.
Dinsmore, with an indignant, reproving look at the latter, who colored
under it, and relapsed into silence.

The weather was delightful, and the children having been given a half
holiday, spent the afternoon in the grounds. Zoe forsook the company of
the older people for theirs, and joined in their sports, for she was still
child-like in her tastes.

She was as active as a boy, and before her marriage had taken keen delight
in climbing rocks and trees. The apple-trees in the orchard were in full
bloom, and taking a fancy to adorn herself with their blossoms, she
climbed up among the branches of one of the tallest, in order, as she
said, to "take her pick and choice," Rosie, Lulu, Gracie and Walter
standing near and watching her with eager interest.

"Oh, Zoe, take care!" Rosie called to her, "that branch doesn't look
strong, and you might fall and hurt yourself badly."

"Don't you be afraid. I can take care of myself," she returned with a
light laugh.

But another voice spoke close at hand, fairly startling her, it was so
unexpected. "Zoe, what mad prank is this? Let me help you down at once."

"There's no need for you to trouble yourself, I am quite able to get down
without assistance, when I'm ready," she replied, putting a strong
emphasis upon the last words.

"No; it is too dangerous," and he held up his arms with an imperative,
"Come!"

"How you do order me about," she muttered, half under her breath, and more
than half inclined to rebel.

But no; the children were looking and listening, and must not be allowed
to suspect any unpleasantness between herself and her husband.

She dropped into his arms, he set her upon her feet, drew her hand within
his arm, and walked away with her.

"I do not approve of tree-climbing for a married woman, Zoe," he said,
when they were out of ear-shot of the children; "at least, not for my
wife; and I must request you not to try it again."

"It's a pity I didn't know how much my liberty would be curtailed by
getting married," she returned bitterly.

"And I am exceedingly sorry it is out of my power to restore your liberty
to you, since it seems that would add to your happiness."

At that she hastily withdrew her hand from his arm and walked quickly away
from him, taking the direction of the house.

Leaning against a tree, his arms folded, his face pale and stern, he
looked after her with a heart full of keenest anguish. She had never been
dearer to him than at this moment, but alas, she seemed to have lost her
love for him, and what a life of miserable dissension they were likely to
lead, repenting at leisure their foolishly hasty marriage!

And she was half frantic with pain and passion. He was tired of her
already--before they had been married a year--he did not love her any
longer and would be glad to be rid of her. Oh, what should she do! would
that she could fly to the ends of the earth that he might be relieved of
her hated presence.

And yet--oh, how could she ever endure constant absence from him? She
loved him so dearly, so dearly!

She hurried on past the house, down the whole length of the avenue and
back again, the hot tears all the time streaming over her cheeks. Then she
hastily wiped them away, went to her rooms, bathed her eyes, and dressed
carefully for tea.

Womanly pride had come to her aid; she must hide her wounds from all,
especially from Edward himself and "that detestable Miss Deane." She would
pretend to be happy, very happy, and no one should guess how terribly her
heart was aching.




CHAPTER XVIII.

    "Where lives the man that has not tried
     How mirth can into folly glide,
     And folly into sin!"
                            --Scott.


Ralph Conly was not a favorite with any of his Ion relatives, because they
knew his principles were not altogether such as they could approve, nor
indeed his practice either; yet they had no idea how bad a youth he was,
else intimacy between him and Max would have been forbidden.

All unsuspected by the older people, he was exerting a very demoralizing
influence over the younger boy. Every afternoon they sought out some
private spot and had a game of cards, and little by little Ralph had
introduced gambling into the game, till now the stakes were high in
proportion to the means of the players.

On this particular afternoon they had taken possession of a summer-house
in a retired part of the grounds, and were deep in play.

Ralph at first let Max win, the stakes being small; then raising them
higher, he won again and again, till he had stripped Max of all his
pocket money and his watch.

Max felt himself ruined, and broke out in passionate exclamations of grief
and despair, coupled with accusations of cheating, which were, indeed,
well founded.

Ralph grew furious and swore horrible oaths, and Max answered with a
repetition of his accusation, concluding with an oath, the first he had
uttered since his father's serious talk with him on the exceeding
sinfulness and black ingratitude of profanity.

All that had passed then, the passages of Scripture telling of the
punishment of the swearer under the Levitical law, flashed back upon him
as the words left his lips, and covering his face with his hands he
groaned in anguish of spirit at thought of his fearful sin.

Then Mr. Dinsmore's voice, speaking in sternest accents, startled them
both. "Ralph, is this the kind of boy you are? a gambler and profane
swearer? And you, too, Max? Do you mean to break your poor father's heart
and some day bring down his gray hairs with sorrow to the grave? Go at
once to your room, sir. And you, Ralph, return immediately to Roselands. I
cannot expose my grandchildren to the corrupting influence of such a
character as yours."

The mandate was obeyed promptly and in silence by both, Ralph not daring
to gather up his plunder, or even his cards from the table where they lay.

Mr. Dinsmore took possession of both, and followed Max to the house. In
the heat of their altercation the lads had raised their voices to a high
pitch, and he, happening to be at no great distance, and hastening to the
spot to learn the cause of the disturbance, had come upon them in time to
hear the last sentence uttered by each, and had taken in the whole
situation at a glance.

He went directly to his daughter's dressing-room, and sent for Violet to
join them there.

Both ladies were greatly distressed by the tale he had to tell.

"Oh," sobbed Violet, "it will break my husband's heart to learn that his
only son has taken to such evil courses! And to think that it was a
relative of our own who led him into it!"

"Yes," sighed Mr. Dinsmore, "I blame myself for not being more watchful;
though I had no idea that Ralph had acquired such vices."

"I cannot have you blame yourself, papa," Elsie said, with tender look and
tone, "I am sure it was no fault of yours. And I cannot believe the dear
boy has become a confirmed swearer or gambler in so short a time. He is a
warm-hearted fellow, and has a tender conscience. We will hope by divine
aid to reclaim him speedily."

"Dear mamma, thank you!" exclaimed Violet, smiling through her tears.
"What you say of Max is quite true, and I have no doubt that he is at this
very moment greatly distressed because of his sin."

"I trust it may be so," said Mr. Dinsmore. "But now the question is, what
is to be done with him? I wish his father were here to prescribe the
course to be taken."

"Oh, he has already done so!" cried Violet, bursting into tears again. "He
said if Max should ever be guilty of profanity he was to be confined to
his own room for a week, and forbidden all intercourse with the rest of
the family as unworthy to associate with them. I begged him not to compel
us to be so severe, but he was inexorable."

"Then we have no discretionary power, no choice but to carry out his
directions," Mr. Dinsmore said, feeling rather relieved that the decision
was not left with him. "I shall go now and tell Max what his sentence is,
and from whom it comes.

"And, unfortunately, it will be necessary, in order to carry it out, to
inform the other members of the family, who might otherwise hold
communication with him.

"That task I leave to you, Elsie and Violet."

He left the room, and Violet, after a little sorrowful converse with her
mother, went to her own, and with many tears told Lulu and Gracie what had
occurred, and what was, by their father's direction, to be Max's
punishment.

Both little sisters were shocked and grieved, very sorry for Max, for it
seemed to them quite terrible to be shut up in one room for a whole week,
while to be out of doors was so delightful; but even Lulu had nothing to
say against their father's decree, especially after Violet had explained
that he had made it in his great love for Max, wanting to cure him of
vices that would make him wretched in this life and the next.

Rosie was still more shocked and scarcely less sorry than Lulu and Gracie,
for she had been taught to look upon swearing and gambling as very great
sins, and yet she liked Max very much indeed, and pitied him for the
disgrace and punishment he had brought upon himself.

It was she who told Zoe, seeking her in her dressing-room, where she was
making her toilet for the evening.

"Oh, Rosie, how dreadful!" exclaimed Zoe. "I never could have believed it
of Max! but it is all because of the bad influence of that wicked Ralph.
I see now why Edward disapproves of him so thoroughly that he didn't like
me to ride with him. But I do think Captain Raymond is a very severe
father. A whole week in the house this lovely weather! How can the poor
boy ever stand it!

"And nobody to speak a kind word to him, either. I don't think they ought
to be so hard on him, for I dare say he is grieving himself sick over it
now, for he isn't a bad boy."

"No," said Rosie, "I don't think he is; I like Max very much, but of
course his father's orders have to be carried out, and for that reason we
are all forbidden to go near him, and we have no choice but to obey."

"Forbidden, indeed!" thought Zoe to herself. "I for one shall do as I
please about it."

"Zoe, how pretty you are! that dress is very becoming!" exclaimed Rosie,
suddenly changing the subject.

"Am I? But I can't compare with Miss Deane in either beauty or
conversational powers," returned Zoe, the concluding words spoken with
some bitterness.

"Can't you? just ask Ned about it," laughed Rosie. "I verily believe he
thinks you the sweetest thing he ever set eyes on. There, I hear him
coming, and must run away, for I know he always wants you all to himself
here; and besides, I have to dress."

She ran gayly away, passing her brother on the threshold.

Zoe was busying herself at a bureau drawer, apparently searching for
something, and did not look toward him or speak. In another moment she had
found what she wanted, closed the drawer, and passed into her boudoir.

Edward had been standing silently watching her, love and anger struggling
for the mastery in his breast. If she had only turned to him with a word,
or even a look of regret for the past, and desire for reconciliation, he
would have taken her to his heart again as fully and tenderly as ever. He
was longing to do so, but too proud to make the first advances when he
felt himself the aggrieved one.

"All would be right between them but for Zoe's silly jealousy and pride.
Why could she not trust him and submit willingly to his guidance and
control while she was still so young and inexperienced--such a mere child
as to be quite incapable of judging for herself in any matter of
importance? In fact, he felt it his duty to guide and control her till she
should grow older and wiser."

Such were his thoughts as he went through the duties of the toilet, while
Zoe sat at the window of her boudoir gazing out over the smoothly shaven
lawn with its stately trees, lovely in their fresh spring attire, to the
green fields and woods beyond, yet scarcely taking in the beauty of the
landscape, so full of tears were her eyes, so full her heart of anger,
grief, and pain.

She had not looked at her husband as he stood silently near her a moment
ago, but felt that he was gazing with anger and sternness upon her.

"If he had only said one kind word to me," she whispered to herself, "I
would have told him I was sorry for my silly speech this afternoon, and
oh, so happy to be his own little wife, if--if only he hasn't quit loving
me."

She hastily wiped her eyes and endeavored to assume an air of cheerfulness
and indifference, as she heard his step approaching.

"Are you ready to go down now, Zoe?" he asked in a freezing tone.

"Yes," she answered, turning to follow him as he led the way to the door.

There seemed to be a tacit understanding between them that their
disagreements and coldness toward each other were to be concealed from all
the rest of the world; in the old happy days they had always gone down
together to the drawing-room or the tea-table, therefore would do so
still.

Also, they studiously guarded their words and looks in the presence of any
third person.

Yet Elsie, the tender mother, with eyes sharpened by affection, had
already perceived that all was not right. She had noted Zoe's disturbed
look when Edward seemed specially interested in Miss Deane's talk or Miss
Fleming's music, and had silently determined not to ask them to prolong
their stay at Ion.

The supper-bell rang as Edward and Zoe descended the stairs together, and
they obeyed its summons without going into the drawing-room.

Violet's place at the table was vacant as well as that of Max, and Lulu
and Gracie bore the traces of tears about their eyes.

These things reminded Zoe of Max's trouble, forgotten for a time in her
own, and she thought pityingly of him in his imprisonment, wondered if he
would be put upon prison fare, and determined to find out, and if he were,
to try to procure him something better.

She made an errand to her own rooms soon after leaving the table, went to
his door and knocked softly.

"Who's there?" he asked in a voice half choked with sobs.

"It is I, Maxie," she said in an undertone at the keyhole, "Zoe, you know.
I want to say I'm ever so sorry for you, and always ready to do anything I
can to help you."

"Thank you," he said, "but I mustn't see anybody, so can't open the door;
and, indeed," with a heavy sob, "I'm not fit company for you or any of
the rest."

"Yes, you are, you're as good as I am. But why can't you open the door?
are you locked in?"

"No; but--papa said I--I must stay by myself for a week if--if I did what
I have done to-day. So please don't stay any longer, though it was ever so
good in you to come."

"Good-by, then," and she moved away.




CHAPTER XIX.

    "High minds of native pride and force
     Most deeply feel thy pangs, remorse!
     Fear of their scourge mean villains have;
     Thou art the torture of the brave."
                              --Scott.


Max sat before his writing-table, his folded arms upon it, and his face
hidden upon them. He was in sore distress of mind. How he had fallen
before temptation! into what depths of disgrace and sin! sin that in olden
times would have been punished with death, even as the horrible crime of
murder, and that must still be as hateful as ever in the sight of an
unchangeable God.

And not only that sin, of which he had thought he had so truly and deeply
repented, but another which he had always been taught was a very low and
degrading vice. Oh, could there be forgiveness for him?

And how would his dear honored father feel when the sad story should reach
his ears? would it indeed break his heart as Grandpa Dinsmore had said?
The boy's own heart was overwhelmed with grief, dismay, and remorse as he
asked himself these torturing questions.

The door opened, but so softly that the sound was lost in his bitter
sobbing, then a hand rested lightly, tenderly upon his bowed head, and a
gentle, pitying voice said, "My poor, dear boy, my heart bleeds for you."

"O Grandma Elsie!" he burst out, "can you say that to such a wicked fellow
as I am?"

"Did not Jesus weep with compassion over the sinners of Jerusalem, many of
whom were even then plotting His death? And, Maxie, He pities you in your
fallen estate, and is ready to forgive you the moment you turn to Him with
grief and hatred of your sin and an earnest desire to forsake it, and to
give yourself to His service."

"Oh, I do, I do hate it!" he cried out with vehemence. "I didn't mean ever
to swear any more, and I feel as if I'd rather cut off my right hand than
to do it again! But oh, how can I ask Him to forgive me, when He did once,
and I've gone and done the same wicked thing again, just as if I hadn't
been really sorry at all, though I was sure I was! Grandma Elsie, what
shall I do?"

"'Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts;
let him return unto the Lord, and He will have mercy upon him, and to our
God, for He will abundantly pardon.'

"'He is the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin.'

"'His name is Jesus, for He shall save His people from their sins.' He
says, 'Him that cometh unto me, I will in no wise cast out.' 'O Israel,
thou hast destroyed thyself; but in me is thine help.'

"'Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though
they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.'

"'I, even I, am He that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake,
and will not remember thy sins.'"

"Oh, He is very good to say that!" sobbed the penitent boy. "But won't you
ask Him to forgive me, Grandma Elsie?"

"Yes, Max, but you must pray, too, for yourself; confess your sins to Him,
and ask Him to blot them out and remember them no more against you,
because Jesus has suffered their penalty in your stead. Shall we kneel
down now and ask Him?"

She stayed with him some time longer, talking in tender, motherly fashion;
not extenuating his guilt, but speaking of the blood that cleanseth from
all sin, the love and tender compassion of Jesus, His willingness and
ability to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by Him.

Warning him, too, of the danger from evil associates and from indulgence
in the vice of gambling.

Then she told him he was not too young to begin to lead a Christian life,
and urged him to do so without a moment's delay.

"I think I do want to be a Christian, Grandma Elsie," he said, "if I only
knew just how."

"It is to leave the service of Satan for that of the Lord Jesus Christ,"
she said. "It is to give yourself body and soul, at once and forever, to
Jesus, trusting in Him alone for salvation from sin and eternal death.

"'Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved,' 'Look unto
me and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth.'

"Just take the first step, and He will help you on all the way, one step
at a time, till you reach the gates of the celestial city. 'This God is
our God forever and ever, He will be our guide even unto death.'

"Just speak to the Lord Jesus, dear Max, as if you could see Him standing
before you while you knelt at His feet; say to Him as the leper did,
'Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.' Tell Him how full you are
of the dreadful leprosy of sin, how unable to heal yourself, and beseech
Him to do the work for you, to wash you and make you clean and cover you
with the robe of His righteousness; give yourself to Him, asking Him to
accept the worthless gift and make you entirely and forever His own."

She rose to leave him.

"Oh, do stay a little longer!" he pleaded, clinging to her hand. "Tell me,
do you think Mamma Vi will ever love me any more? that she will ever kiss
me again?" he sobbed.

"I am sure she will, Max," Elsie answered in moved tones; "she has not
ceased to love you, and I think will come and speak a word to you now, if
you wish it."

"Oh, so much! only--only I'm dreadfully ashamed to look her in the face.
And--O Grandma Elsie, do you think it will break my father's heart when he
hears it all?"

"It will make him very sad indeed, I have no doubt, Max," she answered,
gently, "but if he hears, too, that you have truly repented and given your
heart to God, he cannot fail to be greatly comforted. Tell him the whole
truth, my dear boy, don't try to conceal anything from him."

"It's what I mean to do, Grandma Elsie," he said with a heavy sigh,
"though I'd rather take the worst kind of a flogging. And that's what I'd
get if he was here, for he told me so."

"I am very glad you love your father so well, Max, and that your sorrow is
more for grieving him, and especially for having dishonored and displeased
God, than for the unpleasant consequences to yourself; it gives me great
hope that you will never be guilty of such conduct again.

"Now, I shall go and send your mamma to you; she is in her own rooms, for
she has been too much distressed over her dear boy's sad fall to join the
others at the table or in the drawing-room. She loves you very dearly,
Max."

"It's very good of her," he said in trembling tones, "and oh, I'm ever so
sorry to have grieved her so!"

Violet was greatly comforted by her mother's report of her interview with
Max, because both saw in his conduct and words the evidence of sincere
repentance toward God, giving them strong hope of his future avoidance of
the sins of profanity and gambling.

She went to him presently, put her arms about him, kissed him, wept with
him, and like her mother pointed him to the Saviour, telling of His
willingness to forgive every truly penitent soul.

"O Mamma Vi," he sobbed, "I thought I was that before, when papa showed me
what an awful sin swearing was, and I didn't think I could ever do it
again; but I got dreadfully angry with Ralph because he cheated me out of
everything--all my money and my watch that I've always thought so much of,
you know--and the wicked words slipped out before I knew it; they just
seemed to speak themselves."

"Ah, dear Max, that is one of the dreadful consequences of allowing
ourselves to fall into such wicked ways; it is the power of habit which
grows upon us till we are bound by it as with an iron chain.

"The Bible says, 'His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he
shall be holden with the cords of his sins.' So the longer any one lives
in sin, the harder it is for him to break away from it--to repent and be
converted and saved. Therefore, I beseech you to come to Jesus now; God's
time is always now."

"Mamma Vi, I think I have," he said low and humbly; "I tried to do it with
my heart, when Grandma Elsie was praying for me."

"O Max, dear Max, I am very glad!" she returned with tears of joy in her
eyes. "And your father will rejoice almost as the angels do in heaven when
a sinner repents and is saved."

"It's a dreadful task to have to write down all about this afternoon for
him to read," sighed the boy.

"But you will do it, Max? will you tell him the whole truth like a brave
boy?" queried Violet anxiously.

"Yes, ma'am, I will. Oh, I wish he were here! so I could just tell him,
and have it all over in a few minutes. But now it will be so long that
I'll have to wait to hear what he has to say about it."

Violet expressed her sympathy, joining very heartily in his wish for his
father's presence, then left him to his task.

"Seems to me it's a little like marching up to the cannon's mouth," Max
said to himself, as he took out his writing materials and dipped his pen
in the ink, "but it's got to be done, and I'll have it over."

He cogitated a moment, then began. "Dear papa, I've been doing very wrong
for 'most a week--letting a fellow teach me to play cards and gamble; we
didn't play for money or anything but fun at first, but afterward we did;
and I lost all the money I had, and, worse still, the nice watch you sent
me.

"But the very worst is to come. You would never believe I could be so
terribly wicked after all you said to me, and I wouldn't have believed it
myself, and oh, I don't like to tell you, for I'm afraid it will almost
break your heart, papa, to know you have such a wicked boy for your only
son!

"But I have to tell you, because you know you said I must tell you
everything bad I did.

"Well, I was sure the fellow had cheated, and I got very mad, and called
him a cheat and a thief. Then he got mad and swore horrible oaths at me,
and called me a liar, and that made me madder than ever, and--O papa, how
can I write it for you to see? I swore at him."

The boy's tears were dropping upon the paper. He dashed them hastily away,
and went on writing.

"I am dreadfully, dreadfully sorry, papa! I think I was never so sorry for
anything in all my life, because--because it was so wicked and ungrateful
to God. I've asked Him to forgive me for Jesus' sake, and Grandma Elsie
has asked Him for me, too, and Mamma Vi told me she had been praying for
me. And I've tried to give myself to the dear Saviour, and I hope I'll be
His servant all the rest of my life.

"I think He has forgiven me, and will you forgive me, too, papa? I'm to
stay alone here in my room for a week. Mamma Vi says you said that was the
way I should be punished, if I ever did that wicked thing again, and it
isn't a bit worse than I deserve."




CHAPTER XX.

    "There are that raise up strife and contention."
                                 --_Hab._ 1:3.

    "Only by pride cometh contention."
                               --_Prov._ 13:10.


While Zoe was at Max's door, something took Edward to their rooms. He was
there but a moment--just long enough to pick up the article he wanted--and
hurrying down the hall again, caught the sound of her voice as he reached
the head of the stairway.

For an instant he stood still, debating with himself whether to interfere
or not; then deciding in the negative, passed on down the stairs more
angry with her than ever.

She was defying riot only his authority, but also that of his grandfather
and mother, and interfering with their management of the children
committed to their care by their own father. Truly, he feared he had made
a sad mistake in putting such a child into a woman's position, where she
felt herself entitled to rights, for whose proper exercise she had not yet
sufficient judgment or self-control.

As he entered the drawing-room, Miss Deane, who was seated at a table
looking over a portfolio of drawings and engravings, called him to her
side.

"You have visited these places, Mr. Travilla," she said, "and I want the
benefit of your explanations, and your opinion whether the pictures are
true to nature. They are European views, I see."

Of course he could not, without great rudeness, refuse to take a seat by
her side and give her the information she requested.

So it happened that when Zoe came in presently after, her anger was
intensely aroused by seeing her husband and Miss Deane seated at a distant
table, apart from the rest of the occupants of the room, laughing and
talking with their heads very close together over an engraving.

Edward lifted his just in time to catch her look of mingled amazement,
scorn, and indignation. He flushed hotly, and remembering what he had just
overheard up-stairs, and what had passed between them in the
apple-orchard, gave her an angry glance in return.

She drew her slight, girlish figure up to its full height, and turning
away, crossed the room toward a sofa where Mrs. Dinsmore and a bachelor
gentleman of the neighborhood sat conversing together.

A sudden impulse seized her as Mr. Larned rose and took her hand in
greeting, Mrs. Dinsmore being called from the room at the same moment by a
servant, who said that some one was waiting in the hall to speak to her.

"I'll pay Edward back in his own coin," Zoe said to herself, and Mr.
Larned was surprised at the great cordiality and winning sweetness of her
manner as she took the vacated seat by his side, then at the spirit and
vivacity with which she rattled away to him, now on this theme, now on
that.

Excitement lent an unwonted glow to her cheek and brilliancy and sparkle
to her always beautiful eyes.

Edward, watching her furtively, with darkening brow, thought he had never
seen her so pretty and fascinating, and never had her low soft laugh, as
now and again it reached his ear, sounded so silvery sweet and musical,
yet it jarred on his nerves, and he would fain have stopped it.

He hoped momentarily that Mr. Larned would go, but he sat on and on the
whole evening, Zoe entertaining him all the while.

Other members of the family came in, but though he rose to greet them, he
immediately resumed his seat, and she kept hers, even in spite of the
frowning looks her husband gave her from time to time, but which she
feigned not to see.

At length, his mother perceiving with pain what was going on, managed to
release him from Miss Deane, and he at once took a seat on his wife's
other side, and joined in the talk.

Zoe had but little to say after that, and Mr. Larned presently took his
departure.

That was a signal for the good-nights, and all scattered to their rooms.

Zoe's heart quaked as the door of her boudoir closed upon her, shutting
her in alone with her irate husband.

She knew that he was angry, more angry with her than he had ever been
before, and though in her thoughts she tried to put all the blame on him,
conscience told her that she was by no means blameless.

He locked the door, then turned toward her. She glanced up at him half
defiantly, half timidly. His look was very stern and cold.

She turned away with a pout and a slight shrug of her pretty shoulders.

"It seems your smiles are for Miss Deane, while your black looks are
reserved for your wife," she said.

"I have no interest in Miss Deane," he replied; "it is nothing to me how
she behaves, but my wife's conduct is a matter of vital importance; and
let me tell you, Zoe, I will have no more such exhibitions as you made of
yourself to-night with either Mr. Larned or any other man. I won't allow
it. There are some things a man won't put up with. You must and shall show
some respect to my wishes in regard to this."

"Orders, you'd better say," she muttered.

"Well, then, orders, if you prefer it."

She was very angry, and withal a good deal frightened.

"Exhibitions indeed!" she cried, sinking into a chair, for she was
trembling from head to foot. "What did I do? Why had you any more right to
laugh and talk with another woman than I with another man?"

"Laughing and talking may be well enough; but it was more than that; you
were actually flirting."

"You call it that just because you are jealous. And if I was, it was your
fault--setting me the example by flirting with Miss Deane."

"I did nothing of the kind," he returned haughtily. "I sat beside her
against my will, simply because she requested me to go over those sketches
and engravings with her. I couldn't in common politeness refuse."

"Well, I didn't know that; and you needn't scold me for following your
example."

"I tell you I did not set you the example; and I advise you to beware how
you behave so again. Also how you interfere in the discipline grandpa and
mamma see proper to use toward Max and his sisters, as you did to-night."

"So you have been acting the spy upon your wife!" she interrupted in
scornful indignation.

"No; I overheard you quite accidentally. It is the second time you have
done that thing, and I warn you to let it be the last."

"Indeed! Why don't you say at once that you'll beat me if I don't obey all
your tyrannical orders?"

"Because it wouldn't be true; should I ever so far forget myself as to
lift my hand against my wife, I could never again lay claim to the name of
gentleman."

"Perhaps, then, you will lock me up?" she sneered.

"Possibly I may, if you make it necessary," he said coldly.

"Lock me up, indeed! I'd like to see you try it!" she cried, starting up
with flashing eyes, and stamping her foot in a sort of fury of
indignation.

Then rushing into the adjoining room, she tore off her ornaments and
dress, pulled down her hair, her cheeks burning, her eyes hot and dry.

But by the time she had assumed her night-dress the first fury of passion
had spent itself, and scalding tears were raining down her cheeks.

She threw herself on the bed, sobbing convulsively. "Oh, I never, never
thought he would treat me so! and he wouldn't dare if papa was alive; but
he knows I've nobody to defend me--nobody in the wide world, and he can
abuse me as much as he pleases. But I think it's very mean for a big
strong man to be cruel to a little weak woman."

Then as her anger cooled still more, "But I have done and said provoking
things to-day as well as he," she acknowledged to herself. "I suppose if
I'd been in his place I'd have got mad, too, and scolded and threatened my
wife. Well, if he'd only come and kiss me and coax me a little, I'd say I
was sorry and didn't intend to vex him, so any more."

She hushed her sobs and listened. She could hear him moving about in the
dressing-room.

"Edward!" she called in soft, tremulous tones.

No answer.

She waited a moment, then called a little louder, "Ned!"

There was no reply, and she turned over on her pillow, and cried herself
to sleep.

When she woke all was darkness and silence.

She felt half frightened.

"Edward," she said softly, and put out her hand to feel for him.

He was not there. She sprang from the bed and groped her way into the
dressing-room.

There the moon shone in, and by its light she perceived the form of her
husband stretched upon a couch, while the sound of his breathing told her
that he slept.

She crept back to her bed, and lay down upon it with such a sense of utter
loneliness as she had never known before.

"Oh," she moaned to herself, "he hates me, he hates me! he wouldn't even
lie down beside me! he will never love me any more."

She wept a long while, but at last fell into a profound sleep.

When she next awoke day had dawned, but it was earlier than their usual
hour for rising.

The first object that met her gaze was Edward's untouched pillow, and the
sight instantly brought back the events of the previous day and night.

Her first emotion was resentment toward her husband, but better thoughts
succeeded. She loved him dearly, and for the sake of peace she would
humble herself a little. She would go and wake him with a kiss, and say
she was sorry to have vexed him, and if he'd only be kind and not order
her, she wouldn't do so any more.

She slipped out of bed, stole noiselessly to the door of the
dressing-room, and looked in.

He was not there, and the room was in great disorder, closet and wardrobe
doors and bureau drawers open and things scattered here and there, as if
he had made a hasty selection of garments, tossing aside such as he did
not want.

As Zoe gazed about in wonder and surprise, the sound of wheels caught her
ear.

She ran to a window overlooking a side entrance, and dropped on her knees
before it to look and listen without danger of being seen.

There stood the family carriage. Edward was in the act of handing Miss
Fleming into it; Miss Deane followed, and he stepped in after her, only
pausing a moment with his foot upon the step to turn and answer a question
from his mother.

"How long do you expect to be gone, Edward?" Elsie asked.

"Probably a week or ten days, mother," he replied. "Good-by," and in
another instant the carriage rolled away.

Zoe felt stunned, bewildered, as she knelt there leaning her head against
the window frame and watched it till it was out of sight.

"Gone!" she said aloud; "gone without one word of good-by to me, without
telling me he was going, without saying he was sorry for his cruel words
last night, and with Miss Deane. Oh, I know now that he hates me and will
never, never love me again!"

Bitter, scalding tears streamed from her eyes. She rose presently and
began mechanically picking up and putting away his clothes, then made her
usual neat toilet, stopping every now and then to wipe away her tears, for
she was crying all the time.

The breakfast bell rang at the accustomed hour, but she could not bear the
thought of going down and showing her tear-swollen eyes at the table.
Besides, she did not feel hungry; she thought she would never want to eat
again.

After a little, opening the door in answer to a rap, she found Agnes
standing there with a delightful breakfast on a silver waiter--hot coffee,
delicate rolls and muffins, tender beefsteak, and omelet.

"Good-mornin', Miss Zoe," said the girl, walking in and setting her burden
down on a stand. "Miss Elsie she tole me for to fotch up dis yere. She
tink, Miss Elsie do, dat p'raps you'd rather eat yo' breakfus up yere dis
mornin'."

"Yes, so I would, Agnes, though I'm not very hungry. Tell mamma she's very
kind, and I'm much obliged."

"Ya'as, Miss Zoe," and Agnes courtesied and withdrew.

Zoe took a sip of the coffee, tasted the omelet, found a coming appetite,
and went on to make a tolerably hearty meal, growing more cheerful and
hopeful as she ate.

But grief overcame her again as she went about the solitary rooms; it
seemed as if her husband's presence lingered everywhere, and yet as if he
were dead and buried, and she never to see him more.

Not quite a year had elapsed since her father's death, and the scenes of
that day and night and many succeeding ones came vividly before her; the
utter forlornness of her condition, alone in a strange land with a dying
parent, with no earthly comforter at hand, no friend or helper in all the
wide world, and how Edward then flew to her assistance, how kindly he
ministered to her dying father, how tenderly he took her in his arms,
whispering words of love and sympathy, and asking her to become his wife
and give him the right to protect and care for her.

And how he had lavished favors and endearments upon her all these months;
how patiently he had borne with petulance and frequent disregard of his
known wishes, nor ever once reminded her that she owed her home and every
earthly blessing to him.

How he had sympathized with her in her bursts of grief for her father,
soothing her with tenderest caresses and assurances of the bliss of the
departed, and reminding her of the blessed hope of reunion in the better
land.

After all this, she surely might have borne a little from him--a trifling
neglect or reproof, a slight exertion of authority, especially as she
could not deny that she was very young and foolish to be left to her own
guidance.

And perhaps he had a right to claim her obedience, for she knew that she
had promised to give it.

She found she loved him with a depth and passion she had not been aware
of. But he had gone away without a good-by to her, in anger, and with Miss
Deane. He would never have done that if there had been a spark of love
left in his heart.

Where and how was he going to spend that week or ten days? At the house of
Miss Deane's parents, sitting beside her, hearing her talk and enjoying
it, though he knew his little wife at home must be breaking her heart
because of his absence?

Was he doing this instead of carrying out his half threat of locking her
up? Did he know that this was a punishment ten times worse?

But if he wasn't going to love her any more, if he was tired of her and
wanted to be rid of her, how could she ever bear to stay and be a burden
and constant annoyance to him?

Elsie, coming up a little later, found her in her boudoir crying very
bitterly.

"Dear child, my dear little daughter," she said, taking her in her kind
arms, "don't grieve so; a week or even ten days will soon roll round, and
Edward will be with you again."

"O mamma, it is a long, long while!" she sobbed. "You know we've never
been parted for a whole day since we were married, and he's all I have."

"Yes, dear, I know; and I felt sure you were crying up here and didn't
want to show your tell-tale face at the table, so I sent your breakfast
up. I hope you paid it proper attention--did not treat it with neglect?"
she added sportively.

"It tasted very good, mamma, and you were very kind," Zoe said.

She longed to ask where and on what errand Edward had gone, but did not
want to expose her ignorance of his plans.

"I did not know the ladies were going to-day," she remarked.

"It was very sudden," was the reply; "a telegram received this morning
summoned them home because of the alarming illness of Miss Deane's father,
and as Edward had business to attend to that would make it necessary for
him to take a train leaving only an hour later than theirs, he thought it
best to see them on their way as far as our city. He could not do more, as
their destination and his lie in exactly opposite directions."

Though Edward had kept his own counsel, the kind mother had her
suspicions, and was anxious to relieve Zoe's mind as far as lay in her
power.

Zoe's brightening countenance and sigh of relief showed her that her
efforts were not altogether in vain.

"I think Edward was sorry to leave his little wife for so long," she went
on. "He committed her to my care. What will you do with yourself this
morning, dear, while I am busy with the children in the school-room?"

"I don't know, mamma; perhaps learn some lessons. Edward would wish me to
attend to my studies while he is away, and I want to please him."

"I haven't a doubt of that, dear. I know there is very strong love between
you, and the knowledge makes me very happy."

"Mamma," said Zoe, "may I ask you a question?"

"Certainly, dear, as many as you please."

"Did you obey your husband?"

Elsie looked surprise, almost startled; the query seemed to throw new
light on the state of affairs between Edward and his young wife; but she
answered promptly in her own sweet, gentle tones. "My dear, I often wished
he would only give me the opportunity; it would have been so great a
pleasure to give up my wishes for one I loved so dearly."

"Then he never ordered you?"

"Yes, once--very soon after our marriage--he laid his commands upon me to
cease calling him Mr. Travilla and say Edward," Elsie said, with a dreamy
smile and a far-away look in her soft brown eyes.

"He was very much older than I, and knowing him from very early childhood,
as a grown-up gentleman and my father's friend, I had been used to calling
him Mr. Travilla, and could hardly feel it respectful to drop the title.

"The only other order he ever gave me was not to exert myself to lift my
little Elsie before I had recovered my strength after her birth. He was
very tenderly careful of his little wife, as he delighted to call her."

"I wish I had known him," said Zoe. "Is my husband much like him?"

"More in looks than disposition. I sometimes think he resembles my father
more than his own in the latter regard.

"Yes," thought Zoe, "that's where he gets his disposition to domineer over
me and order me about. I always knew Grandpa Dinsmore was of that sort."

Aloud she said, with a watery smile, "And my Edward has been very tenderly
careful of me."

"And always will be, I trust," said his mother, smiling more cheerily. "If
he does not prove so, he is less like my father than I think. Mamma will
tell you, I am sure, that she has been the happiest of wives."

"I suppose it depends a good deal upon the two dispositions how a couple
get on together," remarked Zoe, sagely. "But, mamma, do you think the man
should always rule and have his way in everything?"

"I think a wife's best plan, if she desires to have her own way, is always
to be or to seem ready to give up to her husband. Don't deny or oppose
their claim to authority, and they are not likely to care to exert it."

"If I were only as wise and good as you, mamma!" murmured Zoe with a sigh.

"Ah, dear, I am not at all good; and as to the wisdom, I trust it will
come to you with years; there is an old saying that we cannot expect to
find gray heads on green shoulders."




CHAPTER XXI.

    "And if division come, it soon is past,
     Too sharp, too strange an agony to last.
     And like some river's bright, abundant tide,
     Which art or accident had forc'd aside,
     The well-springs of affection gushing o'er,
     Back to their natural channels flow once more."
                               --Mrs. Norton.


Left alone, Zoe sat meditating on her mother-in-law's advice.

"Oh," she said to herself, "if I could only know that my husband's love
isn't gone forever, I could take comfort in planning to carry it out; but
oh, if he hadn't quite left off caring for me, how could he threaten me
so, and then go away without making up, without saying good-by, even if he
didn't kiss me? I couldn't have gone away from him so for one day, and he
expects to be away for ten. Ten days! such a long, long while!" and her
tears fell like rain.

She wiped them away, after a little, opened her books and tried to study,
but she could not fix her mind upon the subject; her thoughts would wander
from it to Edward travelling farther and farther from her, and the tears
kept dropping on the page.

She gave it up and tried to sew, but could mot see to take her stitches or
thread her needle for the blinding tears.

She put on her hat and a veil to hide her tear-stained face and swollen
eyes, stole quietly down-stairs and out into the grounds, where she
wandered about solitary and sad.

Everywhere she missed Edward; she could think of nothing but him and his
displeasure, and her heart was filled with sad forebodings for the future.
Would he ever, ever love and be kind to her again?

After a while she crept back to her apartments, taking care to avoid
meeting any one.

But Elsie was there looking for her. The children's lesson hours were
over, they were going for a drive, and hoped Zoe would go along.

"Thank you, mamma, but I do not care to go to-day," Zoe answered in a
choking voice, and turned away to hide her tears.

"My dear child, my dear, foolish little girl!" Elsie said, putting her
arms around her, "why should you grieve so? Ned will soon be at home
again, if all goes well. He is not very far away, and if you should be
taken ill, or need him very much for any reason, a telegram would bring
him to you in a few hours."

"But he went away without kissing me good-by; he didn't kiss me last night
or this morning." The words were on the tip of Zoe's tongue, but she held
them back, and answered only with fresh tears and sobs.

"I'm afraid you are not well, dear," Elsie said. "What can I do for you?"

"Nothing, thank you, mamma. I didn't sleep quite so well as usual last
night, and my head aches. I'll lie down and try to get a nap."

"Do, dear, and I hope it will relieve the poor head. As you are a healthy
little body, I presume the pain has been brought on merely by loss of
sleep and crying. I think Edward must not leave you for so long a time
again. Would you like mamma to stay with you, darling?" she asked, with a
motherly caress.

Zoe declined the offer; she would be more likely to sleep if quite alone;
and Elsie withdrew after seeing her comfortably established upon the bed.

"Strange," she said to herself as she passed on through the upper hall and
down the broad staircase into the lower one, "it can hardly be that
Edward's absence alone can distress her so greatly. I fear there is some
misunderstanding between them. I think I must telegraph for Edward if she
continues so inconsolable. His wife's health and happiness are of far more
consequence than any business matter. But I shall consult papa first, of
course."

She went into the library, found him sitting there, and laid the case
before him.

He shared her fear that all was not right between the young couple, and
remarked that, unfortunately, Edward had too much of his grandfather's
sternness and disposition to domineer.

"I don't like to hear you depreciate yourself, papa," Elsie said. "Edward
may have that disposition without having got it from you. And I am sure
mamma would indignantly repel the insinuation that you were ever a
domineering husband."

"Perhaps so; my daughter was the safety-valve in my case. Well, daughter,
my advice is, wait till to-morrow at all events. I must say she doesn't
seem to me one of the kind to submit tamely to oppression. I did not like
her behavior last evening, and it may be that she needs the lesson her
husband seems to be giving her. He certainly has been affectionate enough
in the past to make it reasonable to suppose he is not abusing her now."

"Oh, I could never think he would do that!" exclaimed his mother, "and I
believe in my heart he would hurry home at once if he knew how she is
fretting over his absence."

It was near the dinner hour when Elsie returned from her drive, and
stealing on tiptoe into Zoe's bedroom she found her fast asleep. Her
eyelashes were still wet, and she looked flushed and feverish.

Elsie gazed at her in tender pity and some little anxiety; the face was so
young and child-like, and even in sleep wore a grieved expression that
touched the kind mother heart.

"Poor little orphan!" she sighed to herself, "she must feel very lonely
and forlorn in her husband's absence, especially if things have gone wrong
between them. How could I ever have borne a word or look of displeasure
from my husband! I hope she is not going to be ill."

"Is Zoe not coming down?" Mr. Dinsmore asked as the family gathered about
the dinner-table.

"I found her sleeping, papa, and thought it best not to wake her;" Elsie
answered. "I think she does not look quite well, and that sleep will do
her more good than anything else."

Zoe slept most of the afternoon, woke apparently more cheerful, and ate
with seeming enjoyment the delicate lunch presently brought her by Elsie's
orders; but she steadily declined to join the family at tea or in the
parlor.

She would much rather stay where she was for the rest of the day, she
said, as she felt dull and her head still ached a little.

Every one felt concerned about, and disposed to be as kind to her as
possible. Mrs. Dinsmore, Elsie, Violet, and Rosie all came in in the
course of the afternoon and evening to ask how she did, and express the
hope that she would soon be quite well again, and to try to cheer her up.

They offered her companionship through the night; any one of them would
willingly sleep with her; but she said she was not timid and would prefer
to remain alone.

"Well, dear, I should feel a trifle easier not to have you alone," Elsie
said, as she bade her good-night, "but we will not force our company upon
you. None of us lock our doors at night, and my rooms are not far away;
don't hesitate to wake me, if you feel uneasy or want anything in the
night."

"Thank you, dear mamma," returned Zoe, putting her arms about her mother's
neck; "you are so good and kind! such a dear mother to me! I will do as
you say; if I feel at all timid in the night I shall run to your rooms and
creep into bed with you."

So they all left her, and the house grew silent and still.

It was the first night since her marriage that her husband had not been
with her, and she missed him more than ever. Besides, through the day she
had been buoyed up in a measure by the hope that he would send her a
note, a telegram, or some sort of message.

He had not done so, and the conviction that she had quite alienated him
from her grew stronger and stronger.

Again she indulged in bitter weeping, wetting her pillow with her tears as
she vainly courted sleep.

"He hates me now, I know he does, and will never love me again," she
repeated to herself. "I wish I didn't love him so. Ho said he was sorry he
couldn't give me my liberty, but I don't want it; but he wants to be rid
of me, or he would never have said that; and how unhappy he must be, and
will be all his life, tied to a wife he hates.

"I won't stay here to be a burden and torment to him!" she cried, starting
up with sudden determination and energy. "I love him so dearly that I'll
deliver him from that, even though it will break my heart; for oh, how
_can_ I live without him!"

She considered a moment, and (foolish child) thought it would be an act of
noble self-sacrifice, and also very romantic, to run away and die of a
broken heart, in order to relieve her husband of the burden and torment
she chose to imagine that he considered her.

A folly that was partly the effect of too much reading of sensational
novels, partly of physical ailment, for she was really feverish and ill.

She did not pause to decide where she would go, or to reflect how she
could support herself. Were not all places alike away from the one she so
dearly loved? and as to support she had a little money, and would not be
likely to live long enough to need more.

Perhaps Edward would search for her from a sense of duty--she knew he was
very conscientious--but she would manage so that he would never be able to
find her; she would go under an assumed name; she would call herself Miss,
and no one would suspect her of being a married woman running away from
her husband. Ah, it was not altogether a disadvantage to be and look so
young!

And when she should find herself dying, or so near it that there would not
be time to send for Edward, she would tell some one who she really was,
and ask that a letter should be written to him telling of her death, so
that he would know he wus free to marry again.

Marry again! The thought of that shook her resolution for a moment. It was
torture to imagine the love and caresses that had been hers lavished upon
another woman.

But, perhaps, after his unhappy experience of married life, he would
choose to live single the rest of his days. He had his mother and sisters
to love, and could be happy without a wife.

Besides, she had read somewhere that though love was everything to a
woman, men were different and could do quite well without it.

She went into the dressing-room, turned up the night lamp, and looked at
her watch.

It was one o'clock. At two a stage passed northward along a road on the
farther side of Fairview. She could easily make her few preparations in
half an hour, walk to the nearest point on the route of the stage in time
to stop it and get in, then while journeying on, decide what her next step
should be.

She packed a hand-bag with such things as she deemed most essential,
arrayed herself in a plain, dark woollen dress, with hat, veil, and gloves
to match, threw a shawl over her arm, and was just turning to go, when a
thought struck her.

"I ought to leave a note, of course; they always do."

Sitting down at her writing-desk, she directed an envelope to her husband,
then wrote on a card:

    "I am going away never to come back. Don't look for me, for it
    will be quite useless, as I shall manage so that you can never
    trace me. It breaks my heart to leave you, my dear dear
    husband, for I love you better than life, but I know I have lost
    your love, and I want to rid you of the burden and annoyance of
    a hated wife. So, farewell forever in this world, and nay you be
    very happy all your days.

                                                       "ZOE."

Her tears fell fast as she wrote; she had to wipe them away again and
again, and the card was so blotted and blistered by them that some of the
words were scarcely legible, but there was not time to write another; so
she put it in the envelope and laid it on the toilet table, where it would
be sure to catch his eye.

Then taking up her shawl and satchel, she sent one tearful farewell glance
around the room, and stole noiselessly down-stairs and out of the house by
a side door. It caught her dress in closing, but she was unaware of that
for a moment, as she stood still on the step, remembering with a sudden
pang, that was more than half regret, that the deed was done beyond
recall, for the dead-latch was down, and she had no key with which to
effect an entrance; she must go on now, whether she would or not.

She took a step forward, and found she was last; she could neither go on
nor retreat. Oh, dreadful to be caught there and her scheme at the same
time baffled and revealed!

All at once she saw it in a new light. "Oh, how angry, how very angry
Edward would be! What would he do and say to her? Certainly, she had given
him sufficient reason to deem it necessary to lock her up; for what right
had she to go away to stay without his knowledge and consent? she who had
taken a solemn vow--in the presence of her dying father, too--to love,
honor and obey him as long as they both should live. Oh, it would be too
disgraceful to be caught so!"

She exerted all her strength in the effort to wrench herself free, even at
the cost of tearing the dress and being obliged to travel with it
unrepaired; but in vain; the material was too strong to give way, and she
sank down on the step in a state of pitiable fright and despair.

She heard the clock in the hall strike two. Even the servants would not be
stirring before five; so she had at least three hours to sit there alone
and exposed to danger from tramps, thieves, and burglars, if any should
happen to come about.

And oh, the miserable prospect before her when this trying vigil should be
over. How grieved mamma would be! dear mamma, whom she loved with true
daughterly affection; how stern and angry Grandpa Dinsmore, how astonished
and displeased all the others; how wicked and supremely silly they would
think her.

Perhaps she could bribe the servants to keep her secret (her dress, her
travelling bag and the early hour would reveal something of its nature),
and gain her rooms again without being seen by any of the family; but then
her life would be one of constant terror of discovery.

Should she try that course, or the more straightforward one of not
attempting any concealment?

She was still debating this question in her mind, when her heart almost
flew into her mouth at the sound of a man's step approaching on the gravel
walk. It drew nearer, nearer, came close to her side, and with a cry of
terror she fell in a little heap on the doorstep in a dead faint.

He uttered a low exclamation of astonishment, stooped over her, and
pushing aside her veil so that the moonlight shone full upon her face,
"Zoe!" he said, "is it possible! What can have brought you here at this
hour of the night?"

He paused for an answer, but none came; then bending lower and perceiving
that she was quite unconscious, also fast, he took a key from his pocket
and opened the door.

He bent over her again, taking note of her dress and the travelling bag by
her side.

"Running away, evidently! could any one have conceived the possibility of
her doing so crazy a thing!" he muttered, as he took her in his arms.

Then a dark thought crossed his mind, but he put it determinately from
him.

"No; I will not, cannot think it! She is pure, guileless, and innocent as
an infant."

He stooped again, picked up the bag, closed the door softly, and carried
her up-stairs--treading with caution lest a stumble or the sound of his
footsteps should arouse some one and lead to the discovery of what was
going on; yet with as great celerity as consistent with that caution,
fearing consciousness might return too soon for the preservation of the
secrecy he desired.

But it did not; she was still insensible when he laid her down on a couch
in her boudoir.

He took off her hat and veil, threw them aside, loosened her dress, opened
a window to give her air, then went into the dressing-room for the night
lamp usually kept burning there.

As he turned it up, his eye fell upon Zoe's note.

He knew her handwriting instantly.

"Here is the explanation," was the thought that flashed into his mind, and
snatching it up, he tore open the envelope, held the card near the light
and read what her fingers had traced scarcely an hour ago.

His eyes filled as he read, and two great drops fell as he laid it down.

He picked up the lamp and hastened back to her.

As he drew near she opened her eyes, sent one frightened glance round the
room and up into his pale, troubled face, then covering hers with her
hands, burst into hysterical weeping.

He set down the lamp, knelt by her sofa and gathered her in his arms,
resting her head against his breast.

"Zoe, my little Zoe, my own dear wife!" he said in faltering accents,
"have I really been so cruel that you despair of my love? Why, my darling,
no greater calamity than your loss could possibly befall me. I love you
dearly, dearly! better far than I did when I asked you to be mine--when we
gave ourselves to each other."

"Oh, is it true? do you really love me yet in spite of all my jealousy and
wilfulness, and--and--oh, I have been very bad and ungrateful and
troublesome!" she sobbed, clinging about his neck.

"And I have been too dictatorial and stern," he said, kissing her again
and again. "I have not had the patience I ought to have had with my little
girl-wife, have not been so forbearing and kind as I meant to be."

"Indeed, you have been very patient and forbearing," she returned, "and
would never have been cross to me if I hadn't provoked you beyond
endurance. I have been very bad to you, dear Ned, but if you'll keep me
and love me I'll try to behave better."

"I'll do both," he said, holding her closer and repeating his caresses.

"Oh, I'm so glad, so glad!" she cried, with the tears running over her
cheeks, "so glad I have to weep for joy. And I've been breaking my heart
since you went away and left me in anger and without one word of good-by."

"My poor darling, it was too cruel," he sighed; "but I found I could not
stand it any more than you, so had to come back to make it up with you.
And I frightened you terribly down there at the door, did I not?"

"O Ned," she murmured, hiding her blushing face on his breast, "how very
good you are to be so loving and kind when you have a right to be angry
and stern with me. You haven't even asked me what I was doing down there
in the night."

"Your note explained that," he said in moved tones, thinking how great
must have been the distress that led to such an act, "and I fear I am as
deserving of reproof as yourself."

"Then you will forgive me?" she asked humbly. "I thought I had a right to
go away, thinking it would make you happier, but now I know I hadn't,
because I had promised myself to you for all my life."

"No; neither of us has a right to forsake the other (we 'are no more twain
but one flesh. What, therefore, God hath joined together, let no man put
asunder'); we are husband and wife for as long as we both shall live, and
must dwell together in mutual love and forbearance. We will exchange
forgiveness, dearest, for we have both been to blame, and I forgive your
attempt of to-night on condition that you promise me never, never to do
such a thing again."

"I promise," she said, "and," imploringly, "O Ned, won't you keep my
secret? I couldn't bear to have it known even in the family."

"No more could I, love," he answered; "and oh, but I am thankful that you
were caught by the door and so prevented from carrying out your purpose!"

"So am I, and that it was my own dear husband, and not a burglar, as I
feared, who found me there."

"Ah, was that the cause of your fright?" he asked, with a look of relief
and pleasure. "I thought it was your terror of your husband's wrath that
caused your faint. But, darling, you are looking weary and actually ill.
You must go to bed at once."

"I'll obey you, this time and always," she answered, looking up fondly
into his face. "I am convinced now that I am only a foolish child in need
of guidance and control, and who should provide them but you? I could
hardly stand it from anybody else--unless mamma--but I'm sure that in
future it will be a pleasure to take it from my own dear husband if--if
only----" she paused, blushing and hiding her face on his breast.

"If what, love?"

"If only instead of 'You must and shall,' you will say kindly, 'I want you
to do it to please me, Zoe.'"

"Sweet one," he answered, holding her to his heart, "I do fully intend
that it shall be always love and coaxing after this."




CHAPTER XXII.

    "Our love, it ne'er was reckoned,
     Yet good it is and true;
     It's half the world to me, dear,
     It's all the world to you."
                      --Hood.


Edward was a trifle late in obeying the call to breakfast. He found the
rest of the family already seated at the table, and great was the surprise
created by his entrance.

"Why, how's this? hae we all been sleepin' a week or ten days?" exclaimed
Mr. Lilburn. "The lad was to hae been absent that length o' time, and I
thought it was but yesterday he went; yet here he is!"

"This is an unexpected pleasure, my dear boy," was his mother's greeting.

The others said "Good-morning," and all smilingly awaited an explanation.

"Good-morning to you all," returned Edward, taking his seat. "Of course I
have not had time to attend to the business matter that took me away; but
the fact is, I found I could not do without my wife, so came back after
her."

"Where is she now?" asked his mother.

"I left her still in bed and asleep. I came home by the stage, found her
awake--indeed, I think she said she had not slept at all--and kept her
awake for some time talking----"

"So much to say after so lengthened a separation?" laughingly interrupted
his grandfather.

"Yes, sir, a good deal," Edward answered, coloring slightly. "So she has
to make it up now, and I would not wake her."

"Quite right," said his mother. "Her breakfast shall be sent up whenever
she is ready for it."

"I'm very glad you've come, Ned," remarked Rosie, "for Zoe nearly cried
her eyes out yesterday, grieving after you. 'Twouldn't be I that would
fret so after any man living--unless it might be grandpa," with a
coquettish, laughing look at him.

"Thank you, my dear," he said.

"Ah, lassie, that's a' because your time hasna come yet," remarked Mr.
Lilburn. "When it does, you'll be as lovelorn and foolish as the rest."

"Granting that it is foolish for a woman to love her husband," put in Mrs.
Dinsmore, sportively.

"A heresy never to be countenanced here," said her spouse; "the husbands
and wives of this family expect to give and receive no small amount of
that commodity. Do you set off again this morning, Ned?"

"No, sir; not before to-morrow; not then unless Zoe is ready to go with
me."

"Quite right, my boy, your wife's health and happiness are, as your mother
remarked to me yesterday, of more consequence than any mere business
matter."

On leaving the table Edward followed his mother out to the veranda.

"Can I have a word in private with you, mamma?" he asked, and she thought
his look was troubled.

"Certainly," she said. "I hope nothing is wrong with our little Zoe?"

"It is of her--and myself I want to speak. I feel impelled to make a
confession to you, mother dear, that I would not willingly to any one
else. Perhaps you have suspected," he added, coloring with mortification,
"that all was not right between us when I left yesterday. She would not
have fretted so over my mere absence of a few days, but I had scolded and
threatened her the night before, and went away without any reconciliation
or even a good-by. In fact, she was asleep when I left the rooms, and knew
nothing of my going."

"O Edward!" exclaimed his listener in a low, pained tone.

"I am bitterly ashamed of my conduct, mother," he said with emotion, "but
we have made it up and are both very happy again in each other's love. She
was very humble over her part of the quarrel, poor little thing! and we
mean to live in peace and love the rest of our lives, God helping us," he
added reverently.

"I trust so, my dear boy," Elsie said, "for whether you live in peace or
contention, will make all the difference of happiness or misery in your
lives. It would have quite broken my heart had your father ever scolded or
threatened me."

"But you, mamma, were a woman when you married, old enough and wise enough
to guide and control yourself."

"I was older than Zoe is, it is true; but do not be dictatorial, Edward;
if you must rule, do it by love and persuasion; you will find it the
easiest and happiest way for you both."

"Yes, mother, I am convinced of it; but unfortunately for my poor little
wife, I have not my father's gentleness and easy temper. Will you come up
with me now and take a look at her? I fear she is not quite well--her
cheeks are so flushed and her hands so hot. I shall never forgive myself
if I have made her ill."

"I sincerely hope you are not to be visited with so severe a punishment as
that," his mother said. "But come, let us go to her at once."

They found her still sleeping, but not profoundly; her face was
unnaturally flushed, and wore a troubled expression, while her breathing
seemed labored.

As they stood anxiously regarding her, she woke with a sharp cry of
distress and anguish, then catching sight of her husband bending over her,
her face grew radiant, and throwing her arms about his neck, "O Ned, dear
Ned!" she cried, "are you here? and do you love me yet?"

"Dearly, dearly, my darling," he said, holding her close. "What has
troubled you?"

"Oh, such a dreadful dream! I thought I was all alone in a desert and
couldn't find you anywhere."

"But 'drames always go by conthraries, my dear,'" he quoted sportively.
Then more seriously, "Are you quite well, love?" he asked.

"A little dull and a trifle headachy," she answered, smiling up at him,
"but I think a cup of coffee and a drive with my husband in the sweet
morning air will cure me."

"You shall have both with the least possible delay."

"What time is it? Have you been to breakfast?"

"It's about nine, and I have taken breakfast. I think you must have some
before exerting yourself to dress."

"Just as you say; it's nice to have you tell me what to do," she said,
nestling closer in his arms. "I can't think why I should ever have
disliked it."

"I presume it was all the fault of my tone and manner, sometimes of my
words, too," he said, passing his hand caressingly over her hair and
cheek. "I'm afraid I've been decidedly bearish on several occasions; but I
trust I shall have the grace to treat my wife with politeness and
consideration after this."

Elsie, who had left the room on Zoe's awaking, now came in and bidding her
an affectionate good-morning, said she had ordered her breakfast to be
brought up at once, adding, "I hope you will do it justice, my dear."

"I'll see that she does, mamma," Edward answered for her, in sportive
tone; "she has made such fair promises of submission, obedience, and all
that, that she'll hardly dare refuse to do anything I bid her."

"I haven't been very good about it lately, mamma," Zoe said, looking half
tearfully, half smilingly from one to the other, "but Ned's forgiven me,
and now I feel as you say you did--that it's a real pleasure to give up my
wishes to one I love so very dearly, and who is, I know, very much wiser
than I."

"That is right, dear," Elsie said tenderly, "and I trust he will show
himself worthy of all your love and confidence."

The two now comported themselves like a pair of lovers, as indeed they had
done through all their brief married life, except the last few days.

Edward exerted himself for the entertainment of his little wife during
their drive, and was very tender and careful of her.

On their return, he bade her lie down on the sofa in her boudoir and rest,
averring that she looked languid and unlike herself.

"To please you," she said, obeying the mandate with a smiling glance up
into his face.

"That's a good child!" he responded, sitting down beside her and smoothing
her hair with fond, caressing hand. "Now, what shall I do to please you?"

"Stay here, close beside me, and hold my hand, and talk to me."

"Very well," he answered, closing his fingers over the hand she put into
his, then lifting it to his lips. "How your face has changed, love, since
that frightened look you gave me when I came in with the lamp last night."

"How frightened and ashamed I was, Ned!" she exclaimed, tears springing to
her eyes; "I felt that you had a right to beat me if you wanted to, and I
shouldn't have said a word if you'd done it."

"But you couldn't have feared that?" he said, with a pained look, and
coloring deeply.

"No, oh, _no, indeed_! I know you would _never_ do that, but I dreaded
what you might say, and did not at all expect you would be so kind and
forgiving and loving to me.

"But how was I brought up here? I knew nothing from the instant you were
at my side on the door-step till I saw you coming in with the lamp."

"In your husband's arms."

"What a heavy load for you to carry!" she said, looking at him with
concern.

"No, not at all; I did it with perfect ease, except for the darkness and
the fear that you might recover consciousness on the way and scream out
with affright before you discovered who your captor was."

"My husband, my dear, kind husband!" she murmured, softly stroking his
face as he bent over her to press a kiss upon her forehead.

"My darling little wife," he returned.

Then after a moment's silent exchange of caresses,

"Would you mind telling me where you were going and what you intended to
do?" he asked with a half smile.

"I have no right to refuse, if you require a full confession," she said,
half playfully, half tearfully, and blushing deeply.

"I don't require it, but should like to have it, nevertheless; for I
confess my curiosity is piqued," he said with an amused, yet tender look
and tone.

"There isn't really very much to tell," she sighed, "only that because I
was dreadfully unhappy and had worked myself up to believing that I was a
hated wife, a burden and annoyance to my husband, I thought it would be an
act of noble self-sacrifice to run away, and--O Ned, please don't laugh at
me!"

"I am not laughing, love," he said in soothing, half-tremulous tones,
taking her in his arms and holding her close, as he had done the night
before. "How could I laugh at you for being willing to sacrifice
everything for me? But that's not all?"

"Not quite. It came to me like a flash about the stage passing so near at
two o'clock in the morning, and that I could get away then without being
seen, and after I was in it make up my mind where I would get out."

"And how did you expect to support yourself?"

"There was some money in my purse--you never let it get empty, Ned--and--I
thought I wouldn't need any very long."

"Wouldn't? why not?"

"Oh, I was sure, _sure_ I couldn't live long without you," she cried,
hugging him close and ending with a burst of tears and sobs.

"You dear, dear little thing!" he said with emotion, and tightening his
clasp of her slight form; "after I had been so cruel to you, too!"

"No, you weren't, except in going away without making up and saying
good-by."

"It's very generous in you to say it, darling. But how large was this sum
of money that you expected to last as long as you needed any?"

"I don't know. I didn't stop to count it. You can do that, if you want to.
I suppose the purse is in my satchel."

He brought the satchel--still unpacked--took out the purse and examined
its contents.

"Barely ten dollars," he said. "It would have lasted but a few days, and,
my darling, what would have become of you then?"

He bent over her in grave tenderness.

"I don't know, Ned," she replied; "I suppose I'd have had to look for
employment."

"To think of you, my little, delicate, petted darling, looking for
employment by which to earn your daily bread!" he exclaimed with emotion.
"It is plain you know nothing of the hardships and difficulties you would
have had to encounter. I shudder to think of it all. But I should never
have let it come to that."

"Would you have looked for me, Ned?"

"I should have begun the search the instant I heard of your flight, nor
ever have known a moment's rest till I found you!" he exclaimed with
energy. "But as I came in the stage you purposed to take, I should have
met and brought you back, if that fortunate mishap had not taken place."

Then she told him of her thoughts, feelings, and painful anticipations
while held fast in the relentless grasp of the door, finishing with, "Oh,
I never could have dreamed that it would all end so well, so happily for
me!"

"And yet, dear one, I do not think you at all realize how painful--not to
say dreadful--would have been the consequences to you, to me, and, indeed,
to all the family, if you had succeeded in carrying out what I must call
your crazy scheme."

She looked up at him in alarmed inquiry, and he went on, "'Madame Rumor,
with her thousand tongues,' would have had many a tale to tell of the
cruel abuse to which you had been subjected by your husband and his
family--so cruel that you were compelled to run away in the night, taking
advantage of the temporary absence of your tyrannical husband; while----"

"O Ned, dear Ned, I never thought of that!" she exclaimed, interrupting
him with a burst of tears and sobs. "I wouldn't for the world have
wrought harm to you or any of them."

"No, love, I know you wouldn't. I believe your motives were altogether
kind and self-sacrificing," he said soothingly; "and you yourself would
have been the greatest sufferer; the world judges hardly--how hardly my
little girl-wife has no idea; wicked people would have found wicked
motives to which to impute your act and caused a stain upon your fair fame
that might never have been removed.

"But there, there, love, do not cry any more over it; happily, the whole
thing is a secret between us two, and we may now dismiss the disagreeable
subject forever.

"But shall we not promise each other that we will never part in anger,
even when the separation may not be for an hour? or ever lie down to sleep
at night unreconciled, if there has been the slightest misunderstanding or
coldness between us?"

"Oh, yes, yes, I promise!" she cried eagerly; "but, oh, dear Ned, I hope
we will never, never have any more coldness or quarrelling between us,
never say a cross word to each other."

"And I join you, dearest, in both wish and promise."

"I am growing very babyish," she said presently with a wistful look up
into his face; "I can hardly bear to think of being parted from you for a
day; and I suppose you'll have to be going off again to attend to that
business affair?"

"Yes, as soon as I see that my wife is quite well enough to undertake the
journey; for I'm not going again without her."

"Oh, will you take me with you, Ned?" she cried joyfully. "How very good
in you."

"Good to myself, little woman," he said, smiling down at her; "it will
turn a tiresome business trip into a pleasure excursion. I have always
found my enjoyment doubled by the companionship of my better half."

"I call that rank heresy," she said laughing, "_you're_ the better half as
well as the bigger. I wish I were worthy of such a good husband," she
added earnestly and with a look of loving admiration. "I'm very proud of
you, my dear--so good and wise and handsome as you are!"

"Oh, hush, hush! such fulsome flattery," he returned, coloring and
laughing. "Let me see; this is Friday, so near the end of the week that I
do not care to leave home till next week. We will say Tuesday morning
next, if that will suit you, love?"

"Nicely," she answered. "Oh, I'm so glad you have promised to take me with
you!"




CHAPTER XXIII.

LULU.


Before two days had passed Zoe was quite herself again, and as full of
delight at the prospect of going away for a little trip as any child could
have been. She wore so bright a face, was so merry and frolicsome, that it
was a pleasure to watch her, especially when with her husband, and not
aware that any other eye was upon her.

His face, too, beamed with happiness.

Elsie's eyes resting upon them would sometimes fill with tears--half of
joy in their felicity, half of sorrowful yet tender reminiscence. In his
present mood Edward was very like his father in looks, in speech, in
manner.

Tuesday morning came, bringing with it delightful weather; Edward had
decided to take a later train than when starting before, because he would
not have Zoe roused too soon from sleep.

They took breakfast with the family at the usual hour, an open barouche
waiting for them at the door; then with a gay good-by to all set out upon
their journey, driving to the nearest station, and there taking the cars.

"I wish I was going, too!" sighed Lulu, as she and Rosie stood looking
after the barouche.

"Mamma would have let us drive over to the station with them," said Rose;
"Edward asked if we might, but Ben had some errands to do in town, and
couldn't bring us back in time for lessons."

"Lessons! I'm sick and tired of them!" grumbled Lulu. "Other children had
holidays last week, but we had to go right on studying."

"But we are to take ours in a week or two, visiting at the Oaks and the
Laurels, perhaps two weeks at each place, and I'm sure that will be nicer
than to have had Easter holidays at home."

"There, it's out of sight," said Lulu. "I'd like to be Aunt Zoe, just
starting off on a journey. Let's take a run down the avenue, Rosie."

"I would, but I must look over my Latin lesson, or I may not be ready for
grandpa."

With the last words she turned and went into the house.

Lulu knew that she was not ready for Mr. Dinsmore either, but she was in
no mood for study, and the grounds looked so inviting that she yielded to
the temptation to take a ramble instead.

Max, from his window, saw her wandering about among the shrubs and flowers
and longed to join her. He was bearing his punishment in a very good
spirit, making no complaint, spending his time in study, reading, writing
and carving.

Mr. Dinsmore came to him to hear his recitations, and was always able to
commend them as excellent. He treated the boy in a kind, fatherly manner,
talking to him of his sin and the way to obtain forgiveness and
deliverance from it, very much as Elsie and Violet had.

Yet he did not harp continually upon that, but dwelt often upon other
themes, trying so to treat the lad that his self-respect might be
restored.

Max appreciated the kindness shown him, and was strengthened in his good
resolutions. He was privately very much troubled about his losses,
particularly that of the watch, supposing it to be in Ralph's possession,
for Mr. Dinsmore had said nothing to him on the subject.

Being very fond of his sisters, Max felt the separation from them no small
part of his punishment; he followed Lulu's movements this morning with
wistful eyes.

She looked up, and seeing his rather pale, sad face at the window, drew
nearer and called softly to him, "Max, how are you? I'm so sorry for
you."

He only shook his head and turned away.

Then Mr. Dinsmore's voice spoke sternly from a lower window, "Lulu, you
are disobeying orders. Go into the house and to the school-room
immediately. You ought to have been there fully a quarter of an hour ago."

Lulu was a little frightened, and obeyed at once.

"You are late, Lulu. You must try to be more punctual in future," Elsie
said in a tone of mild rebuke, as the little girl sat down at her desk.

"I don't care if I am," she muttered, insolently.

Rose darted at her a look of angry astonishment, Gracie looked shocked,
and little Walter said, "It's very, _very_ naughty to speak so to my
mamma."

But Elsie did not seem to have heard; her face still wore its usual sweet,
placid expression. Lulu thought she had not heard, but found out her
mistake when she went forward to recite. She was told in a gentle, quiet
tone, "You are not my pupil, to-day, Lulu," and returned to her seat
overwhelmed with embarrassment and anger.

No further notice was taken of her by any one excerpt Gracie, who now and
then stole a troubled, half-pitying look at her, until Mr Dinsmore came
to hear the Latin lessons.

Lulu had sat idly at her desk nursing her anger and discontent, her eyes
on the book open before her, but her thoughts elsewhere, so was not
prepared for him.

She was frightened, but tried to hide it, made an attempt to answer the
first question put to her, but broke down in confusion.

He asked another; she was unable to answer it; and with a frown he said,
"I perceive that you know nothing about your lesson to-day. Why have you
not learned it?"

"Because I didn't want to," muttered the delinquent.

Rosie opened her eyes wide in astonishment. She would never have dared to
answer her grandfather in that manner.

"Take your book and learn it now," he said in his sternest tone.

Lulu did not venture to disobey, for she was really very much afraid of
Mr. Dinsmore.

He heard Rosie's lesson, assigned her task for the next day, and both left
the room. The others had gone about the time Mr. Dinsmore came in, so Lulu
was left alone.

She thought it best to give her mind to the lesson, and in half an hour
felt that she was fully prepared with it.

But Mr. Dinsmore did not come back, and she dared not leave the room,
though very impatient to do so.

The dinner bell rang, and still he had not come.

Lulu was hungry and began to fear that she was to be made to fast; but at
length a servant brought her a good, substantial, though plain dinner, set
it before her, and silently withdrew.

"It's not half as good as they've got," Lulu remarked half aloud to
herself, discontentedly eying her fare, "but it's better than nothing."

With that philosophical reflection she fell to work, and speedily emptied
the dishes.

Mr. Dinsmore came to her shortly after, heard the lesson, gave her a
little serious talk and dismissed her.

Feeling that she owed an apology to Grandma Elsie, but still too stubborn
and proud to make it, Lulu was ashamed to join the others, so went off
alone into the grounds. She was not Grandma Elsie's pupil, she understood,
until the morning's impertinence had been atoned for.

It was against rules to go beyond the boundary of the grounds without
permission; yet after wandering through them for a while, she did so, and
entering a shady, pleasant road, walked on without any settled purpose,
till she reached a neighboring plantation where lived some little girls
with whom she had a slight acquaintance.

They were playing croquet on the lawn, and espying Lulu at the gate,
invited her to come in and join them.

She did so, became much interested in the sport, and forgot to go home
until the lengthening shadows warned her that it must be very near the tea
hour at Ion.

She then bade a hasty good-by and retraced her steps with great expedition
and in no tranquil state of mind. In truth, she was a good deal alarmed as
she thought of the possible consequences to herself of her bold disregard
of rules.

She arrived at Ion heated and out of breach, and, as a glance at the hall
clock told her, fully fifteen minutes late.

Hair and dress were in some disorder, but not thinking of that, in her
haste and perturbation, she went directly to the supper-room, where the
family were in the midst of their meal.

They all seemed busily engaged with it or in conversation, and she hoped
to slip unobserved into her seat.

But to her consternation she perceived, as she drew near, that neither
plate nor chair seemed to have been set for her; every place was
occupied.

At the same instant Mr. Dinsmore, turning a stern look upon her, remarked,
"We have no place here for the rebellious and insubordinate, therefore I
have ordered your plate removed; and while you continue to belong to that
class, you will take your meals in your own room."

He dismissed her with a wave of the hand as he spoke, and, filled with
anger and chagrin, she turned and flew from the room, never stopping till
she had gained her own and slammed the door behind her.

"Before Mr. Lilburn and everybody!" she exclaimed aloud, stamping her foot
in impotent rage.

Then catching sight of her figure in the glass, she stood still and gazed,
her cheeks reddening more and more with mortification. Hair and dress were
tumbled, the latter slightly soiled with the dust of the road, as were her
boots also, and the frill about her neck was crushed and partly tucked in.

She set to work with energy to make herself neat, and had scarcely
completed the task when her supper was brought in. It consisted of
abundance of rich sweet milk, fruit, and the nicest of bread and butter.

She ate heartily; then as Agnes carried away the tray, seated herself by
the window with her elbows on the sill, her chin in her hands, and half
involuntarily took a mental review of the day.

The retrospect was not agreeable.

"And I'll have to tell papa all about it in my diary," she groaned to
herself. "No, I sha'n't; what's the use? it'll just make him feel badly.
But he said I must, and he trusted me, he _trusted_ me to tell the truth
and the whole truth, and I can't deceive him; I can't hide anything after
that."

With a heavy sigh she took her writing-desk, set it on the sill to catch
the fading light, and wrote:

"It has been a bad day with me. I didn't look over my lessons before
school, as I ought to have done, but went out in the grounds instead.
While I was there, I broke a rule. Grandpa Dinsmore reproved me and called
me in. I went up to the school-room. Grandma Elsie said I was late and
must be more punctual, and I gave her a saucy answer. She wouldn't hear my
lessons, and I was cross and wouldn't study, and wasn't ready for Grandpa
Dinsmore, and was saucy to him. So I had to stay up there in the
school-room and learn my lesson over and eat my dinner there by myself.

"After that, when he let me out, I took a long walk and played croquet
with some other girls--all without leave.

"They were eating supper when I got back, and I went in without making
myself neat, and my plate and chair had been taken away, and I was sent up
here to take my supper and stay till I'm ready to behave better."

She read over what she had written.

"Oh, what a bad report! How sad it will make papa feel when he reads it!"
she thought, tears springing to her eyes.

She pushed the desk aside and leaned on the sill again, her face hidden in
her hands. Her father's words about the kindness and generosity of Mr.
Dinsmore and his daughter in offering to share their home with his
children, came to her recollection, and all the favors received at the
hands of these kindest of friends passed in review before her. Could her
own mother have been kinder than Grandma Elsie? and she had repaid her
this day with ingratitude, disobedience and impertinence. How despicably
mean!

Tears of shame and penitence began to fall from her eyes, and soon she was
sobbing aloud.

Violet heard her from the next room, and came to her side.

"What is it, Lulu, dear? are you sorry for your misconduct?" she asked in
gentle, affectionate tones, smoothing the child's hair with her soft white
hand as she spoke.

"Yes, Mamma Vi," sobbed the little girl. "Won't you please tell Grandma
Elsie I'm sorry I was saucy and disobedient to her this morning?"

"Yes, dear, I will. And--have you not a message for grandpa also?"

"Yes; I'm sorry I was naughty and impertinent to him, and for breaking his
rules, too. Do you think they'll forgive me, Mamma Vi, and try me again?"

"I am sure they will," Violet said. "And will you not ask God's
forgiveness, also, dear child?"

"I do mean to," Lulu said. "And I've told papa all about it. I wish he
didn't have to know, because it will make him very sorry."

"Yes," sighed Violet, "it grieves him very much when his dear children do
wrong. I hope, dear Lulu, that thought will help you to be good in future.
Still more, that you will learn to hate and forsake sin because it is
dishonoring and displeasing to God, because it grieves the dear Saviour
who loves you and died to redeem you."

Forgiveness was readily accorded by both Mr. Dinsmore and his daughter,
and Lulu went to bed comparatively happy after a short visit and kind
motherly talk from Grandma Elsie.

Two days later Max was released from his imprisonment. He more than half
dreaded to make his appearance below stairs, thinking every one would
view him askance, but was agreeably surprised by being greeted on every
hand with the utmost kindness and cordiality.

On the following Monday he and the other children were sent to the Oaks to
make the promised visit.

Gracie alone needed some persuasion to induce her to go of her own free
will, and that only because mamma was not going. Gracie was not at all
sure that she could live two whole weeks without her dear mamma.

Just before they started, Mr. Dinsmore made Max very happy by the
restoration of his money and watch. He added an admonition against
gambling, and Max replied with an earnest promise never to touch a card
again.




CHAPTER XXIV.

A CHAPTER OF SURPRISES.


Edward and Zoe decided upon a little pleasure trip in addition to the
business one, and, in consequence, were absent from home for over a
fortnight. On their return, Elsie met them on the threshold with the
warmest and most loving of welcomes.

"How well and happy you both look, my dear children!" she said, glancing
from one to the other, her face full of proud, fond, motherly affection.

"As we are, mother dear," Edward responded. "Glad to see you so, also. How
is Vi?"

"Doing nicely."

"Vi! Is she sick?" asked Zoe, her tone expressing both surprise and
concern.

"Yes," Elsie said, leading the way down the hall and up the stairs. Then
as they reached the upper hall, "Come this way, my dears, I have something
to show you."

She led them to the nursery; to the side of a dainty crib; and pushing
aside its curtains of lace, brought to view a little downy head and pink
face nestling cosily upon the soft pillow within.

Zoe uttered an exclamation of astonishment and delight. "Why, mamma, where
did you get it? Oh, the little lovely darling!" and down she went on her
knees by the side of the crib, to make a closer inspection. "O Ned, just
look! did you ever see anything half so dear and sweet?"

"Yes," he said, with a meaning, laughing look into her sparkling face. "I
see something at this moment that to my eyes is dearer and sweeter still.
What does Vi think of it, mamma?" turning to his mother.

"She is very proud and happy," Elsie answered with a smile. "I believe Zoe
has expressed her views exactly."

"It's Vi's, is it?" said Zoe. "Come, Ned, do look at it. You ought to care
a little about your----"

She broke off with an inquiring glance up into her mother's face.

"Niece," supplied Elsie, "my first granddaughter."

"Another Elsie, I suppose," Edward remarked, bending down to examine the
little creature with an air of increasing interest.

"Her father must be heard from before the name can be decided upon," his
mother answered. "Vi wishes it named for me, but I should prefer to have
another Violet."

"I incline to think Captain Raymond will agree with her," said Edward.

"I never saw so young a baby," remarked Zoe. "How old is she, mamma?"

"A week to-day."

"I'm tempted to break the tenth commandment," said Zoe, leaning over the
babe and touching her lips to its velvet cheek. "I used to be very fond of
dolls, and a live one would be so nice. I almost wish it was mine."

"Don't forget that you would be only half owner if it was," said Edward
laughing. "But come now, my dear, it is time we were attending to the
duties of the toilet. The tea-bell will ring directly."

"Well, I'll always want to share everything I have with you," she said.
"Mamma," rising and putting her hand into her husband's, "we've had _such_
a nice time! Ned has been _so_ good and kind to me!"

"And she has been the best and dearest of little wives," he said,
returning the look of fond affection she had bent upon him, "so we could
not fail to enjoy ourselves hugely."

"I am rejoiced to hear it," Elsie said, looking after them with glad tears
in her eyes as they left the room together.

       *       *       *       *       *

The children were enjoying themselves greatly at the Oaks. Horace
Dinsmore, Jr., and his young wife made a very pleasant host and hostess.
Horace's reminiscences of his own childhood and his sister Elsie's
girlhood in this, her old home, were very interesting, not to Rosie and
Walter only, but to the others.

They were shown her suite of rooms, the exact spot in the drawing-room
where she stood during the ceremony that united her to Mr. Travilla, and
the arbor--still called Elsie's arbor--where he offered himself and was
accepted.

They had an equally pleasant visit at the Laurels, whither they went
directly from the Oaks, Gracie wondering why she was not permitted to go
to see mamma first for a while, and grieving over it for a time.

They were not told what had taken place in their absence, until the day of
their return to Ion.

Mrs. Dinsmore had driven over for them, and after an hour's chat with her
daughter, Mrs. Lacey, sent for the children, who were amusing themselves
in the grounds.

"O grandma, good-morning! Did you come to take us home?" cried Rosie, as
she came running in, put her arms about Mrs. Dinsmore's neck, and held up
her face for a kiss.

"Yes, dear child, and to bring you some news. Good-morning, Max, Lulu,
Gracie, Walter--all of you--there's a little stranger at Ion."

"A little stranger!" was the simultaneous exclamation from all five, Max
adding, "What sort?" and Rosie, "Where from?"

"A very sweet, pretty little creature, I think; a little girl from 'No
Man's Land,'" was the smiling reply. "A new little sister for you, Max,
Lulu, and Gracie, a niece for Rosie and Walter."

Max looked pleased, though slightly puzzled, too; Gracie's eyes shone, and
the pink flush deepened on her cheeks, as she asked delightedly, "Is it a
baby? Mamma's baby?" but Lulu frowned and was silent.

"Yes, it is your mamma's baby," replied Grandma Rose. "Would you like to
go home and see it?"

All answered in the affirmative, except Lulu, who said nothing, and then
hurried from the room to make ready.

"O Lu, aren't you glad?" exclaimed Gracie, as they put on their hats.

"No!" snapped Lulu, "what is there to be glad about? It'll steal all
papa's love away from us; Mamma Vi's, too, of course, if she ever had
any."

Gracie was shocked, "Lulu!" she said, just ready to cry, "how can you say
such things? I just know nothing will ever make papa quit loving us. Can't
he love us and the new baby too? and can't mamma?"

"Well, you'll see!" returned Lulu wisely.

There was no time for anything more; the good-bys were said, they were
helped into the Ion carriage, waiting at the door, and driven rapidly
homeward.

During the drive Grandma Rose noticed that while the other children were
merry and talkative, Lulu was silent and sullen, and Gracie apparently
just ready to burst into tears.

She more than half suspected what the trouble was, but thought best to
seem not to see that anything was amiss.

Mr. Dinsmore and his daughter were on the veranda waiting to welcome the
little party on their arrival, and Rosie and Walter were well content to
stay with their mother for a little, while the others passed on up to
Violet's rooms.

They found her in her boudoir, seated in an easy-chair, beside a window
overlooking the avenue, and with her baby on her lap.

She was looking very young, very sweet and beautiful, happy, too, though a
shade of anxiety crossed her features as the children came in.

"How are you, dears? I am very glad to see you again," she said, smiling
sweetly and holding out her pretty white hand.

Gracie sprang forward with a little joyful cry. "O mamma, my dear, sweet,
pretty mamma! I am so glad to get back to you!" and threw her arms about
Violet's neck.

Violet's arm was instantly around the child's waist; she kissed her
tenderly two or three times, then said, looking down at the sleeping babe,
"This is your little sister, Gracie."

"Oh, the darling, wee, pretty pet!" exclaimed Gracie, bending over it.
"Mamma, I'm so glad, if--if----" She stopped in confusion, while Lulu,
standing back a little, threw an angry glance at her.

"If what, dear?" asked Violet.

"If you and papa will love me and all of us just as well," stammered the
little girl, growing very red, and her eyes filling with tears.

"Dear child," Violet said, drawing her to her side with another tender
caress, "you need not doubt it for a moment."

"Why, Gracie, what could have put such a notion into your head?'" said
Max. "Mamma Vi, may I kiss you and it, too?" with an affectionate glance
at her, then a gaze of smiling curiosity at the babe.

"Indeed, you may, Max," Violet answered, offering her lips.

"I'm glad she's come, and I expect to love her dearly," he remarked, when
he had touched his lips softly to the babe's cheek, "though I'd rather
she'd been a boy, as I have two sisters already and no brother at all."

"Haven't you a kiss for me, Lulu, dear?" Violet asked half entreatingly,
"and a welcome for your little sister?"

Lulu silently and half reluctantly kissed both, then turned and walked out
of the room.

Violet looked after her with a slight sigh, but at that moment her own
little brother and sister created a diversion by running in with a glad
greeting for her and the new baby.

Their delight was rather noisily expressed, and no one of the little group
either heard or saw a carriage drive up the avenue to the main entrance.

But Mr. Dinsmore and Elsie were on the watch for it (they had been
exchanging meaning, happy glances all the morning), and ready with the
warmest of greetings for the tall, handsome, noble looking man who hastily
alighted from it and ran up the veranda steps.

"Dear mother!" he said, grasping Mrs. Travilla's hand, then giving her a
filial kiss.

"We are very glad to see you, captain," she said. "Your telegram this
morning was a delightful surprise."

"Yes, it was, indeed, to all of us who knew of its coming," said Mr.
Dinsmore, shaking hands in his turn.

"My wife! how is she? and the children? are they all well?" asked the
gentleman half breathlessly.

"All well," was the answer. "We told Violet you had reported yourself in
Washington, and she will not be overcome at sight of you. You will find
her in her own rooms."

He hurried thither, met Gracie at the head of the stairs, and caught her
in his arms with an exclamation of astonishment and delight.

"Can this be my baby girl? this plump, rosy little darling?"

"Papa!" she cried, throwing her arms about his neck and hugging him
tightly, while he kissed her again and again with ardent affection, "oh,
have you come? No, I'm your own little Gracie, but not the baby girl now,
for there's a little one on mamma's lap. Come, and I'll show you."

"Ah!" he exclaimed, letting her lead him on. "I had not heard, have not
had a letter for three or four weeks."

They were at the door. Gracie threw it open. Rose was holding the babe.
Violet looked up, started to her feet with a cry of joy, and in an instant
was in her husband's arms, weeping for very gladness.

For several moments they were conscious of nothing but the joy of the
reunion; then with a sudden recollection she withdrew herself from his
arms, took her babe, and laid it in them.

"Another darling," he said gazing tenderly upon it, "another dear little
daughter! My love, how rich we are!"

He kissed it, gave it to the waiting nurse, and turned to his wife again.

"Let me help you to the sofa, love," he said.

"Lie down for a little. I fear this excitement will exhaust and injure
you."

She let him have his way. He sat down by her side, held her hand, and bent
over her in loving anxiety.

"Are you quite well?" he asked.

"Very well indeed," she said, looking up fondly into his face, "and, oh,
_so_ happy now that you are here, my dear, dear husband!"

Gracie crept to his side and leaned lovingly against him.

"My little darling," he said, putting his arm round her and turning to
give her a kiss. "But where are Max and Lulu?"

"Up in the boys' work-room, papa," she answered. "They don't know you've
come."

"Then I must enlighten their ignorance," he said gayly. "Excuse me a
moment, my love. Take care of mamma for me while I'm gone, Gracie," and
rising hastily he left the room.

Max and Lulu were busily engaged looking over designs and materials for
their work, and discussing their comparative merits. So deeply interested
were they that they took no note of approaching footsteps till they halted
in the doorway, then turning their heads they saw their father standing
there, regarding them with a proud, fond fatherly smile.

"Papa! O papa!" they both cried out joyfully, and ran into his
outstretched arms.

"My dear, dear children!" he said, holding them close, and caressing first
one, then the other.

He sat down with one on each knee, an arm around each, and for some
minutes there was a delightful interchange of demonstrations of affection.

"Now you see, Lu, that papa does love us as well as ever," Max said, in a
tone of mingled triumph and satisfaction.

"Did she doubt it?" asked the captain in surprise, and gazing searchingly
into her face.

She blushed and hung her head.

"She thought the new baby would steal all your love," said Max.

"Silly child!" said her father, drawing her closer and giving her another
kiss. "Do you think my heart is so small that it can hold love enough for
but a limited number? Did I love Max less when you came? or you less when
our Heavenly Father gave Gracie to us? No, daughter; I can love the
newcomer without any abatement of my affection for you."

"Papa, I'm sorry I said it. I won't talk so any more; and I mean to love
the baby very much," she murmured with her arm about his neck, her cheek
laid to his.

"I hope so," he said; "it would give me a very sad heart to know that you
did not love your little sister.

"Well, Max, my son, what is it?"

The boy was hanging his head and his face had suddenly grown scarlet,
"Papa, I--I--Did you get my letter and diary I sent you last month?"

"Yes; and Lulu's also," the captain said, with a sigh and a glance from
one to the other, his face growing very grave. "I think my children would
often be deterred from wrongdoing by the thought of the pain it will cause
their father, if they could at all realize how sore it is. It almost broke
my heart, Max, to learn that you had again been guilty of the dreadful sin
of profanity, and had learned to gamble also; yet I was greatly comforted
by the assurance that you were truly penitent, and hoped you had given
your heart to God.

"My boy, and my little girl, there is nothing else I so earnestly desire
for you as that you may be His true and faithful servants all your days,
His in time and eternity."

A solemn silence fell on the little group, and for several minutes no one
spoke.

Lulu was crying softly, and there were tears in Max's eyes, while the
father held both in a close embrace.

At length Lulu murmured, "I am sorry for all my naughtiness, papa, and do
mean to try very hard to be good."

"I, too," said Max, struggling with his emotion, "and if you think I
deserve (oh, I know I do), and, papa, if you think you ought to----"

"You have had your punishment, my son," the captain said in a moved tone.
"I consider it all sufficient. And now we will go down to Mamma Vi and
Gracie. I want you all together, that I may enjoy you all at once and as
much as possible for the short time that I can be with you.

"But before we go, I have a word more to say: there is one thing about you
both that greatly comforts and encourages me, my darlings; that is your
truthfulness, your perfect openness with me and willingness to
acknowledge your faults."

Those concluding words brought a flush of joy and love to each young face
as they were lifted to his. He gave a hearty kiss to Lulu, then to Max,
and led them from the room, a very happy pair.




CHAPTER XXV.

            "One sacred oath has tied
    Our loves; one destiny our life shall guide,
    Nor wild, nor deep, our common way divide."
                                    --Prior.


Edward sat at the open window of his wife's boudoir enjoying the beauties
of the landscape--the verdant lawn and shrubberies, the smiling fields and
wooded hills beyond--the sweet morning breeze and the matin songs of the
birds, while Zoe in the adjoining room put the finishing touches to her
toilet.

She came to him presently, very simply dressed in white, looking sweet and
fresh as a rose just washed with dew, and seated herself upon his knee.

"Darling!" he said, low and tenderly, putting his arm about her slender
waist and imprinting a kiss upon the rosy cheek.

"My dear, dear husband! what could I ever do without you; how desolate I
should be this day, if I hadn't you to love and care for me!" she said
with a sob, stealing an arm around his neck and laying her cheek to his.
"You know--you cannot have forgotten--that it is just one year to-day
since dear papa died."

"Think what a blessed year it has been to him, love; think what a happy
meeting with him in that blessed land you may look forward to. There,
death-divided friends will meet never to part again, free from sin and
sorrow, pain and care, and to be 'forever with the Lord.'

"No; I have not forgotten what this day one year ago took from you, or
what it gave to me--my heart's best treasure."

He drew her closer, and again touched his lips to her cheek.

Smiling through her tears, she offered her lips.

"Oh, I'm very, very happy!" she said. "It has been a happy year in spite
of my grief for my dear, dear father, except when--O Ned, we won't ever be
cross to one another again, will we?"

"I trust not, my darling," he said. "It is too sharp a pain to be at
variance with one's other half," he added, with playful tenderness. "Is it
not, love!"

"Indeed, indeed it is!" she cried.

"See! this is to prove to you that I have not forgotten what a treasure I
secured a year ago," he said, reaching for an open jewel case that stood
on a table near at hand, and laying it in her lap.

"Pearls! Oh, how lovely! the most magnificent set I ever saw. Many, many
thanks, dear Ned!" she exclaimed in delight. "I shall wear them this
evening in honor of the day.

"But what shall I give you? I'm afraid I have nothing but--what I gave you
a year ago--myself."

"The most priceless treasure earth can afford!" he responded, clasping her
close to his heart.

"And your love," she said softly, her arm stealing round his neck again,
her shining eyes gazing fondly into his, "is more to me than all its gold
and jewels."


       *       *       *       *       *


[Transcriber's notes:

Page 14 text reads: ". . . tempter; (smudge) having . . ."; the word "as"
was inserted in place of the smudge.

Page 70 missing word "bit" inserted to read ". . . not a bit cold . . .:]



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELSIE'S NEW RELATIONS***


******* This file should be named 14909.txt or 14909.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/9/0/14909



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

