The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brochure Series of Architectural
Illustration, Vol 1, No. 11, November, 1895, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Brochure Series of Architectural Illustration, Vol 1, No. 11, November, 1895
       The Country Houses of Normandy

Author: Various

Release Date: February 12, 2005 [EBook #15020]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COUNTRY HOUSES OF NORMANDY ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Richard J. Shiffer and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.






[Illustration: LXXXI. Ferme la Vallauine, Normandy.]




THE BROCHURE SERIES

OF ARCHITECTURAL ILLUSTRATION.

VOL. I.   NOVEMBER, 1895.   No. 11.




THE COUNTRY HOUSES OF NORMANDY.


The houses chosen for illustration in this number are of different
types, of different dates, built for men of different stations in
life, and are constructed of different materials. They are, however,
all in the province of Normandy, in northern France, and they are all
situated outside the towns; further than this it may not be well to go
in attempting to classify them under one head. Like the subjects
chosen for our last issue, they contain many suggestive ideas for
treatment of similar problems in our own country, and for this reason
they deserve special attention.

The tendency among the French has always been strong to build their
houses in compact groups, and detached buildings with free space on
all sides are the exception even in the country. Mr. Louis H. Gibson,
whose book "Beautiful Houses" we have noticed in another column, says
of the French domestic architecture:--

"Excepting the ch√¢teaux, the structures of which we have the
completest record are almost entirely buildings fronting directly on
the street or road. In France it is rare indeed that one sees an
isolated building with a free passage around it, as is common in our
American towns and cities. It is not at all uncommon for a farm
building to be constructed within a wall; again, the farmer's house
may be almost flush with the road. Little farm communities, with the
buildings abutting on one another, are very common, because of the
companionship which such association brings. This was not alone true
in the early history of France, but obtains in the construction of
to-day. The small towns, as well as the cities, are almost universally
built very compactly. Thus we may expect to see very few examples of
isolated structures in France."

In this respect it will be seen the taste of the French house builder
differs from ours where open space about a dwelling-house is
considered one of its important attractions. Consequently the examples
here shown should not be considered as typical of French domestic
architecture. The town house is, if anything, the type.

Most of the examples which we have chosen belong to the sixteenth
century or thereabouts. The Manoir d'Ango, of which we gave four views
in last month's issue and of which three more are now shown, was built
about the middle of the sixteenth century, and the _manoir_ at
Archelles was also built about the same time. It was also during this
century that the best and most interesting of the French half-timber
work was done, and although we have no data at hand for determining
the matter, we judge that the two examples here illustrated date from
about this time. The construction in these buildings is doubtless the
same as that commonly used in others of this character--a strong
framework of timber filled in with brick masonry and then plastered.
Many of the town houses built in this way were very elaborate and were
adorned with exquisite carved wood ornament. In Verdier and Cattois'
"Architecture Civile et Domestique" may be found numerous examples,
and in a future number of THE BROCHURE SERIES we shall give place to
some of the most attractive.

[Illustration: LXXXII. Manoir at Archelles, Normandy.]

One consideration has influenced the selection of some of the subjects
included in the illustrations of this number which has not before been
mentioned, and it is not necessary to dwell upon it now. It has been
our experience that architectural students are constantly looking
about for appropriate subjects for sketching, and some are so
fastidious that they find very few satisfactory ones. We commend the
views here given, and also those in the last issue, as excellent and
appropriate subjects for treatment either in water-color, pen-and-ink,
or pencil. Next to working directly from nature, it would be hard to
find better practice than can be had by translating these photographic
views into drawings.

LXXXI.

FERME LA VALLAUINE, NORMANDY.

With the resources at our command we are unable to further identify
this house than the above title indicates. In fact, it tells its own
story. Judging by analogy, it probably dates from the sixteenth
century. Nothing could well be more picturesque.

LXXXII and LXXXIII.

MANOIR AT ARCHELLES, NORMANDY.

Archelles is a small village near Arques, and its principal attraction
is this beautiful _manoir_ with a garden at its back, and surrounded
by fine trees. It dates from the sixteenth century and is built of
brick decorated in a sort of mosaic inlaid with a light colored stone.
The old walls overgrown with vines are especially attractive.

LXXXIV.

PORCH OF CHURCH AT BEUVREIL, NORMANDY.

The form and proportions of this old porch are so good that in spite
of the rough and meagre detail it has an irresistible charm.

LXXXV.

MANOIR DE VITANVAL, STE. ANDRESSE, NORMANDY.

Ste. Andresse is a small community on the coast of Normandy a few
miles north-west of Havre.

LXXXVI to LXXXVIII.

MANOIR D'ANGO, NORMANDY.

This _manoir_ has already been referred to in the preceding number,
where four other views are given.




Architectural Schools.

COLUMBIA COLLEGE.


In the series of articles in which we have undertaken to give an idea
of the scope of the courses of architectural study offered by the
various schools of the country, we can hardly do better, in referring
to Columbia College, than quote from a paper in which Professor
William R. Ware describes the methods used for the teaching of the
history of architecture at Columbia. Our extracts are made from a
portion of the paper printed in _The American Architect_ for November
30, 1895.

These four exercises, the Lectures on History and Ornament, with the
study of English, French, and German text-books, the Historical
Research, the Historical Drawing, and the Historical Design, occupy a
chief part of the student's time during the first three years of the
course. At the end of the third year the stated instruction by
recitations and the lectures is virtually finished, the fourth year
being, by an arrangement which is perhaps a novelty in places of
learning, quite free from lectures or recitations. The men give their
whole time by day to problems in design, to what may be called
"_atelier_ work," without interruption. Their evenings, throughout the
whole year, are devoted to historical study. As the college library,
including the Avery library, as well as the books and photographs
belonging to the Department of Architecture, is accessible every
evening until eleven o'clock, and the Metropolitan Museum is open
twice a week until ten, every facility is afforded for the prosecution
of this work. In order to make the most of these appliances, every
student of the Fourth-year class and all the special students (who are
of similar grade, being received only in advanced standing) prepares
once a month, under the name of Advanced Architectural History, an
original paper. This he illustrates by drawings and reads to the
class. All this affords an almost unexampled opportunity for serious
work.

We exhibit to the students the architecture of the past as a series of
problems just as it appeared to the builders of its own day, and we
hope thus not only to give them a clearer insight into the real spirit
and character of the masterpieces that have come down to us, by
bringing to view the ideas and considerations which really influenced
their designers, but at the same time to exercise our own young men in
the practical application of those same ideas. We hope thus to develop
in them the same good sense and good taste, the same readiness of
invention and happy ingenuity, to which these masterpieces are due.

[Illustration: LXXXIII. Manoir at Archelles, Normandy.]

The exercises themselves may be described as a species of design by
description or by dictation. The attempt is made, by indicating the
conditions under which a given piece of work was executed, to present
to the student the same problem that the workman of old was called
upon to solve. The student can then compare his own solution of it
with the one that has come down to him, thus receiving correction and
guidance in his work from the hand of the master. It is plain that the
special excellencies of the original monument are likely to reveal
themselves with fresh distinctness, and to find special sympathy and
appreciation in the mind of one who has striven, however
unsuccessfully, to solve the same problem.

An example or two taken from widely different fields will suffice to
illustrate this. In studying vaulting, we once got so far as to
understand how oblong vaults were thrown across a nave, while square
vaults covered the aisles. A class of fifteen or twenty students were
then asked to find out how a semi-circular or polygonal apse could be
added to a choir roofed on this system. In the course of a couple of
hours' figuring I found that they had worked out among them all the
five solutions of this problem, which in the Middle Ages it took one
or two hundred years to develop. This was very encouraging. At another
time they were given a somewhat minute description of four pilaster
capitals from Blois or Chambord, and they made thumb-nail sketches on
the spot, according to their interpretation of the description. The
next day photographs and drawings of a dozen or twenty other such
capitals were given them, so that they might understand the fashion of
the time, and they were told to draw out their sketches on a larger
scale. The result was fifteen or twenty sets of capitals, all showing
the same four motives, but differing in a most interesting way,
according to the personal differences of taste and skill on the part
of the designers.

On another occasion the First-year class, after their studies in
Egyptian and Assyrian architecture, made a dozen or twenty
restorations of Solomon's Temple, according to the description in the
Book of Kings. The drawings they produced showed considerable
fertility of invention, especially in the designs for Jachin and Boaz,
and the whole series together seemed to be quite as creditable and as
reasonable as most of those which have from time to time been put
forth by the learned.

This practice in historical design we believe to be founded on sound
theoretical principles. To regard a work of art as far as possible
from the point-of-view of the artist is, indeed, the first principle
of fair and intelligent criticism. To foster the individuality and
personal initiative of a pupil by bringing authority to bear upon him
in a way of correction at the end of his task, and guidance and
suggestion at the beginning, rather than control during the course of
the work, is the first principle of intelligent teaching. Moreover,
the results, so far as we have gone, have justified the method. We
have, indeed, employed it hitherto mainly as a matter of experiment
when favorable circumstances have suggested it. But every year we use
it to a greater and greater extent, and it is gradually acquiring a
recognized place as an integral portion of our work.

(_To be continued_.)




Personal.


Of the many fortunate ones who have come back to a winter of work
after a summer abroad are Messrs. Claude F. Bragdon, Charles M.
Sutton, and Howard Hatton, of Rochester. Messrs. Sutton and Hatton are
now with J. Foster Warner. Mr. Bragdon has temporarily opened an
office at 60 Trust Building, but will have offices in the new Cutler
Building when completed.

Mr. Wilson Eyre, Jr., of Philadelphia, has just finished designing a
second formal garden, which is said to be delightfully un-American;
and Mr. Frank Miles Day's Horticultural Hall is nearly ready to
receive the mural coloring and allegorical painting which Mr. Joseph
Lindon Smith is to execute. The latter will be a conspicuous departure
from ordinarily accepted models.

[Illustration: LXXXIV. Porch of Church at Beuvreil, Normandy.]




The Brochure Series
of Architectural Illustration.

PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY
BATES & GUILD,
6 BEACON STREET, BOSTON, MASS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Subscription Rates per year ... 50 cents, in advance.
Special Club Rates for five subscriptions ... $2.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

Entered at the Boston Post Office as Second-class Matter.




SPECIAL NOTICE.

Back numbers of THE BROCHURE SERIES _are not_ kept in stock. All
subscriptions will be dated from the time received and subscribers who
wish for the current numbers must place their subscriptions at once.

A hundred photographs are published in twelve issues of THE BROCHURE
SERIES. You may get some duplicates, but the new ones will be well
worth a subscription at fifty cents. _This is addressed to
non-subscribers._

       *       *       *       *       *

We have repeatedly called attention in this column to the question of
perennial importance to us--that of subscriptions. We have no apology
to offer for this insistence upon the publisher's business, for it
concerns every one who has any interest in the undertaking, in so far
as the support received in this quarter will make it either possible
or impossible, as the case maybe, to add to the attractions of the
magazine as conducted at present.

We have every reason to feel satisfied with the support thus far
accorded us, for our subscription list is now much larger than we
expected it would be at this time, but this is only a beginning. In
the advertising pages of this number will be found an announcement
which, we trust, will appeal to a large number of our present
subscribers who already know our work. In most cases it is only
necessary to show the magazine and state the price to at once secure a
subscriber. Try it and see; enter the prize competition, and help
yourself by helping us.

In the September issue we took occasion to notice the mural decoration
and color treatment of the staircase hall of the new Public Library
Building in Boston. Those who would judge for themselves of the merits
of our conclusions must see the building; but it is not necessary to
go to Boston in order to realize that here we have a remarkably
beautiful structure, and many of its features can be fully enjoyed and
appreciated in photographic views. In another column will be found a
notice of a very attractive and unusually satisfactory handbook of the
library, with numerous illustrations from the photographs of Mr. E.E.
Soderholtz. Further than this, we wish to call particular attention to
the set of photographs which is advertised on the front cover of this
number. As a photographer of architectural subjects Mr. Soderholtz
certainly has no superior in this country, and in this collection the
subjects and manner of presentation are equally worthy of the highest
praise.




Wanted Draughtsmen's Addresses.


We intend issuing, the coming year, a number of interestingly
illustrated announcements of new architectural publications and
importations. We want to send these to every architectural student and
draughtsman in the United States and Canada. If you are not on our
subscription list, send us your _residence_ address for our circular
mailing list. Address a postal card as below, putting simply your
address on the back. If you are in an office, have the other fellows
put their residence addresses on the same card. We prefer to address
mail matter to your residence, as there is less danger of miscarriage.
Do not get the idea that by sending your address you are ordering
something you will be asked to pay for. All the expense, except the
postal card, is on our side. If we can't get out announcements
interesting enough to attract your attention and occasionally secure
an order, it will be our loss. Address:--

  Bates & Guild,
    6 Beacon Street,
      Boston, Mass.

_For Circular List_.

[Illustration: LXXXV. Manoir de Vitanval, Ste. Andresse, Normandy.]




Brochure Series Competition No. 2.


The first lot of drawings in the competition for a design for the
advertising page of The Boynton Furnace Co., in THE BROCHURE SERIES,
was due on December 10, and eleven designs were received.

The judges have awarded the prize to Mr. Edwin R. Clark of Lowell,
Mass., and his design appears in this issue as the advertisement of
the Boynton Furnace Co., on page xi. The reasons for the award may be
a guide to others engaged in similar work, and consequently we
reproduce several of the other designs for comparison with Mr.
Clark's.

It must be remembered that the first consideration in this problem is
the effectiveness as advertising matter of the design submitted--its
artistic merits, although important, are distinctly secondary to this
quality. The medium in which it is to be used and the clientage to
which it is intended to appeal must also be constantly borne in mind.

[Illustration: Design by Edwin R. Clark.]

Mr. Clark submitted three drawings, a second one of which is given
herewith. The first is superior in giving a more positive effect to
the page and in being a more unusual treatment than the second.
Although both are drawn with skill and are admirable in technique, the
type of design and ornament used in the second have come into such
common use that if for no other reason than this the first would be
preferable.

[Illustration: Design by W.B. Olmsted.]

As decorative treatment Mr. Olmsted's design is in many respects the
most masterly of the lot, and if the personal choice of the judges had
been the only consideration upon which the award was to be made, this
would have been placed first, for it is remarkable for careful and
intelligent arrangement, subtle balancing and proportion of parts, and
especially for what may be called the decorative sense by which just
the right relation of black to white is preserved. It is seldom that
any but the most accomplished designers succeed in obtaining this just
proportion, which gives a sparkle to the design such as is seen in the
best of the Japanese stencil patterns used on printed stuffs. The
clever use of motives connected with the business advertised and the
idea of presenting the Boynton apparatus in attractive form and other
heaters thrown about in confusion is commendable. The only reason for
passing over this design in the award is the advertising value of the
attractive appearance of some of the more ornate designs.

[Illustration: LXXXVI. Manoir d'Ango, Normandy.]

One other drawing, that of Mr. Brown, deserves particular notice for
its intrinsic excellence. It is especially praiseworthy for its grace
of line and general arrangement. The figure is well placed and,
although faulty in drawing, is particularly effective in treatment. It
is essentially a poster design, but none the less appropriate for the
present purpose on this account. It lacks only in those qualities of
draughtsmanship which come with practice and experience.

[Illustration: Design by F. Chouteau Brown.]

The remaining drawing which we illustrate is a very interesting
although not especially forcible treatment of the class of ornament
adopted by Mr. Louis H. Sullivan, and in his hands having a wonderful
charm, but seldom used with entire success by others.

The result in this first series of designs is especially satisfactory
in the intelligence shown in grasping the essentials of the problem.
All of the remaining six drawings have points of excellence to commend
them, and if we had space to reproduce them would prove instructive in
showing the diversity of treatment possible while fully meeting the
conditions imposed.




Reviews.


_Beautiful Houses_. A study in house building.
     By Louis H. Gibson. Illustrated. Boston T.Y. Crowell & Co. 1895.
     pp. 346. $3.

This book is in many respects very attractive, and will be found
useful to architectural readers as well as to the general public.

It is divided into two parts, the first under the heading "The World's
Houses" and the second, "Some House Plans" and "Materials and
Details."

The first part is that which will be of most value to the
architectural reader. In it are described the principal types of
domestic architecture, giving most prominence to the work of France.
The illustrations of this portion of the work are well chosen and very
well printed. In fact, to the architect they form the most valuable
part of the book. The second part is devoted mainly to Mr. Gibson's
own designs. These are mostly good, straightforward work, although we
can hardly agree with all of his opinions. His use of language is not
always discriminating and is sometimes misleading.

[Illustration: Design by Chas. F. Hogeboom, Jr.]

To the general reader there will be much of interest in all portions
of the book, especially if he contemplates building a house. And in
this case we sincerely trust that its perusal will result in another
commission for some fortunate architect.

[Illustration: LXXXVII. Manoir d'Ango, Normandy.]


_Handbook of the New Public Library in Boston._ Compiled by
     Herbert Small. Fully illustrated. Boston, 1895. Curtis & Co.
     78 pp. 16c.

The unusual interest which has been aroused in architectural circles
by the new building for the Boston Public Library is the reason for
devoting special attention to this little book in these columns.
Although intended for general readers, it has a very instructive
article by Mr. C. Howard Walker considering the building
architecturally, which will interest architectural readers. The
illustrations, made from photographs by E.E. Soderholtz, are excellent
and numerous, and the cover, printed in green and black, from the
design of B.G. Goodhue, is an additional attraction. On the whole,
even after so much in the way of illustration of this building has
been already published, it is worth the while of any architect or
draughtsman to send for this little pamphlet.




Club Notes.


The Chicago Architectural Club is keeping its members guessing to know
what scheme of work or entertainment will come next on its programme.

The annual meeting for election of officers was held October 7.
Several of the regular monthly competitions and an informal exhibition
have already come and gone, and a "Bohemian Night" with all its
accompaniments comes every fortnight.

The following classes have been arranged for some time ago: Water
Color, under Hugh M.G. Garden; Architecture, under George R. Dean; Pen
and Ink, under Charles E. Birge; Modeling, under Richard W. Bock.

A talk on "The Impecunious Draughtsman Abroad" was given by Mr. Myron
H. Hunt, and Mr. George R. Dean has given a lantern-slide exhibition,
illustrating the Ch√¢teau de Blois.

The club also held a joint meeting with the Chicago Society of
Artists, when Mr. N.S. Patton discussed the question of "The
Architectural and Artistic Possibilities of the Lake Front."

The annual banquet and meeting of the Cleveland Architectural Club was
held at the Hollenden Hotel Thursday evening, November 14, with about
forty present. Dinner was served at six o'clock, followed by toasts
from Messrs. John L. Culley, F.A. Coburn, and Charles W. Hopkinson,
with President Hubbell as toastmaster.

After the speaking the annual meeting was held, with an address by the
president, reports by the secretary, treasurer, librarian, chairman of
the Current Work Committee, and the chairman of the Entertainment and
House Committee.

The club has grown from a charter membership one year ago of fourteen
to a total membership of forty-five.

The newly elected officers are: President, Benjamin S. Hubbell;
Vice-President, Frederick Baird; Secretary, Herbert B. Briggs;
Treasurer, Albert E. Skeel; Librarian, G.B. Bohm; Directors, M. James
Bowman and C.S. Schneider.

A joint exhibition of the Cleveland Architectural Club and the
Cleveland Art Association will be held in the Garfield Building, from
January 20 to February 5, 1896. Works will be received until Monday,
January 6. The exhibition will include: Architectural sketches,
perspectives, and elevations in all renderings; photographs of
executed work; landscape architecture; interior architecture and
decoration; interior furnishings (samples and sketches); architectural
and decorative metal work (wrought iron, bronze, and brass); sculpture
(architectural and ornamental).

An illustrated catalogue will be issued.

All drawings must be framed or mounted.




A Good Endorsement.


The following letter from the office of Richard M. Hunt is of interest
to all users of shingle stains:--

     Dexter Bros., Boston:

     _Gentlemen_,--The shingle stains we have used on some of the
     buildings of Biltmore Village, N.C., furnished by you, have
     given absolute satisfaction as to quality and color. We
     consider your stains the best we have used so far.

                 Yours respectfully,
     (Signed)                 R.H. HUNT.


[Illustration: LXXXVII. Manoir d'Ango. Normandy.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brochure Series of Architectural
Illustration, Vol 1, No. 11, November, 1895, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COUNTRY HOUSES OF NORMANDY ***

***** This file should be named 15020-8.txt or 15020-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/0/2/15020/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Richard J. Shiffer and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
