The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Crystal Stopper, by Maurice LeBlanc

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Crystal Stopper

Author: Maurice LeBlanc

Posting Date: August 16, 2008 [EBook #1563]
Release Date: December, 1998
Last Updated: November 10, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CRYSTAL STOPPER ***




Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer





THE CRYSTAL STOPPER

by Maurice LeBlanc




CHAPTER I. THE ARRESTS

The two boats fastened to the little pier that jutted out from the
garden lay rocking in its shadow. Here and there lighted windows showed
through the thick mist on the margins of the lake. The Enghien Casino
opposite blazed with light, though it was late in the season, the end
of September. A few stars appeared through the clouds. A light breeze
ruffled the surface of the water.

Arsene Lupin left the summer-house where he was smoking a cigar and,
bending forward at the end of the pier:

“Growler?” he asked. “Masher?... Are you there?”

A man rose from each of the boats, and one of them answered:

“Yes, governor.”

“Get ready. I hear the car coming with Gilbert and Vaucheray.”

He crossed the garden, walked round a house in process of construction,
the scaffolding of which loomed overhead, and cautiously opened the door
on the Avenue de Ceinture. He was not mistaken: a bright light flashed
round the bend and a large, open motor-car drew up, whence sprang two
men in great-coats, with the collars turned up, and caps.

It was Gilbert and Vaucheray: Gilbert, a young fellow of twenty or
twenty-two, with an attractive cast of features and a supple and sinewy
frame; Vaucheray, older, shorter, with grizzled hair and a pale, sickly
face.

“Well,” asked Lupin, “did you see him, the deputy?”

“Yes, governor,” said Gilbert, “we saw him take the 7.40 tram for Paris,
as we knew he would.”

“Then we are free to act?”

“Absolutely. The Villa Marie-Therese is ours to do as we please with.”

The chauffeur had kept his seat. Lupin gave him his orders:

“Don’t wait here. It might attract attention. Be back at half-past
nine exactly, in time to load the car unless the whole business falls
through.”

“Why should it fall through?” observed Gilbert.

The motor drove away; and Lupin, taking the road to the lake with his
two companions, replied:

“Why? Because I didn’t prepare the plan; and, when I don’t do a thing
myself, I am only half-confident.”

“Nonsense, governor! I’ve been working with you for three years now...
I’m beginning to know the ropes!”

“Yes, my lad, you’re beginning,” said Lupin, “and that’s just why I’m
afraid of blunders... Here, get in with me... And you, Vaucheray, take
the other boat... That’s it... And now push off, boys... and make as
little noise as you can.”

Growler and Masher, the two oarsmen, made straight for the opposite
bank, a little to the left of the casino.

They met a boat containing a couple locked in each other’s arms,
floating at random, and another in which a number of people were singing
at the top of their voices. And that was all.

Lupin shifted closer to his companion and said, under his breath:

“Tell me, Gilbert, did you think of this job, or was it Vaucheray’s
idea?”

“Upon my word, I couldn’t tell you: we’ve both of us been discussing it
for weeks.”

“The thing is, I don’t trust Vaucheray: he’s a low ruffian when one gets
to know him... I can’t make out why I don’t get rid of him...”

“Oh, governor!”

“Yes, yes, I mean what I say: he’s a dangerous fellow, to say nothing
of the fact that he has some rather serious peccadilloes on his
conscience.”

He sat silent for a moment and continued:

“So you’re quite sure that you saw Daubrecq the deputy?”

“Saw him with my own eyes, governor.”

“And you know that he has an appointment in Paris?”

“He’s going to the theatre.”

“Very well; but his servants have remained behind at the Enghien
villa....”

“The cook has been sent away. As for the valet, Leonard, who is
Daubrecq’s confidential man, he’ll wait for his master in Paris. They
can’t get back from town before one o’clock in the morning. But...”

“But what?”

“We must reckon with a possible freak of fancy on Daubrecq’s part, a
change of mind, an unexpected return, and so arrange to have everything
finished and done with in an hour.”

“And when did you get these details?”

“This morning. Vaucheray and I at once thought that it was a favourable
moment. I selected the garden of the unfinished house which we have just
left as the best place to start from; for the house is not watched at
night. I sent for two mates to row the boats; and I telephoned to you.
That’s the whole story.”

“Have you the keys?”

“The keys of the front-door.”

“Is that the villa which I see from here, standing in its own grounds?”

“Yes, the Villa Marie-Therese; and as the two others, with the gardens
touching it on either side, have been unoccupied since this day week,
we shall be able to remove what we please at our leisure; and I swear to
you, governor, it’s well worth while.”

“The job’s much too simple,” mumbled Lupin. “No charm about it!”

They landed in a little creek whence rose a few stone steps, under cover
of a mouldering roof. Lupin reflected that shipping the furniture would
be easy work. But, suddenly, he said:

“There are people at the villa. Look... a light.”

“It’s a gas-jet, governor. The light’s not moving.”

The Growler stayed by the boats, with instructions to keep watch, while
the Masher, the other rower, went to the gate on the Avenue de Ceinture,
and Lupin and his two companions crept in the shadow to the foot of the
steps.

Gilbert went up first. Groping in the dark, he inserted first the big
door-key and then the latch-key. Both turned easily in their locks, the
door opened and the three men walked in.

A gas-jet was flaring in the hall.

“You see, governor...” said Gilbert.

“Yes, yes,” said Lupin, in a low voice, “but it seems to me that the
light which I saw shining did not come from here...”

“Where did it come from then?”

“I can’t say... Is this the drawing-room?”

“No,” replied Gilbert, who was not afraid to speak pretty loudly, “no.
By way of precaution, he keeps everything on the first floor, in his
bedroom and in the two rooms on either side of it.”

“And where is the staircase?”

“On the right, behind the curtain.”

Lupin moved to the curtain and was drawing the hanging aside when,
suddenly, at four steps on the left, a door opened and a head appeared,
a pallid man’s head, with terrified eyes.

“Help! Murder!” shouted the man.

And he rushed back into the room.

“It’s Leonard, the valet!” cried Gilbert.

“If he makes a fuss, I’ll out him,” growled Vaucheray.

“You’ll jolly well do nothing of the sort, do you hear, Vaucheray?” said
Lupin, peremptorily. And he darted off in pursuit of the servant. He
first went through a dining-room, where he saw a lamp still lit, with
plates and a bottle around it, and he found Leonard at the further end
of a pantry, making vain efforts to open the window:

“Don’t move, sportie! No kid! Ah, the brute!”

He had thrown himself flat on the floor, on seeing Leonard raise his arm
at him. Three shots were fired in the dusk of the pantry; and then the
valet came tumbling to the ground, seized by the legs by Lupin, who
snatched his weapon from him and gripped him by the throat:

“Get out, you dirty brute!” he growled. “He very nearly did for me...
Here, Vaucheray, secure this gentleman!”

He threw the light of his pocket-lantern on the servant’s face and
chuckled:

“He’s not a pretty gentleman either... You can’t have a very clear
conscience, Leonard; besides, to play flunkey to Daubrecq the deputy...!
Have you finished, Vaucheray? I don’t want to hang about here for ever!”

“There’s no danger, governor,” said Gilbert.

“Oh, really?... So you think that shots can’t be heard?...”

“Quite impossible.”

“No matter, we must look sharp. Vaucheray, take the lamp and let’s go
upstairs.”

He took Gilbert by the arm and, as he dragged him to the first floor:

“You ass,” he said, “is that the way you make inquiries? Wasn’t I right
to have my doubts?”

“Look here, governor, I couldn’t know that he would change his mind and
come back to dinner.”

“One’s got to know everything when one has the honour of breaking into
people’s houses. You numskull! I’ll remember you and Vaucheray... a nice
pair of gossoons!...”

The sight of the furniture on the first floor pacified Lupin and he
started on his inventory with the satisfied air of a collector who has
looked in to treat himself to a few works of art:

“By Jingo! There’s not much of it, but what there is is pucka! There’s
nothing the matter with this representative of the people in
the question of taste. Four Aubusson chairs... A bureau signed
‘Percier-Fontaine,’ for a wager... Two inlays by Gouttieres... A genuine
Fragonard and a sham Nattier which any American millionaire will swallow
for the asking: in short, a fortune... And there are curmudgeons who
pretend that there’s nothing but faked stuff left. Dash it all, why
don’t they do as I do? They should look about!”

Gilbert and Vaucheray, following Lupin’s orders and instructions, at
once proceeded methodically to remove the bulkier pieces. The first boat
was filled in half an hour; and it was decided that the Growler and the
Masher should go on ahead and begin to load the motor-car.

Lupin went to see them start. On returning to the house, it struck him,
as he passed through the hall, that he heard a voice in the pantry. He
went there and found Leonard lying flat on his stomach, quite alone,
with his hands tied behind his back:

“So it’s you growling, my confidential flunkey? Don’t get excited: it’s
almost finished. Only, if you make too much noise, you’ll oblige us to
take severer measures... Do you like pears? We might give you one, you
know: a choke-pear!...”

As he went upstairs, he again heard the same sound and, stopping to
listen, he caught these words, uttered in a hoarse, groaning voice,
which came, beyond a doubt, from the pantry:

“Help!... Murder!... Help!... I shall be killed!... Inform the
commissary!”

“The fellow’s clean off his chump!” muttered Lupin. “By Jove!... To
disturb the police at nine o’clock in the evening: there’s a notion for
you!”

He set to work again. It took longer than he expected, for they
discovered in the cupboards all sorts of valuable knick-knacks which it
would have been very wrong to disdain and, on the other hand, Vaucheray
and Gilbert were going about their investigations with signs of laboured
concentration that nonplussed him.

At long last, he lost his patience:

“That will do!” he said. “We’re not going to spoil the whole job and
keep the motor waiting for the sake of the few odd bits that remain. I’m
taking the boat.”

They were now by the waterside and Lupin went down the steps. Gilbert
held him back:

“I say, governor, we want one more look round five minutes, no longer.”

“But what for, dash it all?”

“Well, it’s like this: we were told of an old reliquary, something
stunning...”

“Well?”

“We can’t lay our hands on it. And I was thinking... There’s a cupboard
with a big lock to it in the pantry... You see, we can’t very well...”
 He was already on his way to the villa. Vaucheray ran back too.

“I’ll give you ten minutes, not a second longer!” cried Lupin. “In ten
minutes, I’m off.”

But the ten minutes passed and he was still waiting.

He looked at his watch:

“A quarter-past nine,” he said to himself. “This is madness.”

And he also remembered that Gilbert and Vaucheray had behaved rather
queerly throughout the removal of the things, keeping close together and
apparently watching each other. What could be happening?

Lupin mechanically returned to the house, urged by a feeling of anxiety
which he was unable to explain; and, at the same time, he listened to
a dull sound which rose in the distance, from the direction of Enghien,
and which seemed to be coming nearer... People strolling about, no
doubt...

He gave a sharp whistle and then went to the main gate, to take a glance
down the avenue. But, suddenly, as he was opening the gate, a shot rang
out, followed by a yell of pain. He returned at a run, went round the
house, leapt up the steps and rushed to the dining-room:

“Blast it all, what are you doing there, you two?”

Gilbert and Vaucheray, locked in a furious embrace, were rolling on the
floor, uttering cries of rage. Their clothes were dripping with blood.
Lupin flew at them to separate them. But already Gilbert had got his
adversary down and was wrenching out of his hand something which Lupin
had no time to see. And Vaucheray, who was losing blood through a wound
in the shoulder, fainted.

“Who hurt him? You, Gilbert?” asked Lupin, furiously.

“No, Leonard.”

“Leonard? Why, he was tied up!”

“He undid his fastenings and got hold of his revolver.”

“The scoundrel! Where is he?”

Lupin took the lamp and went into the pantry.

The man-servant was lying on his back, with his arms outstretched, a
dagger stuck in his throat and a livid face. A red stream trickled from
his mouth.

“Ah,” gasped Lupin, after examining him, “he’s dead!”

“Do you think so?... Do you think so?” stammered Gilbert, in a trembling
voice.

“He’s dead, I tell you.”

“It was Vaucheray... it was Vaucheray who did it...”

Pale with anger, Lupin caught hold of him:

“It was Vaucheray, was it?... And you too, you blackguard, since you
were there and didn’t stop him! Blood! Blood! You know I won’t have
it... Well, it’s a bad lookout for you, my fine fellows... You’ll have
to pay the damage! And you won’t get off cheaply either... Mind the
guillotine!” And, shaking him violently, “What was it? Why did he kill
him?”

“He wanted to go through his pockets and take the key of the cupboard
from him. When he stooped over him, he saw that the man unloosed his
arms. He got frightened... and he stabbed him...”

“But the revolver-shot?”

“It was Leonard... he had his revolver in his hand... he just had
strength to take aim before he died...”

“And the key of the cupboard?”

“Vaucheray took it....”

“Did he open it?”

“And did he find what he was after?”

“Yes.”

“And you wanted to take the thing from him. What sort of thing was
it? The reliquary? No, it was too small for that.... Then what was it?
Answer me, will you?...”

Lupin gathered from Gilbert’s silence and the determined expression on
his face that he would not obtain a reply. With a threatening gesture,
“I’ll make you talk, my man. Sure as my name’s Lupin, you shall come out
with it. But, for the moment, we must see about decamping. Here, help
me. We must get Vaucheray into the boat...”

They had returned to the dining-room and Gilbert was bending over the
wounded man, when Lupin stopped him:

“Listen.”

They exchanged one look of alarm... Some one was speaking in the pantry
... a very low, strange, very distant voice... Nevertheless, as they at
once made certain, there was no one in the room, no one except the dead
man, whose dark outline lay stretched upon the floor.

And the voice spake anew, by turns shrill, stifled, bleating,
stammering, yelling, fearsome. It uttered indistinct words, broken
syllables.

Lupin felt the top of his head covering with perspiration. What was this
incoherent voice, mysterious as a voice from beyond the grave?

He had knelt down by the man-servant’s side. The voice was silent and
then began again:

“Give us a better light,” he said to Gilbert.

He was trembling a little, shaken with a nervous dread which he was
unable to master, for there was no doubt possible: when Gilbert had
removed the shade from the lamp, Lupin realized that the voice issued
from the corpse itself, without a movement of the lifeless mass, without
a quiver of the bleeding mouth.

“Governor, I’ve got the shivers,” stammered Gilbert.

Again the same voice, the same snuffling whisper.

Suddenly, Lupin burst out laughing, seized the corpse and pulled it
aside:

“Exactly!” he said, catching sight of an object made of polished metal.
“Exactly! That’s it!... Well, upon my word, it took me long enough!”

On the spot on the floor which he had uncovered lay the receiver of a
telephone, the cord of which ran up to the apparatus fixed on the wall,
at the usual height.

Lupin put the receiver to his ear. The noise began again at once, but
it was a mixed noise, made up of different calls, exclamations, confused
cries, the noise produced by a number of persons questioning one another
at the same time.

“Are you there?... He won’t answer. It’s awful... They must have killed
him. What is it?... Keep up your courage. There’s help on the way...
police... soldiers...”

“Dash it!” said Lupin, dropping the receiver.

The truth appeared to him in a terrifying vision. Quite at the
beginning, while the things upstairs were being moved, Leonard, whose
bonds were not securely fastened, had contrived to scramble to his
feet, to unhook the receiver, probably with his teeth, to drop it and to
appeal for assistance to the Enghien telephone-exchange.

And those were the words which Lupin had overheard, after the first boat
started:

“Help!... Murder!... I shall be killed!”

And this was the reply of the exchange. The police were hurrying to
the spot. And Lupin remembered the sounds which he had heard from the
garden, four or five minutes earlier, at most:

“The police! Take to your heels!” he shouted, darting across the dining
room.

“What about Vaucheray?” asked Gilbert.

“Sorry, can’t be helped!”

But Vaucheray, waking from his torpor, entreated him as he passed:

“Governor, you wouldn’t leave me like this!”

Lupin stopped, in spite of the danger, and was lifting the wounded man,
with Gilbert’s assistance, when a loud din arose outside:

“Too late!” he said.

At that moment, blows shook the hall-door at the back of the house. He
ran to the front steps: a number of men had already turned the corner of
the house at a rush. He might have managed to keep ahead of them, with
Gilbert, and reach the waterside. But what chance was there of embarking
and escaping under the enemy’s fire?

He locked and bolted the door.

“We are surrounded... and done for,” spluttered Gilbert.

“Hold your tongue,” said Lupin.

“But they’ve seen us, governor. There, they’re knocking.”

“Hold your tongue,” Lupin repeated. “Not a word. Not a movement.”

He himself remained unperturbed, with an utterly calm face and the
pensive attitude of one who has all the time that he needs to examine a
delicate situation from every point of view. He had reached one of those
minutes which he called the “superior moments of existence,” those
which alone give a value and a price to life. On such occasions,
however threatening the danger, he always began by counting to himself,
slowly--“One... Two... Three... Four.... Five... Six”--until the beating
of his heart became normal and regular. Then and not till then, he
reflected, but with what intensity, with what perspicacity, with what a
profound intuition of possibilities! All the factors of the problem were
present in his mind. He foresaw everything. He admitted everything. And
he took his resolution in all logic and in all certainty.

After thirty or forty seconds, while the men outside were banging at the
doors and picking the locks, he said to his companion:

“Follow me.”

Returning to the dining-room, he softly opened the sash and drew the
Venetian blinds of a window in the side-wall. People were coming and
going, rendering flight out of the question.

Thereupon he began to shout with all his might, in a breathless voice:

“This way!... Help!... I’ve got them!... This way!”

He pointed his revolver and fired two shots into the tree-tops. Then
he went back to Vaucheray, bent over him and smeared his face and hands
with the wounded man’s blood. Lastly, turning upon Gilbert, he took him
violently by the shoulders and threw him to the floor.

“What do you want, governor? There’s a nice thing to do!”

“Let me do as I please,” said Lupin, laying an imperative stress on
every syllable. “I’ll answer for everything... I’ll answer for the
two of you... Let me do as I like with you... I’ll get you both out of
prison ... But I can only do that if I’m free.”

Excited cries rose through the open window.

“This way!” he shouted. “I’ve got them! Help!”

And, quietly, in a whisper:

“Just think for a moment... Have you anything to say to me?... Something
that can be of use to us?”

Gilbert was too much taken aback to understand Lupin’s plan and he
struggled furiously. Vaucheray showed more intelligence; moreover, he
had given up all hope of escape, because of his wound; and he snarled:

“Let the governor have his way, you ass!... As long as he gets off,
isn’t that the great thing?”

Suddenly, Lupin remembered the article which Gilbert had put in his
pocket, after capturing it from Vaucheray. He now tried to take it in
his turn.

“No, not that! Not if I know it!” growled Gilbert, managing to release
himself.

Lupin floored him once more. But two men suddenly appeared at the
window; and Gilbert yielded and, handing the thing to Lupin, who
pocketed it without looking at it, whispered:

“Here you are, governor... I’ll explain. You can be sure that...”

He did not have time to finish... Two policemen and others after them
and soldiers who entered through every door and window came to Lupin’s
assistance.

Gilbert was at once seized and firmly bound. Lupin withdrew:

“I’m glad you’ve come,” he said. “The beggar’s given me a lot of
trouble. I wounded the other; but this one...”

The commissary of police asked him, hurriedly:

“Have you seen the man-servant? Have they killed him?”

“I don’t know,” he answered.

“You don’t know?...”

“Why, I came with you from Enghien, on hearing of the murder! Only,
while you were going round the left of the house, I went round the
right. There was a window open. I climbed up just as these two ruffians
were about to jump down. I fired at this one,” pointing to Vaucheray,
“and seized hold of his pal.”

How could he have been suspected? He was covered with blood. He had
handed over the valet’s murderers. Half a score of people had witnessed
the end of the heroic combat which he had delivered. Besides, the uproar
was too great for any one to take the trouble to argue or to waste time
in entertaining doubts. In the height of the first confusion, the people
of the neighbourhood invaded the villa. One and all lost their heads.
They ran to every side, upstairs, downstairs, to the very cellar. They
asked one another questions, yelled and shouted; and no one dreamt of
checking Lupin’s statements, which sounded so plausible.

However, the discovery of the body in the pantry restored the commissary
to a sense of his responsibility. He issued orders, had the house
cleared and placed policemen at the gate to prevent any one from passing
in or out. Then, without further delay, he examined the spot and began
his inquiry. Vaucheray gave his name; Gilbert refused to give his, on
the plea that he would only speak in the presence of a lawyer. But,
when he was accused of the murder, he informed against Vaucheray,
who defended himself by denouncing the other; and the two of them
vociferated at the same time, with the evident wish to monopolize the
commissary’s attention. When the commissary turned to Lupin, to request
his evidence, he perceived that the stranger was no longer there.

Without the least suspicion, he said to one of the policemen:

“Go and tell that gentleman that I should like to ask him a few
questions.”

They looked about for the gentleman. Some one had seen him standing on
the steps, lighting a cigarette. The next news was that he had given
cigarettes to a group of soldiers and strolled toward the lake, saying
that they were to call him if he was wanted.

They called him. No one replied.

But a soldier came running up. The gentleman had just got into a boat
and was rowing away for all he was worth. The commissary looked at
Gilbert and realized that he had been tricked:

“Stop him!” he shouted. “Fire on him! He’s an accomplice!...”

He himself rushed out, followed by two policemen, while the others
remained with the prisoners. On reaching the bank, he saw the gentleman,
a hundred yards away, taking off his hat to him in the dusk.

One of the policemen discharged his revolver, without thinking.

The wind carried the sound of words across the water. The gentleman was
singing as he rowed:

  “Go, little bark,
   Float in the dark...”

But the commissary saw a skiff fastened to the landing-stage of the
adjoining property. He scrambled over the hedge separating the two
gardens and, after ordering the soldiers to watch the banks of the lake
and to seize the fugitive if he tried to put ashore, the commissary and
two of his men pulled off in pursuit of Lupin.

It was not a difficult matter, for they were able to follow his
movements by the intermittent light of the moon and to see that he was
trying to cross the lakes while bearing toward the right--that is to
say, toward the village of Saint-Gratien. Moreover, the commissary
soon perceived that, with the aid of his men and thanks perhaps to the
comparative lightness of his craft, he was rapidly gaining on the other.
In ten minutes he had decreased the interval between them by one half.

“That’s it!” he cried. “We shan’t even need the soldiers to keep him
from landing. I very much want to make the fellow’s acquaintance. He’s a
cool hand and no mistake!”

The funny thing was that the distance was now diminishing at an abnormal
rate, as though the fugitive had lost heart at realizing the futility
of the struggle. The policemen redoubled their efforts. The boat shot
across the water with the swiftness of a swallow. Another hundred yards
at most and they would reach the man.

“Halt!” cried the commissary.

The enemy, whose huddled shape they could make out in the boat, no
longer moved. The sculls drifted with the stream. And this absence of
all motion had something alarming about it. A ruffian of that stamp
might easily lie in wait for his aggressors, sell his life dearly and
even shoot them dead before they had a chance of attacking him.

“Surrender!” shouted the commissary.

The sky, at that moment, was dark. The three men lay flat at the bottom
of their skiff, for they thought they perceived a threatening gesture.

The boat, carried by its own impetus, was approaching the other.

The commissary growled:

“We won’t let ourselves be sniped. Let’s fire at him. Are you ready?”
 And he roared, once more, “Surrender... if not...!”

No reply.

The enemy did not budge.

“Surrender!... Hands up!... You refuse?... So much the worse for you...
I’m counting... One... Two...”

The policemen did not wait for the word of command. They fired and, at
once, bending over their oars, gave the boat so powerful an impulse that
it reached the goal in a few strokes.

The commissary watched, revolver in hand, ready for the least movement.
He raised his arm:

“If you stir, I’ll blow out your brains!”

But the enemy did not stir for a moment; and, when the boat was bumped
and the two men, letting go their oars, prepared for the formidable
assault, the commissary understood the reason of this passive attitude:
there was no one in the boat. The enemy had escaped by swimming, leaving
in the hands of the victor a certain number of the stolen articles,
which, heaped up and surmounted by a jacket and a bowler hat, might be
taken, at a pinch, in the semi-darkness, vaguely to represent the figure
of a man.

They struck matches and examined the enemy’s cast clothes. There were no
initials in the hat. The jacket contained neither papers nor pocketbook.
Nevertheless, they made a discovery which was destined to give the case
no little celebrity and which had a terrible influence on the fate of
Gilbert and Vaucheray: in one of the pockets was a visiting-card which
the fugitive had left behind... the card of Arsene Lupin.

At almost the same moment, while the police, towing the captured skiff
behind them, continued their empty search and while the soldiers
stood drawn up on the bank, straining their eyes to try and follow the
fortunes of the naval combat, the aforesaid Arsene Lupin was quietly
landing at the very spot which he had left two hours earlier.

He was there met by his two other accomplices, the Growler and the
Masher, flung them a few sentences by way of explanation, jumped
into the motor-car, among Daubrecq the deputy’s armchairs and other
valuables, wrapped himself in his furs and drove, by deserted roads,
to his repository at Neuilly, where he left the chauffeur. A
taxicab brought him back to Paris and put him down by the church of
Saint-Philippe-du-Roule, not far from which, in the Rue Matignon, he
had a flat, on the entresol-floor, of which none of his gang, excepting
Gilbert, knew, a flat with a private entrance. He was glad to take
off his clothes and rub himself down; for, in spite of his strong
constitution, he felt chilled to the bone. On retiring to bed, he
emptied the contents of his pockets, as usual, on the mantelpiece. It
was not till then that he noticed, near his pocketbook and his keys, the
object which Gilbert had put into his hand at the last moment.

And he was very much surprised. It was a decanter-stopper, a little
crystal stopper, like those used for the bottles in a liqueur-stand.
And this crystal stopper had nothing particular about it. The most that
Lupin observed was that the knob, with its many facets, was gilded right
down to the indent. But, to tell the truth, this detail did not seem to
him of a nature to attract special notice.

“And it was this bit of glass to which Gilbert and Vaucheray attached
such stubborn importance!” he said to himself. “It was for this that
they killed the valet, fought each other, wasted their time, risked
prison... trial... the scaffold!...”

Too tired to linger further upon this matter, exciting though it
appeared to him, he replaced the stopper on the chimney-piece and got
into bed.

He had bad dreams. Gilbert and Vaucheray were kneeling on the flags of
their cells, wildly stretching out their hands to him and yelling with
fright:

“Help!... Help!” they cried.

But, notwithstanding all his efforts, he was unable to move. He himself
was fastened by invisible bonds. And, trembling, obsessed by a monstrous
vision, he watched the dismal preparations, the cutting of the condemned
men’s hair and shirt-collars, the squalid tragedy.

“By Jove!” he said, when he woke after a series of nightmares.
“There’s a lot of bad omens! Fortunately, we don’t err on the side of
superstition. Otherwise...!” And he added, “For that matter, we have a
talisman which, to judge by Gilbert and Vaucheray’s behaviour, should be
enough, with Lupin’s help, to frustrate bad luck and secure the triumph
of the good cause. Let’s have a look at that crystal stopper!”

He sprang out of bed to take the thing and examine it more closely. An
exclamation escaped him. The crystal stopper had disappeared...



CHAPTER II. EIGHT FROM NINE LEAVES ONE

Notwithstanding my friendly relations with Lupin and the many flattering
proofs of his confidence which he has given me, there is one thing which
I have never been quite able to fathom, and that is the organization of
his gang.

The existence of the gang is an undoubted fact. Certain adventures can
be explained only by countless acts of devotion, invincible efforts of
energy and powerful cases of complicity, representing so many forces
which all obey one mighty will. But how is this will exerted? Through
what intermediaries, through what subordinates? That is what I do not
know. Lupin keeps his secret; and the secrets which Lupin chooses to
keep are, so to speak, impenetrable.

The only supposition which I can allow myself to make is that this gang,
which, in my opinion, is very limited in numbers and therefore all the
more formidable, is completed and extended indefinitely by the addition
of independent units, provisional associates, picked up in every class
of society and in every country of the world, who are the executive
agents of an authority with which, in many cases, they are not even
acquainted. The companions, the initiates, the faithful adherents--men
who play the leading parts under the direct command of Lupin--move to
and fro between these secondary agents and the master.

Gilbert and Vaucheray evidently belonged to the main gang. And that is
why the law showed itself so implacable in their regard. For the first
time, it held accomplices of Lupin in its clutches--declared, undisputed
accomplices--and those accomplices had committed a murder. If the murder
was premeditated, if the accusation of deliberate homicide could be
supported by substantial proofs, it meant the scaffold. Now there was,
at the very least, one self-evident proof, the cry for assistance which
Leonard had sent over the telephone a few minutes before his death:

“Help!... Murder!... I shall be killed!...”

The desperate appeal had been heard by two men, the operator on duty
and one of his fellow-clerks, who swore to it positively. And it was
in consequence of this appeal that the commissary of police, who was at
once informed, had proceeded to the Villa Marie-Therese, escorted by his
men and a number of soldiers off duty.

Lupin had a very clear notion of the danger from the first. The fierce
struggle in which he had engaged against society was entering upon a new
and terrible phase. His luck was turning. It was no longer a matter of
attacking others, but of defending himself and saving the heads of his
two companions.

A little memorandum, which I have copied from one of the note-books in
which he often jots down a summary of the situations that perplex him,
will show us the workings of his brain:

“One definite fact, to begin with, is that Gilbert and Vaucheray
humbugged me. The Enghien expedition, undertaken ostensibly with the
object of robbing the Villa Marie-Therese, had a secret purpose. This
purpose obsessed their minds throughout the operations; and what they
were looking for, under the furniture and in the cupboards, was one
thing and one thing alone: the crystal stopper. Therefore, if I want to
see clear ahead, I must first of all know what this means. It is certain
that, for some hidden reason, that mysterious piece of glass possesses
an incalculable value in their eyes. And not only in theirs, for, last
night, some one was bold enough and clever enough to enter my flat and
steal the object in question from me.”

This theft of which he was the victim puzzled Lupin curiously.

Two problems, both equally difficult of solution, presented themselves
to his mind. First, who was the mysterious visitor? Gilbert, who enjoyed
his entire confidence and acted as his private secretary, was the only
one who knew of the retreat in the Rue Matignon. Now Gilbert was in
prison. Was Lupin to suppose that Gilbert had betrayed him and put the
police on his tracks? In that case, why were they content with taking
the crystal stopper, instead of arresting him, Lupin?

But there was something much stranger still. Admitting that they had
been able to force the doors of his flat--and this he was compelled to
admit, though there was no mark to show it--how had they succeeded in
entering the bedroom? He turned the key and pushed the bolt as he did
every evening, in accordance with a habit from which he never departed.
And, nevertheless--the fact was undeniable--the crystal stopper had
disappeared without the lock or the bolt having been touched. And,
although Lupin flattered himself that he had sharp ears, even when
asleep, not a sound had waked him!

He took no great pains to probe the mystery. He knew those problems too
well to hope that this one could be solved other than in the course of
events. But, feeling very much put out and exceedingly uneasy, he then
and there locked up his entresol flat in the Rue Matignon and swore that
he would never set foot in it again.

And he applied himself forthwith to the question of corresponding with
Vaucheray or Gilbert.

Here a fresh disappointment awaited him. It was so clearly understood,
both at the Sante Prison and at the Law Courts, that all communication
between Lupin and the prisoners must be absolutely prevented, that a
multitude of minute precautions were ordered by the prefect of police
and minutely observed by the lowest subordinates. Tried policemen,
always the same men, watched Gilbert and Vaucheray, day and night, and
never let them out of their sight.

Lupin, at this time, had not yet promoted himself to the crowning honour
of his career, the post of chief of the detective-service, [*] and,
consequently, was not able to take steps at the Law Courts to insure the
execution of his plans. After a fortnight of fruitless endeavours, he
was obliged to bow.

     * See 813, by Maurice Leblanc, translated by Alexander
     Teixeira de Mattos.

He did so with a raging heart and a growing sense of anxiety.

“The difficult part of a business,” he often says, “is not the finish,
but the start.”

Where was he to start in the present circumstances? What road was he to
follow?

His thoughts recurred to Daubrecq the deputy, the original owner of the
crystal stopper, who probably knew its importance. On the other hand,
how was Gilbert aware of the doings and mode of life of Daubrecq the
deputy? What means had he employed to keep him under observation? Who
had told him of the place where Daubrecq spent the evening of that day?
These were all interesting questions to solve.

Daubrecq had moved to his winter quarters in Paris immediately after the
burglary at the Villa Marie-Therese and was now living in his own house,
on the left-hand side of the little Square Lamartine that opens out at
the end of the Avenue Victor-Hugo.

First disguising himself as an old gentleman of private means, strolling
about, cane in hand, Lupin spent his time in the neighbourhood, on the
benches of the square and the avenue. He made a discovery on the first
day. Two men, dressed as workmen, but behaving in a manner that left no
doubt as to their aims, were watching the deputy’s house. When Daubrecq
went out, they set off in pursuit of him; and they were immediately
behind him when he came home again. At night, as soon as the lights were
out, they went away.

Lupin shadowed them in his turn. They were detective-officers.

“Hullo, hullo!” he said to himself. “This is hardly what I expected. So
the Daubrecq bird is under suspicion?”

But, on the fourth day, at nightfall, the two men were joined by six
others, who conversed with them in the darkest part of the Square
Lamartine. And, among these new arrivals, Lupin was vastly astonished
to recognize, by his figure and bearing, the famous Prasville, the
erstwhile barrister, sportsman and explorer, now favourite at the
Elysee, who, for some mysterious reason, had been pitchforked into the
headquarters of police as secretary-general, with the reversion of the
prefecture.

And, suddenly, Lupin remembered: two years ago, Prasville and Daubrecq
the deputy had had a personal encounter on the Place du Palais-Bourbon.
The incident made a great stir at the time. No one knew the cause of it.
Prasville had sent his seconds to Daubrecq on the same day; but Daubrecq
refused to fight.

A little while later, Prasville was appointed secretary-general.

“Very odd, very odd,” said Lupin, who remained plunged in thought, while
continuing to observe Prasville’s movements.

At seven o’clock Prasville’s group of men moved away a few yards, in the
direction of the Avenue Henri-Martin. The door of a small garden on
the right of the house opened and Daubrecq appeared. The two detectives
followed close behind him and, when he took the Rue-Taitbout train,
jumped on after him.

Prasville at once walked across the square and rang the bell. The
garden-gate was between the house and the porter’s lodge. The portress
came and opened it. There was a brief conversation, after which
Prasville and his companions were admitted.

“A domiciliary visit,” said Lupin. “Secret and illegal. By the
strict rules of politeness, I ought to be invited. My presence is
indispensable.”

Without the least hesitation he went up to the house, the door of which
had not been closed, and, passing in front of the portress, who was
casting her eyes outside, he asked, in the hurried tones of a person who
is late for an appointment:

“Have the gentlemen come?”

“Yes, you will find them in the study.”

His plan was quite simple: if any one met him, he would pretend to be a
tradesman. But there was no need for this subterfuge. He was able, after
crossing an empty hall, to enter a dining-room which also had no one in
it, but which, through the panes of a glass partition that separated
the dining-room from the study, afforded him a view of Prasville and his
five companions.

Prasville opened all the drawers with the aid of false keys. Next, he
examined all the papers, while his companions took down the books from
the shelves, shook the pages of each separately and felt inside the
bindings.

“Of course, it’s a paper they’re looking for,” said Lupin. “Bank-notes,
perhaps...”

Prasville exclaimed:

“What rot! We shan’t find a thing!”

Yet he obviously did not abandon all hope of discovering what he wanted,
for he suddenly seized the four bottles in a liqueur-stand, took out the
four stoppers and inspected them.

“Hullo!” thought Lupin. “Now he’s going for decanter-stoppers! Then it’s
not a question of a paper? Well, I give it up.”

Prasville next lifted and examined different objects; and he asked:

“How often have you been here?”

“Six times last winter,” was the reply.

“And you have searched the house thoroughly?”

“Every one of the rooms, for days at a time, while he was visiting his
constituency.”

“Still... still...” And he added, “Has he no servant at present?”

“No, he is looking for one. He has his meals out and the portress keeps
the house as best she can. The woman is devoted to us...”

Prasville persisted in his investigations for nearly an hour and a half,
shifting and fingering all the knick-knacks, but taking care to put
everything back exactly where he found it. At nine o’clock, however, the
two detectives who had followed Daubrecq burst into the study:

“He’s coming back!”

“On foot?”

“Yes.”

“Have we time?”

“Oh, dear, yes!”

Prasville and the men from the police-office withdrew, without undue
haste, after taking a last glance round the room to make sure that there
was nothing to betray their visit.

The position was becoming critical for Lupin. He ran the risk of
knocking up against Daubrecq, if he went away, or of not being able
to get out, if he remained. But, on ascertaining that the dining-room
windows afforded a direct means of exit to the square, he resolved to
stay. Besides, the opportunity of obtaining a close view of Daubrecq was
too good to refuse; and, as Daubrecq had been out to dinner, there was
not much chance of his entering the dining-room.

Lupin, therefore, waited, holding himself ready to hide behind a velvet
curtain that could be drawn across the glazed partition in case of need.

He heard the sound of doors opening and shutting. Some one walked into
the study and switched on the light. He recognized Daubrecq.

The deputy was a stout, thickset, bull-necked man, very nearly bald,
with a fringe of gray whiskers round his chin and wearing a pair of
black eye-glasses under his spectacles, for his eyes were weak and
strained. Lupin noticed the powerful features, the square chin, the
prominent cheek-bones. The hands were brawny and covered with hair, the
legs bowed; and he walked with a stoop, bearing first on one hip and
then on the other, which gave him something of the gait of a gorilla.
But the face was topped by an enormous, lined forehead, indented with
hollows and dotted with bumps.

There was something bestial, something savage, something repulsive about
the man’s whole personality. Lupin remembered that, in the Chamber of
Deputies, Daubrecq was nicknamed “The Wild Man of the Woods” and that
he was so labelled not only because he stood aloof and hardly ever
mixed with his fellow-members, but also because of his appearance, his
behaviour, his peculiar gait and his remarkable muscular development.

He sat down to his desk, took a meerschaum pipe from his pocket,
selected a packet of caporal among several packets of tobacco which lay
drying in a bowl, tore open the wrapper, filled his pipe and lit it.
Then he began to write letters.

Presently he ceased his work and sat thinking, with his attention fixed
on a spot on his desk.

He lifted a little stamp-box and examined it. Next, he verified the
position of different articles which Prasville had touched and replaced;
and he searched them with his eyes, felt them with his hands, bending
over them as though certain signs, known to himself alone, were able to
tell him what he wished to know.

Lastly, he grasped the knob on an electric bell-push and rang. The
portress appeared a minute later.

He asked:

“They’ve been, haven’t they?”

And, when the woman hesitated about replying, he insisted:

“Come, come, Clemence, did you open this stampbox?”

“No, sir.”

“Well, I fastened the lid down with a little strip of gummed paper. The
strip has been broken.”

“But I assure you,...” the woman began.

“Why tell lies,” he said, “considering that I myself instructed you to
lend yourself to those visits?”

“The fact is...”

“The fact is that you want to keep on good terms with both sides... Very
well!” He handed her a fifty-franc note and repeated, “Have they been?”

“Yes.”

“The same men as in the spring?”

“Yes, all five of them... with another one, who ordered them about.”

“A tall, dark man?”

“Yes.”

Lupin saw Daubrecq’s mouth hardening; and Daubrecq continued:

“Is that all?”

“There was one more, who came after they did and joined them... and
then, just now, two more, the pair who usually keep watch outside the
house.”

“Did they remain in the study?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And they went away when I came back? A few minutes before, perhaps?”

“Yes, sir.”

“That will do.”

The woman left the room. Daubrecq returned to his letter-writing. Then,
stretching out his arm, he made some marks on a white writing-tablet, at
the end of his desk, and rested it against the desk, as though he wished
to keep it in sight. The marks were figures; and Lupin was able to read
the following subtraction-sum:

   “9 - 8 = 1”

And Daubrecq, speaking between his teeth, thoughtfully uttered the
syllables:

“Eight from nine leaves one... There’s not a doubt about that,” he
added, aloud. He wrote one more letter, a very short one, and addressed
the envelope with an inscription which Lupin was able to decipher when
the letter was placed beside the writing-tablet:

“To Monsieur Prasville, Secretary-general of the Prefecture of Police.”

Then he rang the bell again:

“Clemence,” he said, to the portress, “did you go to school as a child?”

“Yes, sir, of course I did.”

“And were you taught arithmetic?”

“Why, sir...”

“Well, you’re not very good at subtraction.”

“What makes you say that?”

“Because you don’t know that nine minus eight equals one. And that, you
see, is a fact of the highest importance. Life becomes impossible if you
are ignorant of that fundamental truth.”

He rose, as he spoke, and walked round the room, with his hands behind
his back, swaying upon his hips. He did so once more. Then, stopping at
the dining-room, he opened the door:

“For that matter, there’s another way of putting the problem. Take
eight from nine; and one remains. And the one who remains is here, eh?
Correct! And monsieur supplies us with a striking proof, does he not?”

He patted the velvet curtain in which Lupin had hurriedly wrapped
himself:

“Upon my word, sir, you must be stifling under this! Not to say that
I might have amused myself by sticking a dagger through the curtain.
Remember Hamlet’s madness and Polonius’ death: ‘How now! A rat? Dead,
for a ducat, dead!’ Come along, Mr. Polonius, come out of your hole.”

It was one of those positions to which Lupin was not accustomed and
which he loathed. To catch others in a trap and pull their leg was all
very well; but it was a very different thing to have people teasing him
and roaring with laughter at his expense. Yet what could he answer back?

“You look a little pale, Mr. Polonius... Hullo! Why, it’s the
respectable old gentleman who has been hanging about the square for some
days! So you belong to the police too, Mr. Polonius? There, there, pull
yourself together, I sha’n’t hurt you!... But you see, Clemence, how
right my calculation was. You told me that nine spies had been to the
house. I counted a troop of eight, as I came along, eight of them in the
distance, down the avenue. Take eight from nine and one remains: the one
who evidently remained behind to see what he could see. Ecce homo!”

“Well? And then?” said Lupin, who felt a mad craving to fly at the
fellow and reduce him to silence.

“And then? Nothing at all, my good man... What more do you want? The
farce is over. I will only ask you to take this little note to Master
Prasville, your employer. Clemence, please show Mr. Polonius out. And,
if ever he calls again, fling open the doors wide to him. Pray look upon
this as your home, Mr. Polonius. Your servant, sir!...”

Lupin hesitated. He would have liked to talk big and to come out with
a farewell phrase, a parting speech, like an actor making a showy exit
from the stage, and at least to disappear with the honours of war. But
his defeat was so pitiable that he could think of nothing better than to
bang his hat on his head and stamp his feet as he followed the portress
down the hall. It was a poor revenge.

“You rascally beggar!” he shouted, once he was outside the door, shaking
his fist at Daubrecq’s windows. “Wretch, scum of the earth, deputy, you
shall pay for this!... Oh, he allows himself...! Oh, he has the cheek
to...! Well, I swear to you, my fine fellow, that, one of these days...”

He was foaming with rage, all the more as, in his innermost heart, he
recognized the strength of his new enemy and could not deny the masterly
fashion in which he had managed this business. Daubrecq’s coolness, the
assurance with which he hoaxed the police-officials, the contempt with
which he lent himself to their visits at his house and, above all, his
wonderful self-possession, his easy bearing and the impertinence of his
conduct in the presence of the ninth person who was spying on him: all
this denoted a man of character, a strong man, with a well-balanced
mind, lucid, bold, sure of himself and of the cards in his hand.

But what were those cards? What game was he playing? Who held the
stakes? And how did the players stand on either side? Lupin could not
tell. Knowing nothing, he flung himself headlong into the thick of the
fray, between adversaries desperately involved, though he himself was in
total ignorance of their positions, their weapons, their resources and
their secret plans. For, when all was said, he could not admit that
the object of all those efforts was to obtain possession of a crystal
stopper!

One thing alone pleased him: Daubrecq had not penetrated his disguise.
Daubrecq believed him to be in the employ of the police. Neither
Daubrecq nor the police, therefore, suspected the intrusion of a third
thief in the business. This was his one and only trump, a trump
that gave him a liberty of action to which he attached the greatest
importance.

Without further delay, he opened the letter which Daubrecq had handed
him for the secretary-general of police. It contained these few lines:

 “Within reach of your hand, my dear Prasville, within reach of your
 hand!  You touched it!  A little more and the trick was done... But
 you’re too big a fool.  And to think that they couldn’t hit upon
 any one better than you to make me bite the dust.  Poor old France!

 “Good-bye, Prasville.  But, if I catch you in the act, it will be a
 bad lookout for you: my maxim is to shoot at sight.

         “DAUBRECQ”

“Within reach of your hand,” repeated Lupin, after reading the note.
“And to think that the rogue may be writing the truth! The most
elementary hiding-places are the safest. We must look into this, all
the same. And, also, we must find out why Daubrecq is the object of
such strict supervision and obtain a few particulars about the fellow
generally.”

The information supplied to Lupin by a private inquiry-office consisted
of the following details:

      “ALEXIS DAUBRECQ, deputy of the Bouches-du-Rhone for the past two
 years; sits among the independent members.  Political opinions not
 very clearly defined, but electoral position exceedingly strong,
 because of the enormous sums which he spends in nursing his
 constituency.  No private income.  Nevertheless, has a house in
 Paris, a villa at Enghien and another at Nice and loses heavily at
 play, though no one knows where the money comes from.  Has great
 influence and obtains all he wants without making up to ministers
 or, apparently, having either friends or connections in political
 circles.”

“That’s a trade docket,” said Lupin to himself. “What I want is
a domestic docket, a police docket, which will tell me about the
gentleman’s private life and enable me to work more easily in this
darkness and to know if I’m not getting myself into a tangle by
bothering about the Daubrecq bird. And time’s getting short, hang it!”

One of the residences which Lupin occupied at that period and which he
used oftener than any of the others was in the Rue Chateaubriand, near
the Arc de l’Etoile. He was known there by the name of Michel Beaumont.
He had a snug flat here and was looked after by a manservant, Achille,
who was utterly devoted to his interests and whose chief duty was to
receive and repeat the telephone-messages addressed to Lupin by his
followers.

Lupin, on returning home, learnt, with great astonishment, that a woman
had been waiting to see him for over an hour:

“What! Why, no one ever comes to see me here! Is she young?”

“No... I don’t think so.”

“You don’t think so!”

“She’s wearing a lace shawl over her head, instead of a hat, and you
can’t see her face... She’s more like a clerk... or a woman employed in
a shop. She’s not well-dressed...”

“Whom did she ask for?”

“M. Michel Beaumont,” replied the servant.

“Queer. And why has she called?”

“All she said was that it was about the Enghien business... So I thought
that...”

“What! The Enghien business! Then she knows that I am mixed up in that
business... She knows that, by applying here...”

“I could not get anything out of her, but I thought, all the same, that
I had better let her in.”

“Quite right. Where is she?”

“In the drawing-room. I’ve put on the lights.”

Lupin walked briskly across the hall and opened the door of the
drawing-room:

“What are you talking about?” he said, to his man. “There’s no one
here.”

“No one here?” said Achille, running up.

And the room, in fact, was empty.

“Well, on my word, this takes the cake!” cried the servant. “It wasn’t
twenty minutes ago that I came and had a look, to make sure. She was
sitting over there. And there’s nothing wrong with my eyesight, you
know.”

“Look here, look here,” said Lupin, irritably. “Where were you while the
woman was waiting?”

“In the hall, governor! I never left the hall for a second! I should
have seen her go out, blow it!”

“Still, she’s not here now...”

“So I see,” moaned the man, quite flabbergasted.

“She must have got tired of waiting and gone away. But, dash it all, I
should like to know how she got out!”

“How she got out?” said Lupin. “It doesn’t take a wizard to tell that.”

“What do you mean?”

“She got out through the window. Look, it’s still ajar. We are on the
ground-floor... The street is almost always deserted, in the evenings.
There’s no doubt about it.”

He had looked around him and satisfied himself that nothing had been
taken away or moved. The room, for that matter, contained no knick-knack
of any value, no important paper that might have explained the
woman’s visit, followed by her sudden disappearance. And yet why that
inexplicable flight?

“Has any one telephoned?” he asked.

“No.”

“Any letters?”

“Yes, one letter by the last post.”

“Where is it?”

“I put it on your mantel-piece, governor, as usual.”

Lupin’s bedroom was next to the drawing-room, but Lupin had permanently
bolted the door between the two. He, therefore, had to go through the
hall again.

Lupin switched on the electric light and, the next moment, said:

“I don’t see it...”

“Yes... I put it next to the flower-bowl.”

“There’s nothing here at all.”

“You must be looking in the wrong place, governor.”

But Achille moved the bowl, lifted the clock, bent down to the grate, in
vain: the letter was not there.

“Oh blast it, blast it!” he muttered. “She’s done it... she’s taken
it... And then, when she had the letter, she cleared out... Oh, the
slut!...”

Lupin said:

“You’re mad! There’s no way through between the two rooms.”

“Then who did take it, governor?”

They were both of them silent. Lupin strove to control his anger and
collect his ideas. He asked:

“Did you look at the envelope?”

“Yes.”

“Anything particular about it?”

“Yes, it looked as if it had been written in a hurry, or scribbled,
rather.”

“How was the address worded?... Do you remember?” asked Lupin, in a
voice strained with anxiety.

“Yes, I remembered it, because it struck me as funny...”

“But speak, will you? Speak!”

“It said, ‘Monsieur de Beaumont, Michel.’”

Lupin took his servant by the shoulders and shook him:

“It said ‘de’ Beaumont? Are you sure? And ‘Michel’ after ‘Beaumont’?”

“Quite certain.”

“Ah!” muttered Lupin, with a choking throat. “It was a letter from
Gilbert!”

He stood motionless, a little pale, with drawn features. There was no
doubt about it: the letter was from Gilbert. It was the form of address
which, by Lupin’s orders, Gilbert had used for years in corresponding
with him. Gilbert had at last--after long waiting and by dint of endless
artifices--found a means of getting a letter posted from his prison and
had hastily written to him. And now the letter was intercepted! What did
it say? What instructions had the unhappy prisoner given? What help was
he praying for? What stratagem did he suggest?

Lupin looked round the room, which, contrary to the drawing-room,
contained important papers. But none of the locks had been forced; and
he was compelled to admit that the woman had no other object than to get
hold of Gilbert’s letter.

Constraining himself to keep his temper, he asked:

“Did the letter come while the woman was here?”

“At the same time. The porter rang at the same moment.”

“Could she see the envelope?”

“Yes.”

The conclusion was evident. It remained to discover how the visitor had
been able to effect her theft. By slipping from one window to the other,
outside the flat? Impossible: Lupin found the window of his room shut.
By opening the communicating door? Impossible: Lupin found it locked and
barred with its two inner bolts.

Nevertheless, a person cannot pass through a wall by a mere operation of
will. To go in or out of a room requires a passage; and, as the act was
accomplished in the space of a few minutes, it was necessary, in the
circumstances, that the passage should be previously in existence, that
it should already have been contrived in the wall and, of course, known
to the woman. This hypothesis simplified the search by concentrating
it upon the door; for the wall was quite bare, without a cupboard,
chimney-piece or hangings of any kind, and unable to conceal the least
outlet.

Lupin went back to the drawing-room and prepared to make a study of the
door. But he at once gave a start. He perceived, at the first glance,
that the left lower panel of the six small panels contained within the
cross-bars of the door no longer occupied its normal position and that
the light did not fall straight upon it. On leaning forward, he saw two
little tin tacks sticking out on either side and holding the panel in
place, similar to a wooden board behind a picture-frame. He had only to
shift these. The panel at once came out.

Achille gave a cry of amazement. But Lupin objected:

“Well? And what then? We are no better off than before. Here is an empty
oblong, eight or nine inches wide by sixteen inches high. You’re not
going to pretend that a woman can slip through an opening which would
not admit the thinnest child of ten years old!”

“No, but she can have put her arm through and drawn the bolts.”

“The bottom bolt, yes,” said Lupin. “But the top bolt, no: the distance
is far too great. Try for yourself and see.”

Achille tried and had to give up the attempt.

Lupin did not reply. He stood thinking for a long time. Then, suddenly,
he said:

“Give me my hat... my coat...”

He hurried off, urged by an imperative idea. And, the moment he reached
the street, he sprang into a taxi:

“Rue Matignon, quick!...”

As soon as they came to the house where he had been robbed of the
crystal stopper, he jumped out of the cab, opened his private entrance,
went upstairs, ran to the drawing-room, turned on the light and crouched
at the foot of the door leading to his bedroom.

He had guessed right. One of the little panels was loosened in the same
manner.

And, just as in his other flat in the Rue Chateaubriand, the opening was
large enough to admit a man’s arm and shoulder, but not to allow him to
draw the upper bolt.

“Hang!” he shouted, unable any longer to master the rage that had been
seething within him for the last two hours. “Blast! Shall I never have
finished with this confounded business?”

In fact, an incredible ill-luck seemed to dog his footsteps, compelling
him to grope about at random, without permitting him to use the elements
of success which his own persistency or the very force of things placed
within his grasp. Gilbert gave him the crystal stopper. Gilbert sent him
a letter. And both had disappeared at that very moment.

And it was not, as he had until then believed, a series of fortuitous
and independent circumstances. No, it was manifestly the effect of an
adverse will pursuing a definite object with prodigious ability and
incredible boldness, attacking him, Lupin, in the recesses of his safest
retreats and baffling him with blows so severe and so unexpected that he
did not even know against whom he had to defend himself. Never, in the
course of his adventures, had he encountered such obstacles as now.

And, little by little, deep down within himself, there grew a haunting
dread of the future. A date loomed before his eyes, the terrible date
which he unconsciously assigned to the law to perform its work of
vengeance, the date upon which, in the light of a wan April morning, two
men would mount the scaffold, two men who had stood by him, two comrades
whom he had been unable to save from paying the awful penalty...



CHAPTER III. THE HOME LIFE OF ALEXIS DAUBRECQ

When Daubrecq the deputy came in from lunch on the day after the police
had searched his house he was stopped by Clemence, his portress, who
told him that she had found a cook who could be thoroughly relied on.

The cook arrived a few minutes later and produced first-rate characters,
signed by people with whom it was easy to take up her references. She
was a very active woman, although of a certain age, and agreed to do the
work of the house by herself, without the help of a man-servant, this
being a condition upon which Daubrecq insisted.

Her last place was with a member of the Chamber of Deputies, Comte
Saulevat, to whom Daubrecq at once telephoned. The count’s steward gave
her a perfect character, and she was engaged.

As soon as she had fetched her trunk, she set to work and cleaned and
scrubbed until it was time to cook the dinner.

Daubrecq dined and went out.

At eleven o’clock, after the portress had gone to bed, the cook
cautiously opened the garden-gate. A man came up.

“Is that you?” she asked.

“Yes, it’s I, Lupin.”

She took him to her bedroom on the third floor, overlooking the garden,
and at once burst into lamentations:

“More of your tricks and nothing but tricks! Why can’t you leave me
alone, instead of sending me to do your dirty work?”

“How can I help it, you dear old Victoire? [*] When I want a person of
respectable appearance and incorruptible morals, I think of you. You
ought to be flattered.”


     * See The Hollow Needle by Maurice Leblanc, translated by
     Alexander Teixeira de Mattos, and later volumes of the Lupin
     series.

“That’s all you care about me!” she cried. “You run me into danger once
more; and you think it’s funny!”

“What are you risking?”

“How do you mean, what am I risking? All my characters are false.”

“Characters are always false.”

“And suppose M. Daubrecq finds out? Suppose he makes inquiries?”

“He has made inquiries.”

“Eh? What’s that?”

“He has telephoned to the steward of Comte Saulevat, in whose service
you say that you have had the honour of being.”

“There, you see, I’m done for!”

“The count’s steward could not say enough in your praise.”

“He does not know me.”

“But I know him. I got him his situation with Comte Saulevat. So you
understand...”

Victoire seemed to calm down a little:

“Well,” she said, “God’s will be done... or rather yours. And what do
you expect me to do in all this?”

“First, to put me up. You were my wet-nurse once. You can very well give
me half your room now. I’ll sleep in the armchair.”

“And next?”

“Next? To supply me with such food as I want.”

“And next?”

“Next? To undertake, with me and under my direction, a regular series of
searches with a view...”

“To what?”

“To discovering the precious object of which I spoke to you.”

“What’s that?”

“A crystal stopper.”

“A crystal stopper... Saints above! A nice business! And, if we don’t
find your confounded stopper, what then?”

Lupin took her gently by the arm and, in a serious voice:

“If we don’t find it, Gilbert, young Gilbert whom you know and love,
will stand every chance of losing his head; and so will Vaucheray.”

“Vaucheray I don’t mind... a dirty rascal like him! But Gilbert...”

“Have you seen the papers this evening? Things are looking worse than
ever. Vaucheray, as might be expected, accuses Gilbert of stabbing the
valet; and it so happens that the knife which Vaucheray used belonged
to Gilbert. That came out this morning. Whereupon Gilbert, who is
intelligent in his way, but easily frightened, blithered and launched
forth into stories and lies which will end in his undoing. That’s how
the matter stands. Will you help me?”

Thenceforth, for several days, Lupin moulded his existence upon
Daubrecq’s, beginning his investigations the moment the deputy left the
house. He pursued them methodically, dividing each room into sections
which he did not abandon until he had been through the tiniest nooks and
corners and, so to speak, exhausted every possible device.

Victoire searched also. And nothing was forgotten. Table-legs,
chair-rungs, floor-boards, mouldings, mirror- and picture-frames,
clocks, plinths, curtain-borders, telephone-holders and electric
fittings: everything that an ingenious imagination could have selected
as a hiding-place was overhauled.

And they also watched the deputy’s least actions, his most unconscious
movements, the expression of his face, the books which he read and the
letters which he wrote.

It was easy enough. He seemed to live his life in the light of day. No
door was ever shut. He received no visits. And his existence worked with
mechanical regularity. He went to the Chamber in the afternoon, to the
club in the evening.

“Still,” said Lupin, “there must be something that’s not orthodox behind
all this.”

“There’s nothing of the sort,” moaned Victoire. “You’re wasting your
time and we shall be bowled out.”

The presence of the detectives and their habit of walking up and down
outside the windows drove her mad. She refused to admit that they were
there for any other purpose than to trap her, Victoire. And, each time
that she went shopping, she was quite surprised that one of those men
did not lay his hand upon her shoulder.

One day she returned all upset. Her basket of provisions was shaking on
her arm.

“What’s the matter, my dear Victoire?” said Lupin. “You’re looking
green.”

“Green? I dare say I do. So would you look green...”

She had to sit down and it was only after making repeated efforts that
she succeeded in stuttering:

“A man... a man spoke to me... at the fruiterer’s.”

“By jingo! Did he want you to run away with him?”

“No, he gave me a letter...”

“Then what are you complaining about? It was a love-letter, of course!”

“No. ‘It’s for your governor,’ said he. ‘My governor?’ I said. ‘Yes,’ he
said, ‘for the gentleman who’s staying in your room.’”

“What’s that?”

This time, Lupin had started:

“Give it here,” he said, snatching the letter from her. The envelope
bore no address. But there was another, inside it, on which he read:

   “Monsieur Arsene Lupin,
     c/o Victoire.”

“The devil!” he said. “This is a bit thick!” He tore open the second
envelope. It contained a sheet of paper with the following words,
written in large capitals:

     “Everything you are doing is useless and dangerous... Give it up.”

Victoire uttered one moan and fainted. As for Lupin, he felt himself
blush up to his eyes, as though he had been grossly insulted. He
experienced all the humiliation which a duellist would undergo if he
heard the most secret advice which he had received from his seconds
repeated aloud by a mocking adversary.

However, he held his tongue. Victoire went back to her work. As for him,
he remained in his room all day, thinking.

That night he did not sleep.

And he kept saying to himself:

“What is the good of thinking? I am up against one of those problems
which are not solved by any amount of thought. It is certain that I am
not alone in the matter and that, between Daubrecq and the police, there
is, in addition to the third thief that I am, a fourth thief who is
working on his own account, who knows me and who reads my game clearly.
But who is this fourth thief? And am I mistaken, by any chance? And...
oh, rot!... Let’s get to sleep!...”

But he could not sleep; and a good part of the night went in this way.

At four o’clock in the morning he seemed to hear a noise in the house.
He jumped up quickly and, from the top of the staircase, saw Daubrecq go
down the first flight and turn toward the garden.

A minute later, after opening the gate, the deputy returned with a man
whose head was buried in an enormous fur collar and showed him into his
study.

Lupin had taken his precautions in view of any such contingency. As the
windows of the study and those of his bedroom, both of which were at the
back of the house, overlooked the garden, he fastened a rope-ladder to
his balcony, unrolled it softly and let himself down by it until it was
level with the top of the study windows.

These windows were closed by shutters; but, as they were bowed, there
remained a semi-circular space at the top; and Lupin, though he could
not hear, was able to see all that went on inside.

He then realized that the person whom he had taken for a man was a
woman: a woman who was still young, though her dark hair was mingled
with gray; a tall woman, elegantly but quite unobtrusively dressed,
whose handsome features bore the expression of weariness and melancholy
which long suffering gives.

“Where the deuce have I seen her before?” Lupin asked himself. “For I
certainly know that face, that look, that expression.”

She stood leaning against the table, listening impassively to Daubrecq,
who was also standing and who was talking very excitedly. He had his
back turned to Lupin; but Lupin, leaning forward, caught sight of a
glass in which the deputy’s image was reflected. And he was startled to
see the strange look in his eyes, the air of fierce and brutal desire
with which Daubrecq was staring at his visitor.

It seemed to embarrass her too, for she sat down with lowered lids. Then
Daubrecq leant over her and it appeared as though he were ready to fling
his long arms, with their huge hands, around her. And, suddenly, Lupin
perceived great tears rolling down the woman’s sad face.

Whether or not it was the sight of those tears that made Daubrecq lose
his head, with a brusque movement he clutched the woman and drew her
to him. She repelled him, with a violence full of hatred. And, after a
brief struggle, during which Lupin caught a glimpse of the man’s bestial
and contorted features, the two of them stood face to face, railing at
each other like mortal enemies.

Then they stopped. Daubrecq sat down. There was mischief in his face,
and sarcasm as well. And he began to talk again, with sharp taps on the
table, as though he were dictating terms.

She no longer stirred. She sat haughtily in her chair and towered
over him, absent-minded, with roaming eyes. Lupin, captivated by that
powerful and sorrowful countenance, continued to watch her; and he was
vainly seeking to remember of what or of whom she reminded him, when
he noticed that she had turned her head slightly and that she was
imperceptibly moving her arm.

And her arm strayed farther and farther and her hand crept along
the table and Lupin saw that, at the end of the table, there stood
a water-bottle with a gold-topped stopper. The hand reached the
water-bottle, felt it, rose gently and seized the stopper. A quick
movement of the head, a glance, and the stopper was put back in its
place. Obviously, it was not what the woman hoped to find.

“Dash it!” said Lupin. “She’s after the crystal stopper too! The matter
is becoming more complicated daily; there’s no doubt about it.”

But, on renewing his observation of the visitor, he was astounded
to note the sudden and unexpected expression of her countenance, a
terrible, implacable, ferocious expression. And he saw that her hand
was continuing its stealthy progress round the table and that, with an
uninterrupted and crafty sliding movement, it was pushing back books
and, slowly and surely, approaching a dagger whose blade gleamed among
the scattered papers.

It gripped the handle.

Daubrecq went on talking. Behind his back, the hand rose steadily,
little by little; and Lupin saw the woman’s desperate and furious eyes
fixed upon the spot in the neck where she intended to plant the knife:

“You’re doing a very silly thing, fair lady,” thought Lupin.

And he already began to turn over in his mind the best means of escaping
and of taking Victoire with him.

She hesitated, however, with uplifted arm. But it was only a momentary
weakness. She clenched her teeth. Her whole face, contracted with
hatred, became yet further convulsed. And she made the dread movement.

At the same instant Daubrecq crouched and, springing from his seat,
turned and seized the woman’s frail wrist in mid-air.

Oddly enough, he addressed no reproach to her, as though the deed which
she had attempted surprised him no more than any ordinary, very natural
and simple act. He shrugged his shoulders, like a man accustomed to that
sort of danger, and strode up and down in silence.

She had dropped the weapon and was now crying, holding her head between
her hands, with sobs that shook her whole frame.

He next came up to her and said a few words, once more tapping the table
as he spoke.

She made a sign in the negative and, when he insisted, she, in her turn,
stamped her foot on the floor and exclaimed, loud enough for Lupin to
hear:

“Never!... Never!...”

Thereupon, without another word, Daubrecq fetched the fur cloak which
she had brought with her and hung it over the woman’s shoulders, while
she shrouded her face in a lace wrap.

And he showed her out.

Two minutes later, the garden-gate was locked again. “Pity I can’t run
after that strange person,” thought Lupin, “and have a chat with her
about the Daubrecq bird. Seems to me that we two could do a good stroke
of business together.”

In any case, there was one point to be cleared up: Daubrecq the deputy,
whose life was so orderly, so apparently respectable, was in the habit
of receiving visits at night, when his house was no longer watched by
the police.

He sent Victoire to arrange with two members of his gang to keep watch
for several days. And he himself remained awake next night.

As on the previous morning, he heard a noise at four o’clock. As on the
previous morning, the deputy let some one in.

Lupin ran down his ladder and, when he came to the free space above the
shutters, saw a man crawling at Daubrecq’s feet, flinging his arms round
Daubrecq’s knees in frenzied despair and weeping, weeping convulsively.

Daubrecq, laughing, pushed him away repeatedly, but the man clung to
him. He behaved almost like one out of his mind and, at last, in a
genuine fit of madness, half rose to his feet, took the deputy by the
throat and flung him back in a chair. Daubrecq struggled, powerless at
first, while his veins swelled in his temples. But soon, with a strength
far beyond the ordinary, he regained the mastery and deprived his
adversary of all power of movement. Then, holding him with one hand,
with the other he gave him two great smacks in the face.

The man got up, slowly. He was livid and could hardly stand on his legs.
He waited for a moment, as though to recover his self-possession. Then,
with a terrifying calmness, he drew a revolver from his pocket and
levelled it at Daubrecq.

Daubrecq did not flinch. He even smiled, with a defiant air and without
displaying more excitement than if he had been aimed at with a toy
pistol.

The man stood for perhaps fifteen or twenty seconds, facing his
enemy, with outstretched arm. Then, with the same deliberate slowness,
revealing a self-control which was all the more impressive because it
followed upon a fit of extreme excitement, he put up his revolver and,
from another pocket, produced his note-case.

Daubrecq took a step forward.

The man opened the pocketbook. A sheaf of banknotes appeared in sight.

Daubrecq seized and counted them. They were thousand-franc notes, and
there were thirty of them.

The man looked on, without a movement of revolt, without a protest. He
obviously understood the futility of words. Daubrecq was one of those
who do not relent. Why should his visitor waste time in beseeching
him or even in revenging himself upon him by uttering vain threats
and insults? He had no hope of striking that unassailable enemy. Even
Daubrecq’s death would not deliver him from Daubrecq.

He took his hat and went away.

At eleven o’clock in the morning Victoire, on returning from her
shopping, handed Lupin a note from his accomplices.

He opened it and read:

“The man who came to see Daubrecq last night is Langeroux the deputy,
leader of the independent left. A poor man, with a large family.”

“Come,” said Lupin, “Daubrecq is nothing more nor less than a
blackmailer; but, by Jupiter, he has jolly effective ways of going to
work!”

Events tended to confirm Lupin’s supposition. Three days later he saw
another visitor hand Daubrecq an important sum of money. And, two days
after that, one came and left a pearl necklace behind him.

The first was called Dachaumont, a senator and ex-cabinet-minister. The
second was the Marquis d’Albufex, a Bonapartist deputy, formerly chief
political agent in France of Prince Napoleon.

The scene, in each of these cases, was very similar to Langeroux
the deputy’s interview, a violent tragic scene, ending in Daubrecq’s
victory.

“And so on and so forth,” thought Lupin, when he received these
particulars. “I have been present at four visits. I shall know no more
if there are ten, or twenty, or thirty... It is enough for me to learn
the names of the visitors from my friends on sentry-go outside. Shall
I go and call on them?... What for? They have no reason to confide in
me... On the other hand, am I to stay on here, delayed by investigations
which lead to nothing and which Victoire can continue just as well
without me?”

He was very much perplexed. The news of the inquiry into the case
of Gilbert and Vaucheray was becoming worse and worse, the days were
slipping by, and not an hour passed without his asking himself, in
anguish, whether all his efforts--granting that he succeeded--would
not end in farcical results, absolutely foreign to the aim which he was
pursuing.

For, after all, supposing that he did fathom Daubrecq’s underhand
dealings, would that give him the means of rescuing Gilbert and
Vaucheray?

That day an incident occurred which put an end to his indecision. After
lunch Victoire heard snatches of a conversation which Daubrecq held with
some one on the telephone. Lupin gathered, from what Victoire reported,
that the deputy had an appointment with a lady for half-past eight and
that he was going to take her to a theatre:

“I shall get a pit-tier box, like the one we had six weeks ago,”
 Daubrecq had said. And he added, with a laugh, “I hope that I shall not
have the burglars in during that time.”

There was not a doubt in Lupin’s mind. Daubrecq was about to spend his
evening in the same manner in which he had spent the evening six weeks
ago, while they were breaking into his villa at Enghien. To know the
person whom he was to meet and perhaps thus to discover how Gilbert and
Vaucheray had learnt that Daubrecq would be away from eight o’clock in
the evening until one o’clock in the morning: these were matters of the
utmost importance.

Lupin left the house in the afternoon, with Victoire’s assistance. He
knew through her that Daubrecq was coming home for dinner earlier than
usual.

He went to his flat in the Rue Chateaubriand, telephoned for three of
his friends, dressed and made himself up in his favourite character of a
Russian prince, with fair hair and moustache and short-cut whiskers.

The accomplices arrived in a motor-car.

At that moment, Achille, his man, brought him a telegram, addressed to
M. Michel Beaumont, Rue Chateaubriand, which ran:

 “Do not come to theatre this evening.  Danger of your
  intervention spoiling everything.”

There was a flower-vase on the chimney-piece beside him. Lupin took it
and smashed it to pieces.

“That’s it, that’s it,” he snarled. “They are playing with me as I
usually play with others. Same behaviour. Same tricks. Only there’s this
difference...”

What difference? He hardly knew. The truth was that he too was baffled
and disconcerted to the inmost recesses of his being and that he was
continuing to act only from obstinacy, from a sense of duty, so to
speak, and without putting his ordinary good humour and high spirits
into the work.

“Come along,” he said to his accomplices.

By his instructions, the chauffeur set them down near the Square
Lamartine, but kept the motor going. Lupin foresaw that Daubrecq, in
order to escape the detectives watching the house, would jump into the
first taxi; and he did not intend to be outdistanced.

He had not allowed for Daubrecq’s cleverness.

At half-past seven both leaves of the garden-gate were flung open, a
bright light flashed and a motor-cycle darted across the road, skirted
the square, turned in front of the motor-car and shot away toward the
Bois at a speed so great that they would have been mad to go in pursuit
of it.

“Good-bye, Daisy!” said Lupin, trying to jest, but really overcome with
rage.

He eyed his accomplices in the hope that one of them would venture to
give a mocking smile. How pleased he would have been to vent his nerves
on them!

“Let’s go home,” he said to his companions.

He gave them some dinner; then he smoked a cigar and they set off again
in the car and went the round of the theatres, beginning with those
which were giving light operas and musical comedies, for which he
presumed that Daubrecq and his lady would have a preference. He took a
stall, inspected the lower-tier boxes and went away again.

He next drove to the more serious theatres: the Renaissance, the
Gymnase.

At last, at ten o’clock in the evening, he saw a pit-tier box at the
Vaudeville almost entirely protected from inspection by its two screens;
and, on tipping the boxkeeper, was told that it contained a short,
stout, elderly gentleman and a lady who was wearing a thick lace veil.

The next box was free. He took it, went back to his friends to give them
their instructions and sat down near the couple.

During the entr’acte, when the lights went up, he perceived Daubrecq’s
profile. The lady remained at the back of the box, invisible. The two
were speaking in a low voice; and, when the curtain rose again, they
went on speaking, but in such a way that Lupin could not distinguish a
word.

Ten minutes passed. Some one tapped at their door. It was one of the men
from the box-office.

“Are you M. le Depute Daubrecq, sir?” he asked.

“Yes,” said Daubrecq, in a voice of surprise. “But how do you know my
name?”

“There’s a gentleman asking for you on the telephone. He told me to go
to Box 22.”

“But who is it?”

“M. le Marquis d’Albufex.”

“Eh?”

“What am I to say, sir?”

“I’m coming... I’m coming...”

Daubrecq rose hurriedly from his seat and followed the clerk to the
box-office.

He was not yet out of sight when Lupin sprang from his box, worked the
lock of the next door and sat down beside the lady.

She gave a stifled cry.

“Hush!” he said. “I have to speak to you. It is most important.”

“Ah!” she said, between her teeth. “Arsene Lupin!” He was dumbfounded.
For a moment he sat quiet, open-mouthed. The woman knew him! And not
only did she know him, but she had recognized him through his disguise!
Accustomed though he was to the most extraordinary and unusual events,
this disconcerted him.

He did not even dream of protesting and stammered:

“So you know?... So you know?...”

He snatched at the lady’s veil and pulled it aside before she had time
to defend herself:

“What!” he muttered, with increased amazement. “Is it possible?”

It was the woman whom he had seen at Daubrecq’s a few days earlier, the
woman who had raised her dagger against Daubrecq and who had intended to
stab him with all the strength of her hatred.

It was her turn to be taken aback:

“What! Have you seen me before?...”

“Yes, the other night, at his house... I saw what you tried to do...”

She made a movement to escape. He held her back and, speaking with great
eagerness:

“I must know who you are,” he said. “That was why I had Daubrecq
telephoned for.”

She looked aghast:

“Do you mean to say it was not the Marquis d’Albufex?”

“No, it was one of my assistants.”

“Then Daubrecq will come back?...”

“Yes, but we have time... Listen to me... We must meet again... He is
your enemy... I will save you from him...”

“Why should you? What is your object?”

“Do not distrust me... it is quite certain that our interests are
identical... Where can I see you? To-morrow, surely? At what time? And
where?”

“Well...”

She looked at him with obvious hesitation, not knowing what to do, on
the point of speaking and yet full of uneasiness and doubt.

He pressed her:

“Oh, I entreat you... answer me just one word... and at once... It would
be a pity for him to find me here... I entreat you...”

She answered sharply:

“My name doesn’t matter... We will see each other first and you shall
explain to me... Yes, we will meet... Listen, to-morrow, at three
o’clock, at the corner of the Boulevard...”

At that exact moment, the door of the box opened, so to speak, with a
bang, and Daubrecq appeared.

“Rats!” Lupin mumbled, under his breath, furious at being caught before
obtaining what he wanted.

Daubrecq gave a chuckle:

“So that’s it... I thought something was up... Ah, the telephone-trick:
a little out of date, sir! I had not gone half-way when I turned back.”

He pushed Lupin to the front of the box and, sitting down beside the
lady, said:

“And, now my lord, who are we? A servant at the police-office, probably?
There’s a professional look about that mug of yours.”

He stared hard at Lupin, who did not move a muscle, and tried to put
a name to the face, but failed to recognize the man whom he had called
Polonius.

Lupin, without taking his eyes from Daubrecq either, reflected. He would
not for anything in the world have thrown up the game at that point or
neglected this favourable opportunity of coming to an understanding with
his mortal enemy.

The woman sat in her corner, motionless, and watched them both.

Lupin said:

“Let us go outside, sir. That will make our interview easier.”

“No, my lord, here,” grinned the deputy. “It will take place here,
presently, during the entr’acte. Then we shall not be disturbing
anybody.”

“But...”

“Save your breath, my man; you sha’n’t budge.”

And he took Lupin by the coat-collar, with the obvious intention of not
letting go of him before the interval.

A rash move! Was it likely that Lupin would consent to remain in such an
attitude, especially before a woman, a woman to whom he had offered his
alliance, a woman--and he now thought of it for the first time--who was
distinctly good-looking and whose grave beauty attracted him. His whole
pride as a man rose at the thought.

However, he said nothing. He accepted the heavy weight of the hand on
his shoulder and even sat bent in two, as though beaten, powerless,
almost frightened.

“Eh, clever!” said the deputy, scoffingly. “We don’t seem to be
swaggering quite so much.”

The stage was full of actors who were arguing and making a noise.

Daubrecq had loosened his grasp slightly and Lupin felt that the moment
had come. With the edge of his hand, he gave him a violent blow in the
hollow of the arm, as he might have done with a hatchet.

The pain took Daubrecq off his guard. Lupin now released himself
entirely and sprang at the other to clutch him by the throat. But
Daubrecq had at once put himself on the defensive and stepped back and
their four hands seized one another.

They gripped with superhuman energy, the whole force of the two
adversaries concentrating in those hands. Daubrecq’s were of monstrous
size; and Lupin, caught in that iron vise, felt as though he were
fighting not with a man, but with some terrible beast, a huge gorilla.

They held each other against the door, bending low, like a pair of
wrestlers groping and trying to lay hold of each other. Their bones
creaked. Whichever gave way first was bound to be caught by the throat
and strangled. And all this happened amid a sudden silence, for the
actors on the stage were now listening to one of their number, who was
speaking in a low voice.

The woman stood back flat against the partition, looking at them in
terror. Had she taken sides with either of them, with a single movement,
the victory would at once have been decided in that one’s favour. But
which of them should she assist? What could Lupin represent in her eyes?
A friend? An enemy?

She briskly made for the front of the box, forced back the screen and,
leaning forward, seemed to give a signal. Then she returned and tried to
slip to the door.

Lupin, as though wishing to help her, said:

“Why don’t you move the chair?”

He was speaking of a heavy chair which had fallen down between him and
Daubrecq and across which they were struggling.

The woman stooped and pulled away the chair. That was what Lupin was
waiting for. Once rid of the obstacle, he caught Daubrecq a smart kick
on the shin with the tip of his patent-leather boot. The result was the
same as with the blow which he had given him on the arm. The pain
caused a second’s apprehension and distraction, of which he at once took
advantage to beat down Daubrecq’s outstretched hands and to dig his ten
fingers into his adversary’s throat and neck.

Daubrecq struggled. Daubrecq tried to pull away the hands that were
throttling him; but he was beginning to choke and felt his strength
decreasing.

“Aha, you old monkey!” growled Lupin, forcing him to the floor. “Why
don’t you shout for help? How frightened you must be of a scandal!”

At the sound of the fall there came a knocking at the partition, on the
other side.

“Knock away, knock away,” said Lupin, under his breath. “The play is on
the stage. This is my business and, until I’ve mastered this gorilla...”

It did not take him long. The deputy was choking. Lupin stunned him with
a blow on the jaw; and all that remained for him to do was to take the
woman away and make his escape with her before the alarm was given.

But, when he turned round, he saw that the woman was gone.

She could not be far. Darting from the box, he set off at a run,
regardless of the programme-sellers and check-takers.

On reaching the entrance-lobby, he saw her through an open door,
crossing the pavement of the Chaussee d’Antin.

She was stepping into a motor-car when he came up with her.

The door closed behind her.

He seized the handle and tried to pull at it.

But a man jumped up inside and sent his fist flying into Lupin’s
face, with less skill but no less force than Lupin had sent his into
Daubrecq’s face.

Stunned though he was by the blow, he nevertheless had ample time to
recognize the man, in a sudden, startled vision, and also to recognize,
under his chauffeur’s disguise, the man who was driving the car. It was
the Growler and the Masher, the two men in charge of the boats on the
Enghien night, two friends of Gilbert and Vaucheray: in short, two of
Lupin’s own accomplices.

When he reached his rooms in the Rue Chateaubriand, Lupin, after washing
the blood from his face, sat for over an hour in a chair, as though
overwhelmed. For the first time in his life he was experiencing the pain
of treachery. For the first time his comrades in the fight were turning
against their chief.

Mechanically, to divert his thoughts, he turned to his correspondence
and tore the wrapper from an evening paper. Among the late news he found
the following paragraphs:

   “THE VILLA MARIE-THERESE CASE”

      “The real identity of Vaucheray, one of the alleged
 murderers of Leonard the valet, has at last been ascertained.
 He is a miscreant of the worst type, a hardened criminal who
 has already twice been sentenced for murder, in default, under
 another name.

 “No doubt, the police will end by also discovering the real name
 of his accomplice, Gilbert.  In any event, the examining-magistrate
 is determined to commit the prisoners for trial as soon as possible.

 “The public will have no reason to complain of the delays of the law.”

In between other newspapers and prospectuses lay a letter.

Lupin jumped when he saw it. It was addressed:

   “Monsieur de Beaumont, Michel.”

“Oh,” he gasped, “a letter from Gilbert!”

It contained these few words:

 “Help, governor!... I am frightened. I am frightened...”

Once again, Lupin spent a night alternating between sleeplessness and
nightmares. Once again, he was tormented by atrocious and terrifying
visions.



CHAPTER IV. THE CHIEF OF THE ENEMIES

“Poor boy!” murmured Lupin, when his eyes fell on Gilbert’s letter next
morning. “How he must feel it!”

On the very first day when he saw him, he had taken a liking to that
well-set-up youngster, so careless, gay and fond of life. Gilbert was
devoted to him, would have accepted death at a sign from his master.
And Lupin also loved his frankness, his good humour, his simplicity, his
bright, open face.

“Gilbert,” he often used to say, “you are an honest man. Do you know,
if I were you, I should chuck the business and become an honest man for
good.”

“After you, governor,” Gilbert would reply, with a laugh.

“Won’t you, though?”

“No, governor. An honest man is a chap who works and grinds. It’s a
taste which I may have had as a nipper; but they’ve made me lose it
since.”

“Who’s they?”

Gilbert was silent. He was always silent when questioned about his
early life; and all that Lupin knew was that he had been an orphan since
childhood and that he had lived all over the place, changing his name
and taking up the queerest jobs. The whole thing was a mystery which no
one had been able to fathom; and it did not look as though the police
would make much of it either.

Nor, on the other hand, did it look as though the police would consider
that mystery a reason for delaying proceedings. They would send
Vaucheray’s accomplice for trial--under his name of Gilbert or any other
name--and visit him with the same inevitable punishment.

“Poor boy!” repeated Lupin. “They’re persecuting him like this only
because of me. They are afraid of his escaping and they are in a hurry
to finish the business: the verdict first and then... the execution.

“Oh, the butchers!... A lad of twenty, who has committed no murder, who
is not even an accomplice in the murder...”

Alas, Lupin well knew that this was a thing impossible to prove and that
he must concentrate his efforts upon another point. But upon which? Was
he to abandon the trail of the crystal stopper?

He could not make up his mind to that. His one and only diversion from
the search was to go to Enghien, where the Growler and the Masher lived,
and make sure that nothing had been seen of them since the murder at the
Villa Marie-Therese. Apart from this, he applied himself to the question
of Daubrecq and nothing else.

He refused even to trouble his head about the problems set before him:
the treachery of the Growler and the Masher; their connection with the
gray-haired lady; the spying of which he himself was the object.

“Steady, Lupin,” he said. “One only argues falsely in a fever. So hold
your tongue. No inferences, above all things! Nothing is more
foolish than to infer one fact from another before finding a certain
starting-point. That’s where you get up a tree. Listen to your instinct.
Act according to your instinct. And as you are persuaded, outside all
argument, outside all logic, one might say, that this business turns
upon that confounded stopper, go for it boldly. Have at Daubrecq and his
bit of crystal!”

Lupin did not wait to arrive at these conclusions before settling his
actions accordingly. At the moment when he was stating them in his mind,
three days after the scene at the Vaudeville, he was sitting, dressed
like a retired tradesman, in an old overcoat, with a muffler round his
neck, on a bench in the Avenue Victor-Hugo, at some distance from the
Square Lamartine. Victoire had his instructions to pass by that bench at
the same hour every morning.

“Yes,” he repeated to himself, “the crystal stopper: everything turns on
that... Once I get hold of it...”

Victoire arrived, with her shopping-basket on her arm. He at once
noticed her extraordinary agitation and pallor:

“What’s the matter?” asked Lupin, walking beside his old nurse.

She went into a big grocer’s, which was crowded with people, and,
turning to him:

“Here,” she said, in a voice torn with excitement. “Here’s what you’ve
been hunting for.”

And, taking something from her basket, she gave it to him.

Lupin stood astounded: in his hand lay the crystal stopper.

“Can it be true? Can it be true?” he muttered, as though the ease of the
solution had thrown him off his balance.

But the fact remained, visible and palpable. He recognized by its shape,
by its size, by the worn gilding of its facets, recognized beyond any
possible doubt the crystal stopper which he had seen before. He even
remarked a tiny, hardly noticeable little scratch on the stem which he
remembered perfectly.

However, while the thing presented all the same characteristics, it
possessed no other that seemed out of the way. It was a crystal stopper,
that was all. There was no really special mark to distinguish it from
other stoppers. There was no sign upon it, no stamp; and, being cut from
a single piece, it contained no foreign object.

“What then?”

And Lupin received a quick insight into the depth of his mistake. What
good could the possession of that crystal stopper do him so long as he
was ignorant of its value? That bit of glass had no existence in itself;
it counted only through the meaning that attached to it. Before taking
it, the thing was to be certain. And how could he tell that, in taking
it, in robbing Daubrecq of it, he was not committing an act of folly?

It was a question which was impossible of solution, but which forced
itself upon him with singular directness.

“No blunders!” he said to himself, as he pocketed the stopper. “In this
confounded business, blunders are fatal.”

He had not taken his eyes off Victoire. Accompanied by a shopman, she
went from counter to counter, among the throng of customers. She next
stood for some little while at the pay-desk and passed in front of
Lupin.

He whispered her instructions:

“Meet me behind the Lycee Janson.”

She joined him in an unfrequented street:

“And suppose I’m followed?” she said.

“No,” he declared. “I looked carefully. Listen to me. Where did you find
the stopper?”

“In the drawer of the table by his bed.”

“But we had felt there already.”

“Yes; and I did so again this morning. I expect he put it there last
night.”

“And I expect he’ll want to take it from there again,” said Lupin.

“Very likely.”

“And suppose he finds it gone?”

Victoire looked frightened.

“Answer me,” said Lupin. “If he finds it gone, he’ll accuse you of
taking it, won’t he?”

“Certainly.”

“Then go and put it back, as fast as you can.”

“Oh dear, oh dear!” she moaned. “I hope he won’t have had time to find
out. Give it to me, quick.”

“Here you are,” said Lupin.

He felt in the pocket of his overcoat.

“Well?” said Victoire, holding out her hand.

“Well,” he said, after a moment, “it’s gone.”

“What!”

“Yes, upon my word, it’s gone... somebody’s taken it from me.”

He burst into a peal of laughter, a laughter which, this time, was free
from all bitterness.

Victoire flew out at him:

“Laugh away!... Putting me in such a predicament!...”

“How can I help laughing? You must confess that it’s funny. It’s
no longer a tragedy that we’re acting, but a fairy-tale, as much a
fairy-tale as Puss in Boots or Jack and the Beanstalk. I must write it
when I get a few weeks to myself: The Magic Stopper; or, The Mishaps of
Poor Arsene.”

“Well... who has taken it from you?”

“What are you talking about?... It has flown away... vanished from my
pocket: hey presto, begone!”

He gave the old servant a gentle push and, in a more serious tone:

“Go home, Victoire, and don’t upset yourself. Of course, some one saw
you give me the stopper and took advantage of the crowd in the shop to
pick my pocket of it. That only shows that we are watched more closely
than I thought and by adversaries of the first rank. But, once more, be
easy. Honest men always come by their own... Have you anything else to
tell me?”

“Yes. Some one came yesterday evening, while M. Daubrecq was out. I saw
lights reflected upon the trees in the garden.”

“The portress’ bedroom?”

“The portress was up.”

“Then it was some of those detective-fellows; they are still hunting.
I’ll see you later, Victoire. You must let me in again.”

“What! You want to...”

“What do I risk? Your room is on the third floor. Daubrecq suspects
nothing.”

“But the others!”

“The others? If it was to their interest to play me a trick, they’d have
tried before now. I’m in their way, that’s all. They’re not afraid of
me. So till later, Victoire, at five o’clock exactly.”

One further surprise awaited Lupin. In the evening his old nurse told
him that, having opened the drawer of the bedside table from curiosity,
she had found the crystal stopper there again.

Lupin was no longer to be excited by these miraculous incidents. He
simply said to himself:

“So it’s been brought back. And the person who brought it back and who
enters this house by some unexplained means considered, as I did, that
the stopper ought not to disappear. And yet Daubrecq, who knows that he
is being spied upon to his very bedroom, has once more left the stopper
in a drawer, as though he attached no importance to it at all! Now what
is one to make of that?”

Though Lupin did not make anything of it, nevertheless he could not
escape certain arguments, certain associations of ideas that gave him
the same vague foretaste of light which one receives on approaching the
outlet of a tunnel.

“It is inevitable, as the case stands,” he thought, “that there must
soon be an encounter between myself and the others. From that moment I
shall be master of the situation.”

Five days passed, during which Lupin did not glean the slightest
particular. On the sixth day Daubrecq received a visit, in the small
hours, from a gentleman, Laybach the deputy, who, like his colleagues,
dragged himself at his feet in despair and, when all was done, handed
him twenty thousand francs.

Two more days; and then, one night, posted on the landing of the
second floor, Lupin heard the creaking of a door, the front-door, as he
perceived, which led from the hall into the garden. In the darkness
he distinguished, or rather divined, the presence of two persons, who
climbed the stairs and stopped on the first floor, outside Daubrecq’s
bedroom.

What were they doing there? It was not possible to enter the room,
because Daubrecq bolted his door every night. Then what were they
hoping?

Manifestly, a handiwork of some kind was being performed, as Lupin
discovered from the dull sounds of rubbing against the door. Then words,
uttered almost beneath a whisper, reached him:

“Is it all right?”

“Yes, quite, but, all the same, we’d better put it off till to-morrow,
because...”

Lupin did not hear the end of the sentence. The men were already groping
their way downstairs. The hall-door was closed, very gently, and then
the gate.

“It’s curious, say what one likes,” thought Lupin. “Here is a house in
which Daubrecq carefully conceals his rascalities and is on his guard,
not without good reason, against spies; and everybody walks in and out
as in a booth at a fair. Victoire lets me in, the portress admits the
emissaries of the police: that’s well and good; but who is playing false
in these people’s favour? Are we to suppose that they are acting alone?
But what fearlessness! And how well they know their way about!”

In the afternoon, during Daubrecq’s absence, he examined the door of the
first-floor bedroom. And, at the first glance, he understood: one of the
lower panels had been skilfully cut out and was only held in place by
invisible tacks. The people, therefore, who had done this work were the
same who had acted at his two places, in the Rue Matignon and the Rue
Chateaubriand.

He also found that the work dated back to an earlier period and that, as
in his case, the opening had been prepared beforehand, in anticipation
of favourable circumstances or of some immediate need.

The day did not seem long to Lupin. Knowledge was at hand. Not only
would he discover the manner in which his adversaries employed those
little openings, which were apparently unemployable, since they did
not allow a person to reach the upper bolts, but he would learn who the
ingenious and energetic adversaries were with whom he repeatedly and
inevitably found himself confronted.

One incident annoyed him. In the evening Daubrecq, who had complained of
feeling tired at dinner, came home at ten o’clock and, contrary to his
usual custom, pushed the bolts of the hall-door. In that case, how would
the others be able to carry out their plan and go to Daubrecq’s room?
Lupin waited for an hour after Daubrecq put out his light. Then he went
down to the deputy’s study, opened one of the windows ajar and returned
to the third floor and fixed his rope-ladder so that, in case of need,
he could reach the study without passing though the house. Lastly, he
resumed his post on the second-floor landing.

He did not have to wait long. An hour earlier than on the previous night
some one tried to open the hall-door. When the attempt failed, a few
minutes of absolute silence followed. And Lupin was beginning to think
that the men had abandoned the idea, when he gave a sudden start. Some
one had passed, without the least sound to interrupt the silence. He
would not have known it, so utterly were the thing’s steps deadened by
the stair-carpet, if the baluster-rail, which he himself held in his
hand, had not shaken slightly. Some one was coming upstairs.

And, as the ascent continued, Lupin became aware of the uncanny feeling
that he heard nothing more than before. He knew, because of the rail,
that a thing was coming and he could count the number of steps climbed
by noting each vibration of the rail; but no other indication gave him
that dim sensation of presence which we feel in distinguishing movements
which we do not see, in perceiving sounds which we do not hear. And yet
a blacker darkness ought to have taken shape within the darkness and
something ought, at least, to modify the quality of the silence. No, he
might well have believed that there was no one there.

And Lupin, in spite of himself and against the evidence of his reason,
ended by believing it, for the rail no longer moved and he thought that
he might have been the sport of an illusion.

And this lasted a long time. He hesitated, not knowing what to do, not
knowing what to suppose. But an odd circumstance impressed him. A clock
struck two. He recognized the chime of Daubrecq’s clock. And the chime
was that of a clock from which one is not separated by the obstacle of a
door.

Lupin slipped down the stairs and went to the door. It was closed,
but there was a space on the left, at the bottom, a space left by the
removal of the little panel.

He listened. Daubrecq, at that moment, turned in his bed; and his
breathing was resumed, evenly and a little stertorously. And Lupin
plainly heard the sound of rumpling garments. Beyond a doubt, the thing
was there, fumbling and feeling through the clothes which Daubrecq had
laid beside his bed.

“Now,” thought Lupin, “we shall learn something. But how the deuce did
the beggar get in? Has he managed to draw the bolts and open the door?
But, if so, why did he make the mistake of shutting it again?”

Not for a second--a curious anomaly in a man like Lupin, an anomaly
to be explained only by the uncanny feeling which the whole adventure
produced in him--not for a second did he suspect the very simple truth
which was about to be revealed to him. Continuing his way down, he
crouched on one of the bottom steps of the staircase, thus placing
himself between the door of the bedroom and the hall-door, on the
road which Daubrecq’s enemy must inevitably take in order to join his
accomplices.

He questioned the darkness with an unspeakable anguish. He was on
the point of unmasking that enemy of Daubrecq’s, who was also his
own adversary. He would thwart his plans. And the booty captured from
Daubrecq he would capture in his turn, while Daubrecq slept and while
the accomplices lurking behind the hall-door or outside the garden-gate
vainly awaited their leader’s return.

And that return took place. Lupin knew it by the renewed vibration of
the balusters. And, once more, with every sense strained and every
nerve on edge, he strove to discern the mysterious thing that was coming
toward him. He suddenly realized it when only a few yards away. He
himself, hidden in a still darker recess, could not be seen. And what
he saw--in the very vaguest manner--was approaching stair by stair, with
infinite precautions, holding on to each separate baluster.

“Whom the devil have I to do with?” said Lupin to himself, while his
heart thumped inside his chest.

The catastrophe was hastened. A careless movement on Lupin’s part was
observed by the stranger, who stopped short. Lupin was afraid lest the
other should turn back and take to flight. He sprang at the adversary
and was stupefied at encountering nothing but space and knocking against
the stair-rail without seizing the form which he saw. But he at once
rushed forward, crossed the best part of the hall and caught up his
antagonist just as he was reaching the door opening on the garden.

There was a cry of fright, answered by other cries on the further side
of the door.

“Oh, hang it, what’s this?” muttered Lupin, whose arms had closed, in
the dark, round a little, tiny, trembling, whimpering thing.

Suddenly understanding, he stood for a moment motionless and dismayed,
at a loss what to do with his conquered prey. But the others were
shouting and stamping outside the door. Thereupon, dreading lest
Daubrecq should wake up, he slipped the little thing under his jacket,
against his chest, stopped the crying with his handkerchief rolled into
a ball and hurried up the three flights of stairs.

“Here,” he said to Victoire, who woke with a start. “I’ve brought you
the indomitable chief of our enemies, the Hercules of the gang. Have you
a feeding-bottle about you?”

He put down in the easy-chair a child of six or seven years of age, the
tiniest little fellow in a gray jersey and a knitted woollen cap, whose
pale and exquisitely pretty features were streaked with the tears that
streamed from the terrified eyes.

“Where did you pick that up?” asked Victoire, aghast.

“At the foot of the stairs, as it was coming out of Daubrecq’s bedroom,”
 replied Lupin, feeling the jersey in the hope that the child had brought
a booty of some kind from that room.

Victoire was stirred to pity:

“Poor little dear! Look, he’s trying not to cry!... Oh, saints above,
his hands are like ice! Don’t be afraid, sonnie, we sha’n’t hurt you:
the gentleman’s all right.”

“Yes,” said Lupin, “the gentleman’s quite all right, but there’s another
very wicked gentleman who’ll wake up if they go on making such a rumpus
outside the hall-door. Do you hear them, Victoire?”

“Who is it?”

“The satellites of our young Hercules, the indomitable leader’s gang.”

“Well...?” stammered Victoire, utterly unnerved.

“Well, as I don’t want to be caught in the trap, I shall start by
clearing out. Are you coming, Hercules?”

He rolled the child in a blanket, so that only its head remained
outside, gagged its mouth as gently as possible and made Victoire fasten
it to his shoulders:

“See, Hercules? We’re having a game. You never thought you’d find
gentlemen to play pick-a-back with you at three o’clock in the morning!
Come, whoosh, let’s fly away! You don’t get giddy, I hope?”

He stepped across the window-ledge and set foot on one of the rungs of
the ladder. He was in the garden in a minute.

He had never ceased hearing and now heard more plainly still the blows
that were being struck upon the front-door. He was astounded that
Daubrecq was not awakened by so violent a din:

“If I don’t put a stop to this, they’ll spoil everything,” he said to
himself.

He stood in an angle of the house, invisible in the darkness, and
measured the distance between himself and the gate. The gate was open.
To his right, he saw the steps, on the top of which the people were
flinging themselves about; to his left, the building occupied by the
portress.

The woman had come out of her lodge and was standing near the people,
entreating them:

“Oh, do be quiet, do be quiet! He’ll come!”

“Capital!” said Lupin. “The good woman is an accomplice of these as
well. By Jingo, what a pluralist!”

He rushed across to her and, taking her by the scruff of the neck,
hissed:

“Go and tell them I’ve got the child... They can come and fetch it at my
place, Rue Chateaubriand.”

A little way off, in the avenue, stood a taxi which Lupin presumed to be
engaged by the gang. Speaking authoritatively, as though he were one of
the accomplices, he stepped into the cab and told the man to drive him
home.

“Well,” he said to the child, “that wasn’t much of a shake-up, was
it?... What do you say to going to bye-bye on the gentleman’s bed?”

As his servant, Achille, was asleep, Lupin made the little chap
comfortable and stroked his hair for him. The child seemed numbed. His
poor face was as though petrified into a stiff expression made up, at
one and the same time, of fear and the wish not to show fear, of the
longing to scream and a pitiful effort not to scream.

“Cry, my pet, cry,” said Lupin. “It’ll do you good to cry.”

The child did not cry, but the voice was so gentle and so kind that he
relaxed his tense muscles; and, now that his eyes were calmer and
his mouth less contorted, Lupin, who was examining him closely, found
something that he recognized, an undoubted resemblance.

This again confirmed certain facts which he suspected and which he had
for some time been linking in his mind. Indeed, unless he was mistaken,
the position was becoming very different and he would soon assume the
direction of events. After that...

A ring at the bell followed, at once, by two others, sharp ones.

“Hullo!” said Lupin to the child. “Here’s mummy come to fetch you. Don’t
move.”

He ran and opened the door.

A woman entered, wildly:

“My son!” she screamed. “My son! Where is he?”

“In my room,” said Lupin.

Without asking more, thus proving that she knew the way, she rushed to
the bedroom.

“As I thought,” muttered Lupin. “The youngish woman with the gray hair:
Daubrecq’s friend and enemy.”

He walked to the window and looked through the curtains. Two men were
striding up and down the opposite pavement: the Growler and the Masher.

“And they’re not even hiding themselves,” he said to himself. “That’s
a good sign. They consider that they can’t do without me any longer and
that they’ve got to obey the governor. There remains the pretty lady
with the gray hair. That will be more difficult. It’s you and I now,
mummy.”

He found the mother and the boy clasped in each other’s arms; and
the mother, in a great state of alarm, her eyes moist with tears, was
saying:

“You’re not hurt? You’re sure? Oh, how frightened you must have been, my
poor little Jacques!”

“A fine little fellow,” said Lupin.

She did not reply. She was feeling the child’s jersey, as Lupin had
done, no doubt to see if he had succeeded in his nocturnal mission; and
she questioned him in a whisper.

“No, mummy,” said the child. “No, really.”

She kissed him fondly and petted him, until, in a little while, the
child, worn out with fatigue and excitement, fell asleep. She remained
leaning over him for a long time. She herself seemed very much worn out
and in need of rest.

Lupin did not disturb her contemplation. He looked at her anxiously,
with an attention which she did not perceive, and he noticed the wider
rings round her eyes and the deeper marks of wrinkles. Yet he considered
her handsomer than he had thought, with that touching beauty which
habitual suffering gives to certain faces that are more human, more
sensitive than others.

She wore so sad an expression that, in a burst of instinctive sympathy,
he went up to her and said: “I do not know what your plans are, but,
whatever they may be, you stand in need of help. You cannot succeed
alone.”

“I am not alone.”

“The two men outside? I know them. They’re no good. I beseech you,
make use of me. You remember the other evening, at the theatre, in the
private box? You were on the point of speaking. Do not hesitate to-day.”

She turned her eyes on him, looked at him long and fixedly and, as
though unable to escape that opposing will, she said:

“What do you know exactly? What do you know about me?”

“There are many things that I do not know. I do not know your name. But
I know...”

She interrupted him with a gesture; and, resolutely, in her turn,
dominating the man who was compelling her to speak:

“It doesn’t matter,” she exclaimed. “What you know, after all, is not
much and is of no importance. But what are your plans? You offer me your
help: with what view? For what work? You have flung yourself headlong
into this business; I have been unable to undertake anything without
meeting you on my path: you must be contemplating some aim... What aim?”

“What aim? Upon my word, it seems to me that my conduct...”

“No, no,” she said, emphatically, “no phrases! What you and I want is
certainties; and, to achieve them, absolute frankness. I will set you
the example. M. Daubrecq possesses a thing of unparalleled value, not in
itself, but for what it represents. That thing you know. You have
twice held it in your hands. I have twice taken it from you. Well, I am
entitled to believe that, when you tried to obtain possession of it, you
meant to use the power which you attribute to it and to use it to your
own advantage...”

“What makes you say that?”

“Yes, you meant to use it to forward your schemes, in the interest of
your own affairs, in accordance with your habits as a...”

“As a burglar and a swindler,” said Lupin, completing the sentence for
her.

She did not protest. He tried to read her secret thoughts in the depths
of her eyes. What did she want with him? What was she afraid of? If she
mistrusted him, had he not also reasons to mistrust that woman who had
twice taken the crystal stopper from him to restore it to Daubrecq?
Mortal enemy of Daubrecq’s though she were, up to what point did she
remain subject to that man’s will? By surrendering himself to her,
did he not risk surrendering himself to Daubrecq? And yet he had never
looked upon graver eyes nor a more honest face.

Without further hesitation, he stated:

“My object is simple enough. It is the release of my friends Gilbert and
Vaucheray.”

“Is that true? Is that true?” she exclaimed, quivering all over and
questioning him with an anxious glance.

“If you knew me...”

“I do know you... I know who you are. For months, I have taken part in
your life, without your suspecting it... and yet, for certain reasons, I
still doubt...”

He said, in a more decisive tone:

“You do not know me. If you knew me, you would know that there can be no
peace for me before my two companions have escaped the awful fate that
awaits them.”

She rushed at him, took him by the shoulders and positively distraught,
said:

“What? What did you say? The awful fate?... Then you believe... you
believe...”

“I really believe,” said Lupin, who felt how greatly this threat upset
her, “I really believe that, if I am not in time, Gilbert and Vaucheray
are done for.”

“Be quiet!... Be quiet!” she cried, clutching him fiercely. “Be
quiet!... You mustn’t say that... There is no reason... It’s just you
who suppose...”

“It’s not only I, it’s Gilbert as well...”

“What? Gilbert? How do you know?”

“From himself?”

“From him?”

“Yes, from Gilbert, who has no hope left but in me; from Gilbert, who
knows that only one man in the world can save him and who, a few days
ago, sent me a despairing appeal from prison. Here is his letter.”

She snatched the paper greedily and read in stammering accents:

“Help, governor!... I am frightened!... I am frightened!...”

She dropped the letter. Her hands fluttered in space. It was as though
her staring eyes beheld the sinister vision which had already so often
terrified Lupin. She gave a scream of horror, tried to rise and fainted.



CHAPTER V. THE TWENTY-SEVEN

The child was sleeping peacefully on the bed. The mother did not move
from the sofa on which Lupin had laid her; but her easier breathing and
the blood which was now returning to her face announced her impending
recovery from her swoon.

He observed that she wore a wedding-ring. Seeing a locket hanging from
her bodice, he stooped and, turning it, found a miniature photograph
representing a man of about forty and a lad--a stripling rather--in a
schoolboy’s uniform. He studied the fresh, young face set in curly hair:

“It’s as I thought,” he said. “Ah, poor woman!”

The hand which he took between his grew warmer by degrees. The eyes
opened, then closed again. She murmured:

“Jacques...”

“Do not distress yourself... it’s all right he’s asleep.”

She recovered consciousness entirely. But, as she did not speak, Lupin
put questions to her, to make her feel a gradual need of unbosoming
herself. And he said, pointing to the locket:

“The schoolboy is Gilbert, isn’t he?”

“Yes,” she said.

“And Gilbert is your son?”

She gave a shiver and whispered:

“Yes, Gilbert is my son, my eldest son.”

So she was the mother of Gilbert, of Gilbert the prisoner at the Sante,
relentlessly pursued by the authorities and now awaiting his trial for
murder!

Lupin continued:

“And the other portrait?”

“My husband.”

“Your husband?”

“Yes, he died three years ago.”

She was now sitting up. Life quivered in her veins once more, together
with the horror of living and the horror of all the ghastly things that
threatened her. Lupin went on to ask:

“What was your husband’s name?”

She hesitated a moment and answered:

“Mergy.”

He exclaimed:

“Victorien Mergy the deputy?”

“Yes.”

There was a long pause. Lupin remembered the incident and the stir
which it had caused. Three years ago, Mergy the deputy had blown out
his brains in the lobby of the Chamber, without leaving a word of
explanation behind him; and no one had ever discovered the slightest
reason for that suicide.

“Do you know the reason?” asked Lupin, completing his thought aloud.

“Yes, I know it.”

“Gilbert, perhaps?”

“No, Gilbert had disappeared for some years, turned out of doors and
cursed by my husband. It was a very great sorrow, but there was another
motive.”

“What was that?” asked Lupin.

But it was not necessary for Lupin to put further questions. Madame
Mergy could keep silent no longer and, slowly at first, with all the
anguish of that past which had to be called up, she told her story:

“Twenty-five years ago, when my name was Clarisse Darcel and my parents
living, I knew three young men at Nice. Their names will at once give
you an insight into the present tragedy: they were Alexis Daubrecq,
Victorien Mergy and Louis Prasville. The three were old acquaintances,
had gone to college in the same year and served in the same regiment.
Prasville, at that time, was in love with a singer at the opera-house at
Nice. The two others, Mergy and Daubrecq, were in love with me. I shall
be brief as regards all this and, for the rest, as regards the whole
story, for the facts tell their own tale. I fell in love with Victorien
Mergy from the first. Perhaps I was wrong not to declare myself at
once. But true love is always timid, hesitating and shy; and I did
not announce my choice until I felt quite certain and quite free.
Unfortunately, that period of waiting, so delightful for those who
cherish a secret passion, had permitted Daubrecq to hope. His anger was
something horrible.”

Clarisse Mergy stopped for a few seconds and resumed, in a stifled
voice:

“I shall never forget it... The three of us were in the drawing-room.
Oh, I can hear even now the terrible words of threat and hatred which
he uttered! Victorien was absolutely astounded. He had never seen his
friend like this, with that repugnant face, that bestial expression:
yes, the expression of a wild beast... Daubrecq ground his teeth. He
stamped his feet. His bloodshot eyes--he did not wear spectacles in
those days--rolled in their sockets; and he kept on saying, ‘I shall be
revenged ... I shall be revenged... Oh, you don’t know what I am capable
of!... I shall wait ten years, twenty years, if necessary... But it will
come like a thunderbolt... Ah, you don’t know!... To be revenged... To
do harm... for harm’s sake... what joy! I was born to do harm... And you
will both beseech my mercy on your knees, on your knees, yes, on your
knees...’ At that moment, my father entered the room; and, with his
assistance and the footman’s, Victorien Mergy flung the loathsome
creature out of doors. Six weeks later, I married Victorien.”

“And Daubrecq?” asked Lupin, interrupting her. “Did he not try...”

“No, but on our wedding-day, Louis Prasville, who acted as my husband’s
best man in defiance of Danbrecq’s opposition, went home to find the
girl he loved, the opera-singer, dead, strangled...”

“What!” said Lupin, with a start. “Had Daubrecq...”

“It was known that Daubrecq had been persecuting her with his attentions
for some days; but nothing more was known. It was impossible to discover
who had gone in or out during Prasville’s absence. There was not a trace
found of any kind: nothing, absolutely nothing.”

“But Prasville...”

“There was no doubt of the truth in Prasville’s mind or ours. Daubrecq
had tried to run away with the girl, perhaps tried to force her, to
hustle her and, in the course of the struggle, maddened, losing his
head, caught her by the throat and killed her, perhaps without knowing
what he was doing. But there was no evidence of all this; and Daubrecq
was not even molested.”

“And what became of him next?”

“For some years we heard nothing of him. We knew only that he had lost
all his money gambling and that he was travelling in America. And, in
spite of myself, I forgot his anger and his threats and was only too
ready to believe that he had ceased to love me and no longer harboured
his schemes of revenge. Besides, I was so happy that I did not care
to think of anything but my happiness, my love, my husband’s political
career, the health of my son Antoine.”

“Antoine?”

“Yes, Antoine is Gilbert’s real name. The unhappy boy has at least
succeeded in concealing his identity.”

Lupin asked, with some hesitation:

“At what period did... Gilbert... begin?”

“I cannot tell you exactly. Gilbert--I prefer to call him that and not
to pronounce his real name--Gilbert, as a child, was what he is to-day:
lovable, liked by everybody, charming, but lazy and unruly. When he was
fifteen, we put him to a boarding-school in one of the suburbs, with the
deliberate object of not having him too much at home. After two years’
time he was expelled from school and sent back to us.”

“Why?”

“Because of his conduct. The masters had discovered that he used to slip
out at night and also that he would disappear for weeks at a time, while
pretending to be at home with us.”

“What used he to do?”

“Amuse himself backing horses, spending his time in cafes and public
dancing-rooms.”

“Then he had money?”

“Yes.”

“Who gave it him?”

“His evil genius, the man who, secretly, unknown to his parents, enticed
him away from school, the man who led him astray, who corrupted him, who
took him from us, who taught him to lie, to waste his substance and to
steal.”

“Daubrecq?”

“Daubrecq.”

Clarisse Mergy put her hands together to hide the blushes on her
forehead. She continued, in her tired voice:

“Daubrecq had taken his revenge. On the day after my husband turned our
unhappy child out of the house, Daubrecq sent us a most cynical letter
in which he revealed the odious part which he had played and the
machinations by which he had succeeded in depraving our son. And he
went on to say, ‘The reformatory, one of these days... Later on, the
assize-court ... And then, let us hope and trust, the scaffold!’”

Lupin exclaimed:

“What! Did Daubrecq plot the present business?”

“No, no, that is only an accident. The hateful prophecy was just a wish
which he expressed. But oh, how it terrified me! I was ailing at the
time; my other son, my little Jacques, had just been born. And every
day we heard of some fresh misdeed of Gilbert’s--forgeries, swindles--so
much so that we spread the news, in our immediate surroundings, of his
departure for abroad, followed by his death. Life was a misery; and it
became still more so when the political storm burst in which my husband
was to meet his death.”

“What do you mean?”

“A word will be enough: my husband’s name was on the list of the
Twenty-seven.”

“Ah!”

The veil was suddenly lifted from Lupin’s eyes and he saw, as in a
flash of lightning, a whole legion of things which, until then, had been
hidden in the darkness.

Clarisse Mergy continued, in a firmer voice:

“Yes, his name was on it, but by mistake, by a piece of incredible
ill-luck of which he was the victim. It is true that Victorien Mergy
was a member of the committee appointed to consider the question of the
Two-Seas Canal. It is true that he voted with the members who were in
favour of the company’s scheme. He was even paid--yes, I tell you so
plainly and I will mention the sum--he was paid fifteen thousand francs.
But he was paid on behalf of another, of one of his political friends,
a man in whom he had absolute confidence and of whom he was the blind,
unconscious tool. He thought he was showing his friend a kindness; and
it proved his own undoing. It was not until the day after the suicide of
the chairman of the company and the disappearance of the secretary, the
day on which the affair of the canal was published in the papers, with
its whole series of swindles and abominations, that my husband knew
that a number of his fellow-members had been bribed and learnt that the
mysterious list, of which people suddenly began to speak, mentioned
his name with theirs and with the names of other deputies, leaders of
parties and influential politicians. Oh, what awful days those were!
Would the list be published? Would his name come out? The torture of it!
You remember the mad excitement in the Chamber, the atmosphere of terror
and denunciation that prevailed. Who owned the list? Nobody could
say. It was known to be in existence and that was all. Two names were
sacrificed to public odium. Two men were swept away by the storm. And it
remained unknown where the denunciation came from and in whose hands the
incriminating documents were.”

“Daubrecq,” suggested Lupin.

“No, no!” cried Madame Mergy. “Daubrecq was nothing at that time: he had
not yet appeared upon the scene. No, don’t you remember, the truth came
out suddenly through the very man who was keeping it back: Germineaux,
the ex-minister of justice, a cousin of the chairman of the Canal
Company. As he lay dying of consumption, he wrote from his sick-bed to
the prefect of police, bequeathing him that list of names, which, he
said, would be found, after his death, in an iron chest in the corner of
his room. The house was surrounded by police and the prefect took up
his quarters by the sick man’s bedside. Germineaux died. The chest was
opened and found to be empty.”

“Daubrecq, this time,” Lupin declared.

“Yes, Daubrecq,” said Madame Mergy, whose excitement was momentarily
increasing. “Alexis Daubrecq, who, for six months, disguised beyond
recognition, had acted as Germineaux’s secretary. It does not matter
how he discovered that Germineaux was the possessor of the paper in
question. The fact remains that he broke open the chest on the night
before the death. So much was proved at the inquiry; and Daubrecq’s
identity was established.”

“But he was not arrested?”

“What would have been the use? They knew well enough that he must have
deposited the list in a place of safety. His arrest would have involved
a scandal, the reopening of the whole case...”

“So...”

“So they made terms.”

Lupin laughed:

“That’s funny, making terms with Daubrecq!”

“Yes, very funny,” said Madame Mergy, bitterly. “During this time he
acted and without delay, shamelessly, making straight for the goal. A
week after the theft, he went to the Chamber of Deputies, asked for my
husband and bluntly demanded thirty thousand francs of him, to be paid
within twenty-four hours. If not, he threatened him with exposure and
disgrace. My husband knew the man he was dealing with, knew him to be
implacable and filled with relentless hatred. He lost his head and shot
himself.”

“How absurd!” Lupin could not help saying. “How absurd! Daubrecq
possesses a list of twenty-seven names. To give up any one of those
names he is obliged, if he would have his accusation believed, to
publish the list itself--that is to say, to part with the document, or
at least a photograph of it. Well, in so doing, he creates a scandal, it
is true, but he deprives himself, at the same time, of all further means
of levying blackmail.”

“Yes and no,” she said.

“How do you know?”

“Through Daubrecq himself. The villain came to see me and cynically
told me of his interview with my husband and the words that had passed
between them. Well, there is more than that list, more than that famous
bit of paper on which the secretary put down the names and the amounts
paid and to which, you will remember, the chairman of the company,
before dying, affixed his signature in letters of blood. There is more
than that. There are certain less positive proofs, which the people
interested do not know of: the correspondence between the chairman
and the secretary, between the chairman and his counsel, and so on. Of
course, the list scribbled on the bit of paper is the only evidence
that counts; it is the one incontestable proof which it would be no good
copying or even photographing, for its genuineness can be tested most
absolutely. But, all the same, the other proofs are dangerous. They
have already been enough to do away with two deputies. And Daubrecq
is marvelously clever at turning this fact to account. He selects
his victim, frightens him out of his senses, points out to him the
inevitable scandal; and the victim pays the required sum. Or else he
kills himself, as my husband did. Do you understand now?”

“Yes,” said Lupin.

And, in the silence that followed, he drew a mental picture of
Daubrecq’s life. He saw him the owner of that list, using his power,
gradually emerging from the shadow, lavishly squandering the money
which he extorted from his victims, securing his election as a
district-councillor and deputy, holding sway by dint of threats
and terror, unpunished, invulnerable, unattackable, feared by the
government, which would rather submit to his orders than declare war
upon him, respected by the judicial authorities: so powerful, in a word,
that Prasville had been appointed secretary-general of police, over the
heads of all who had prior claims, for the sole reason that he hated
Daubrecq with a personal hatred.

“And you saw him again?” he asked.

“I saw him again. I had to. My husband was dead, but his honour remained
untouched. Nobody suspected the truth. In order at least to defend the
name which he left me, I accepted my first interview with Daubrecq.”

“Your first, yes, for there have been others.”

“Many others,” she said, in a strained voice, “yes, many others... at
the theatre... or in the evening, at Enghien... or else in Paris, at
night ... for I was ashamed to meet that man and I did not want people
to know it... But it was necessary... A duty more imperative than any
other commanded it: the duty of avenging my husband...”

She bent over Lupin and, eagerly:

“Yes, revenge has been the motive of my conduct and the sole
preoccupation of my life. To avenge my husband, to avenge my ruined son,
to avenge myself for all the harm that he has done me: I had no other
dream, no other object in life. That is what I wanted: to see that man
crushed, reduced to poverty, to tears--as though he still knew how to
cry!--sobbing in the throes of despair...”

“You wanted his death,” said Lupin, remembering the scene between them
in Daubrecq’s study.

“No, not his death. I have often thought of it, I have even raised my
arm to strike him, but what would have been the good? He must have taken
his precautions. The paper would remain. And then there is no revenge
in killing a man... My hatred went further than that... It demanded his
ruin, his downfall; and, to achieve that, there was but one way: to cut
his claws. Daubrecq, deprived of the document that gives him his immense
power, ceases to exist. It means immediate bankruptcy and disaster...
under the most wretched conditions. That is what I have sought.”

“But Daubrecq must have been aware of your intentions?”

“Certainly. And, I assure you, those were strange meetings of ours: I
watching him closely, trying to guess his secret behind his actions and
his words, and he... he...”

“And he,” said Lupin, finishing Clarisse’s thought, “lying in wait for
the prey which he desires... for the woman whom he has never ceased to
love... whom he loves... and whom he covets with all his might and with
all his furious passion...”

She lowered her head and said, simply:

“Yes.”

A strange duel indeed was that which brought face to face those two
beings separated by so many implacable things! How unbridled must
Daubrecq’s passion be for him to risk that perpetual threat of death and
to introduce to the privacy of his house this woman whose life he had
shattered! But also how absolutely safe he must feel himself!

“And your search ended... how?” asked Lupin.

“My search,” she replied, “long remained without fruit. You know the
methods of investigation which you have followed and which the police
have followed on their side. Well, I myself employed them, years before
either of you did, and in vain. I was beginning to despair. Then, one
day, when I had gone to see Daubrecq in his villa at Enghien, I picked
up under his writing-table a letter which he had begun to write,
crumpled up and thrown into the waste-paper-basket. It consisted of
a few lines in bad English; and I was able to read this: ‘Empty
the crystal within, so as to leave a void which it is impossible to
suspect.’ Perhaps I should not have attached to this sentence all the
importance which it deserved, if Daubrecq, who was out in the garden,
had not come running in and begun to turn out the waste-paper-basket,
with an eagerness which was very significant. He gave me a suspicious
look: ‘There was a letter there,’ he said. I pretended not to
understand. He did not insist, but his agitation did not escape me; and
I continued my quest in this direction. A month later, I discovered,
among the ashes in the drawing-room fireplace, the torn half of an
English invoice. I gathered that a Stourbridge glass-blower, of the name
of John Howard, had supplied Daubrecq with a crystal bottle made after a
model. The word ‘crystal’ struck me at once. I went to Stourbridge, got
round the foreman of the glass-works and learnt that the stopper of this
bottle had been hollowed out inside, in accordance with the instruction
in the order, so as to leave a cavity, the existence of which would
escape observation.”

Lupin nodded his head:

“The thing tallies beyond a doubt. Nevertheless, it did not seem to me,
that, even under the gilt layer... And then the hiding-place would be
very tiny!”

“Tiny, but large enough,” she said. “On my return from England, I went
to the police-office to see Prasville, whose friendship for me had
remained unchanged. I did not hesitate to tell him, first, the reasons
which had driven my husband to suicide and, secondly, the object of
revenge which I was pursuing. When I informed him of my discoveries, he
jumped for joy; and I felt that his hatred for Daubrecq was as strong
as ever. I learnt from him that the list was written on a slip of
exceedingly thin foreign-post-paper, which, when rolled up into a sort
of pellet, would easily fit into an exceedingly limited space. Neither
he nor I had the least hesitation. We knew the hiding-place. We agreed
to act independently of each other, while continuing to correspond in
secret. I put him in touch with Clemence, the portress in the Square
Lamartine, who was entirely devoted to me...”

“But less so to Prasville,” said Lupin, “for I can prove that she
betrays him.”

“Now perhaps, but not at the start; and the police searches were
numerous. It was at that time, ten months ago, that Gilbert came into my
life again. A mother never loses her love for her son, whatever he may
do, whatever he may have done. And then Gilbert has such a way with
him... well, you know him. He cried, kissed my little Jacques, his
brother and I forgave him.”

She stopped and, weary-voiced, with her eyes fixed on the floor,
continued:

“Would to Heaven that I had not forgiven him! Ah, if that hour could but
return, how readily I should find the horrible courage to turn him away!
My poor child... it was I who ruined him!...” And, pensively, “I should
have had that or any sort of courage, if he had been as I pictured him
to myself and as he himself told me that he had long been: bearing the
marks of vice and dissipation, coarse, deteriorated.

“But, though he was utterly changed in appearance, so much so that I
could hardly recognize him, there was, from the point of view of--how
shall I put it?--from the moral point of view, an undoubted improvement.
You had helped him, lifted him; and, though his mode of life was hateful
to me, nevertheless he retained a certain self-respect... a sort of
underlying decency that showed itself on the surface once more... He was
gay, careless, happy... And he used to talk of you with such affection!”

She picked her words, betraying her embarrassment, not daring, in
Lupin’s presence, to condemn the line of life which Gilbert had selected
and yet unable to speak in favour of it.

“What happened next?” asked Lupin.

“I saw him very often. He would come to me by stealth, or else I went
to him and we would go for walks in the country. In this way, I was
gradually induced to tell him our story, of his father’s suicide and
the object which I was pursuing. He at once took fire. He too wanted
to avenge his father and, by stealing the crystal stopper, to avenge
himself on Daubrecq for the harm which he had done him. His first
idea--from which, I am bound to tell you, he never swerved--was to
arrange with you.”

“Well, then,” cried Lupin, “he ought to have...!”

“Yes, I know... and I was of the same opinion. Unfortunately, my poor
Gilbert--you know how weak he is!--was under the influence of one of his
comrades.”

“Vaucheray?”

“Yes, Vaucheray, a saturnine spirit, full of bitterness and envy, an
ambitious, unscrupulous, gloomy, crafty man, who had acquired a great
empire over my son. Gilbert made the mistake of confiding in him and
asking his advice. That was the origin of all the mischief. Vaucheray
convinced him and convinced me as well that it would be better if we
acted by ourselves. He studied the business, took the lead and finally
organized the Enghien expedition and, under your direction, the burglary
at the Villa Marie-Therese, which Prasville and his detectives had been
unable to search thoroughly, because of the active watch maintained by
Leonard the valet. It was a mad scheme. We ought either to have trusted
in your experience entirely, or else to have left you out altogether,
taking the risk of fatal mistakes and dangerous hesitations. But we
could not help ourselves. Vaucheray ruled us. I agreed to meet Daubrecq
at the theatre. During this time the thing took place. When I came
home, at twelve o’clock at night, I heard the terrible result: Leonard
murdered, my son arrested. I at once received an intuition of the
future. Daubrecq’s appalling prophecy was being realized: it meant trial
and sentence. And this through my fault, through the fault of me, the
mother, who had driven my son toward the abyss from which nothing could
extricate him now.”

Clarisse wrung her hands and shivered from head to foot. What suffering
can compare with that of a mother trembling for the head of her son?
Stirred with pity, Lupin said:

“We shall save him. Of that there is not the shadow of a doubt. But,
it is necessary that I should know all the details. Finish your story,
please. How did you know, on the same night, what had happened at
Enghien?”

She mastered herself and, with a face wrung with fevered anguish,
replied:

“Through two of your accomplices, or rather two accomplices of
Vaucheray, to whom they were wholly devoted and who had chosen them to
row the boats.”

“The two men outside: the Growler and the Masher?”

“Yes. On your return from the villa, when you landed after being pursued
on the lake by the commissary of police, you said a few words to them,
by way of explanation, as you went to your car. Mad with fright, they
rushed to my place, where they had been before, and told me the hideous
news. Gilbert was in prison! Oh, what an awful night! What was I to do?
Look for you? Certainly; and implore your assistance. But where was I to
find you?... It was then that the two whom you call the Growler and the
Masher, driven into a corner by circumstances, decided to tell me of the
part played by Vaucheray, his ambitions, his plan, which had long been
ripening...”

“To get rid of me, I suppose?” said Lupin, with a grin.

“Yes. As Gilbert possessed your complete confidence, Vaucheray watched
him and, in this way, got to know all the places which you live at. A
few days more and, owning the crystal stopper, holding the list of the
Twenty-seven, inheriting all Daubrecq’s power, he would have delivered
you to the police, without compromising a single member of your gang,
which he looked upon as thenceforth his.”

“The ass!” muttered Lupin. “A muddler like that!” And he added, “So the
panels of the doors...”

“Were cut out by his instructions, in anticipation of the contest on
which he was embarking against you and against Daubrecq, at whose house
he did the same thing. He had under his orders a sort of acrobat,
an extraordinarily thin dwarf, who was able to wriggle through those
apertures and who thus detected all your correspondence and all
your secrets. That is what his two friends revealed to me. I at once
conceived the idea of saving my elder son by making use of his brother,
my little Jacques, who is himself so slight and so intelligent,
so plucky, as you have seen. We set out that night. Acting on the
information of my companions, I went to Gilbert’s rooms and found the
keys of your flat in the Rue Matignon, where it appeared that you were
to sleep. Unfortunately, I changed my mind on the way and thought much
less of asking for your help than of recovering the crystal stopper,
which, if it had been discovered at Enghien, must obviously be at
your flat. I was right in my calculations. In a few minutes, my little
Jacques, who had slipped into your bedroom, brought it to me. I went
away quivering with hope. Mistress in my turn of the talisman, keeping
it to myself, without telling Prasville, I had absolute power over
Daubrecq. I could make him do all that I wanted; he would become
the slave of my will and, instructed by me, would take every step in
Gilbert’s favour and obtain that he should be given the means of escape
or else that he should not be sentenced. It meant my boy’s safety.”

“Well?”

Clarisse rose from her seat, with a passionate movement of her whole
being, leant over Lupin and said, in a hollow voice:

“There was nothing in that piece of crystal, nothing, do you understand?
No paper, no hiding-place! The whole expedition to Enghien was futile!
The murder of Leonard was useless! The arrest of my son was useless! All
my efforts were useless!”

“But why? Why?”

“Why? Because what you stole from Daubrecq was not the stopper made by
his instructions, but the stopper which was sent to John Howard, the
Stourbridge glassworker, to serve as a model.”

If Lupin had not been in the presence of so deep a grief, he could not
have refrained from one of those satirical outbursts with which the
mischievous tricks of fate are wont to inspire him. As it was, he
muttered between his teeth:

“How stupid! And still more stupid as Daubrecq had been given the
warning.”

“No,” she said. “I went to Enghien on the same day. In all that business
Daubrecq saw and sees nothing but an ordinary burglary, an annexation of
his treasures. The fact that you took part in it put him off the scent.”

“Still, the disappearance of the stopper...”

“To begin with, the thing can have had but a secondary importance for
him, as it is only the model.”

“How do you know?”

“There is a scratch at the bottom of the stem; and I have made inquiries
in England since.”

“Very well; but why did the key of the cupboard from which it was stolen
never leave the man-servant’s possession? And why, in the second place,
was it found afterward in the drawer of a table in Daubrecq’s house in
Paris?”

“Of course, Daubrecq takes care of it and clings to it in the way in
which one clings to the model of any valuable thing. And that is why I
replaced the stopper in the cupboard before its absence was noticed. And
that also is why, on the second occasion, I made my little Jacques take
the stopper from your overcoat-pocket and told the portress to put it
back in the drawer.”

“Then he suspects nothing?”

“Nothing. He knows that the list is being looked for, but he does not
know that Prasville and I are aware of the thing in which he hides it.”

Lupin had risen from his seat and was walking up and down the room,
thinking. Then he stood still beside Clarisse and asked:

“When all is said, since the Enghien incident, you have not advanced a
single step?”

“Not one. I have acted from day to day, led by those two men or leading
them, without any definite plan.”

“Or, at least,” he said, “without any other plan than that of getting
the list of the Twenty-seven from Daubrecq.”

“Yes, but how? Besides, your tactics made things more difficult for
me. It did not take us long to recognize your old servant Victoire in
Daubrecq’s new cook and to discover, from what the portress told us,
that Victoire was putting you up in her room; and I was afraid of your
schemes.”

“It was you, was it not, who wrote to me to retire from the contest?”

“Yes.”

“You also asked me not to go to the theatre on the Vaudeville night?”

“Yes, the portress caught Victoire listening to Daubrecq’s conversation
with me on the telephone; and the Masher, who was watching the house,
saw you go out. I suspected, therefore, that you would follow Daubrecq
that evening.”

“And the woman who came here, late one afternoon...”

“Was myself. I felt disheartened and wanted to see you.”

“And you intercepted Gilbert’s letter?”

“Yes, I recognized his writing on the envelope.”

“But your little Jacques was not with you?”

“No, he was outside, in a motor-car, with the Masher, who lifted him up
to me through the drawing-room window; and he slipped into your bedroom
through the opening in the panel.”

“What was in the letter?”

“As ill-luck would have it, reproaches. Gilbert accused you of forsaking
him, of taking over the business on your own account. In short, it
confirmed me in my distrust; and I ran away.”

Lupin shrugged his shoulders with irritation:

“What a shocking waste of time! And what a fatality that we were not
able to come to an understanding earlier! You and I have been playing at
hide-and-seek, laying absurd traps for each other, while the days were
passing, precious days beyond repair.”

“You see, you see,” she said, shivering, “you too are afraid of the
future!”

“No, I am not afraid,” cried Lupin. “But I am thinking of all the useful
work that we could have done by this time, if we had united our efforts.
I am thinking of all the mistakes and all the acts of imprudence
which we should have been saved, if we had been working together. I am
thinking that your attempt to-night to search the clothes which Daubrecq
was wearing was as vain as the others and that, at this moment, thanks
to our foolish duel, thanks to the din which we raised in his house,
Daubrecq is warned and will be more on his guard than ever.”

Clarisse Mergy shook her head:

“No, no, I don’t think that; the noise will not have roused him, for we
postponed the attempt for twenty-four hours so that the portress might
put a narcotic in his wine.” And she added, slowly, “And then, you see,
nothing can make Daubrecq be more on his guard than he is already. His
life is nothing but one mass of precautions against danger. He leaves
nothing to chance... Besides, has he not all the trumps in his hand?”

Lupin went up to her and asked:

“What do you mean to convey? According to you, is there nothing to hope
for on that side? Is there not a single means of attaining our end?”

“Yes,” she murmured, “there is one, one only...”

He noticed her pallor before she had time to hide her face between her
hands again. And again a feverish shiver shook her frame.

He seemed to understand the reason of her dismay; and, bending toward
her, touched by her grief:

“Please,” he said, “please answer me openly and frankly. It’s for
Gilbert’s sake, is it not? Though the police, fortunately, have not
been able to solve the riddle of his past, though the real name of
Vaucheray’s accomplice has not leaked out, there is one man, at least,
who knows it: isn’t that so? Daubrecq has recognized your son Antoine,
through the alias of Gilbert, has he not?”

“Yes, yes...”

“And he promises to save him, doesn’t he? He offers you his freedom, his
release, his escape, his life: that was what he offered you, was it not,
on the night in his study, when you tried to stab him?”

“Yes... yes... that was it...”

“And he makes one condition, does he not? An abominable condition, such
as would suggest itself to a wretch like that? I am right, am I not?”

Clarisse did not reply. She seemed exhausted by her protracted struggle
with a man who was gaining ground daily and against whom it was
impossible for her to fight. Lupin saw in her the prey conquered in
advance, delivered to the victor’s whim. Clarisse Mergy, the loving wife
of that Mergy whom Daubrecq had really murdered, the terrified mother of
that Gilbert whom Daubrecq had led astray, Clarisse Mergy, to save her
son from the scaffold, must, come what may and however ignominious the
position, yield to Daubrecq’s wishes. She would be the mistress,
the wife, the obedient slave of Daubrecq, of that monster with the
appearance and the ways of a wild beast, that unspeakable person of whom
Lupin could not think without revulsion and disgust.

Sitting down beside her, gently, with gestures of pity, he made her lift
her head and, with his eyes on hers, said:

“Listen to me. I swear that I will save your son: I swear it... Your son
shall not die, do you understand?... There is not a power on earth that
can allow your son’s head to be touched as long as I am alive.”

“I believe you... I trust your word.”

“Do. It is the word of a man who does not know defeat. I shall succeed.
Only, I entreat you to make me an irrevocable promise.”

“What is that?”

“You must not see Daubrecq again.”

“I swear it.”

“You must put from your mind any idea, any fear, however obscure, of an
understanding between yourself and him... of any sort of bargain...”

“I swear it.”

She looked at him with an expression of absolute security and reliance;
and he, under her gaze, felt the joy of devotion and an ardent longing
to restore that woman’s happiness, or, at least, to give her the peace
and oblivion that heal the worst wounds:

“Come,” he said, in a cheerful tone, rising from his chair, “all will
yet be well. We have two months, three months before us. It is more than
I need... on condition, of course, that I am unhampered in my movements.
And, for that, you will have to withdraw from the contest, you know.”

“How do you mean?”

“Yes, you must disappear for a time; go and live in the country. Have
you no pity for your little Jacques? This sort of thing would end by
shattering the poor little man’s nerves... And he has certainly earned
his rest, haven’t you, Hercules?”

The next day Clarisse Mergy, who was nearly breaking down under the
strain of events and who herself needed repose, lest she should fall
seriously ill, went, with her son, to board with a friend who had a
house on the skirt of the Forest of Saint-Germain. She felt very weak,
her brain was haunted by visions and her nerves were upset by troubles
which the least excitement aggravated. She lived there for some days
in a state of physical and mental inertia, thinking of nothing and
forbidden to see the papers.

One afternoon, while Lupin, changing his tactics, was working out a
scheme for kidnapping and confining Daubrecq; while the Growler and the
Masher, whom he had promised to forgive if he succeeded, were watching
the enemy’s movements; while the newspapers were announcing the
forthcoming trial for murder of Arsene Lupin’s two accomplices, one
afternoon, at four o’clock, the telephone-bell rang suddenly in the flat
in the Rue Chateaubriand.

Lupin took down the receiver:

“Hullo!”

A woman’s voice, a breathless voice, said:

“M. Michel Beaumont?”

“You are speaking to him, madame. To whom have I the honour...”

“Quick, monsieur, come at once; Madame Mergy has taken poison.”

Lupin did not wait to hear details. He rushed out, sprang into his
motor-car and drove to Saint-Germain.

Clarisse’s friend was waiting for him at the door of the bedroom.

“Dead?” he asked.

“No,” she replied, “she did not take sufficient. The doctor has just
gone. He says she will get over it.”

“And why did she make the attempt?”

“Her son Jacques has disappeared.”

“Carried off?”

“Yes, he was playing just inside the forest. A motor-car was seen
pulling up. Then there were screams. Clarisse tried to run, but her
strength failed and she fell to the ground, moaning, ‘It’s he... it’s
that man... all is lost!’ She looked like a madwoman.”

“Suddenly, she put a little bottle to her lips and swallowed the
contents.”

“What happened next?”

“My husband and I carried her to her room. She was in great pain.”

“How did you know my address, my name?”

“From herself, while the doctor was attending to her. Then I telephoned
to you.”

“Has any one else been told?”

“No, nobody. I know that Clarisse has had terrible things to bear... and
that she prefers not to be talked about.”

“Can I see her?”

“She is asleep just now. And the doctor has forbidden all excitement.”

“Is the doctor anxious about her?”

“He is afraid of a fit of fever, any nervous strain, an attack of some
kind which might cause her to make a fresh attempt on her life. And that
would be...”

“What is needed to avoid it?”

“A week or a fortnight of absolute quiet, which is impossible as long as
her little Jacques...”

Lupin interrupted her:

“You think that, if she got her son back...”

“Oh, certainly, there would be nothing more to fear!”

“You’re sure? You’re sure?... Yes, of course you are!... Well, when
Madame Mergy wakes, tell her from me that I will bring her back her son
this evening, before midnight. This evening, before midnight: it’s a
solemn promise.”

With these words, Lupin hurried out of the house and, stepping into his
car, shouted to the driver:

“Go to Paris, Square Lamartine, Daubrecq the deputy’s!”



CHAPTER VI. THE DEATH-SENTENCE

Lupin’s motor-car was not only an office, a writing-room furnished
with books, stationery, pens and ink, but also a regular actor’s
dressing-room, containing a complete make-up box, a trunk filled
with every variety of wearing-apparel, another crammed with
“properties”--umbrellas, walking-sticks, scarves, eye-glasses and so
on--in short, a complete set of paraphernalia which enabled him to alter
his appearance from top to toe in the course of a drive.

The man who rang at Daubrecq the deputy’s gate, at six o-clock that
evening, was a stout, elderly gentleman, in a black frock-coat, a bowler
hat, spectacles and whiskers.

The portress took him to the front-door of the house and rang the bell.
Victoire appeared.

Lupin asked:

“Can M. Daubrecq see Dr. Vernes?”

“M. Daubrecq is in his bedroom; and it is rather late...”

“Give him my card, please.”

He wrote the words, “From Mme. Mergy,” in the margin and added:

“There, he is sure to see me.”

“But...” Victoire began.

“Oh, drop your buts, old dear, do as I say, and don’t make such a fuss
about it!”

She was utterly taken aback and stammered:

“You!... is it you?”

“No, it’s Louis XIV!” And, pushing her into a corner of the hall,
“Listen... The moment I’m done with him, go up to your room, put your
things together anyhow and clear out.”

“What!”

“Do as I tell you. You’ll find my car waiting down the avenue. Come,
stir your stumps! Announce me. I’ll wait in the study.”

“But it’s dark in there.”

“Turn on the light.”

She switched on the electric light and left Lupin alone.

“It’s here,” he reflected, as he took a seat, “it’s here that the
crystal stopper lives... Unless Daubrecq always keeps it by him... But
no, when people have a good hiding-place, they make use of it. And this
is a capital one; for none of us... so far...”

Concentrating all his attention, he examined the objects in the room;
and he remembered the note which Daubrecq wrote to Prasville:

 “Within reach of your hand, my dear Prasville!...
  You touched it!  A little more and the trick was done...”

Nothing seemed to have moved since that day. The same things were lying
about on the desk: books, account-books, a bottle of ink, a stamp-box,
pipes, tobacco, things that had been searched and probed over and over
again.

“The bounder!” thought Lupin. “He’s organized his business jolly
cleverly. It’s all dove-tailed like a well-made play.”

In his heart of hearts, though he knew exactly what he had come to do
and how he meant to act, Lupin was thoroughly aware of the danger and
uncertainty attending his visit to so powerful an adversary. It was
quite within the bounds of possibility that Daubrecq, armed as he was,
would remain master of the field and that the conversation would take an
absolutely different turn from that which Lupin anticipated.

And this prospect angered him somewhat.

He drew himself up, as he heard a sound of footsteps approaching.

Daubrecq entered.

He entered without a word, made a sign to Lupin, who had risen from
his chair, to resume his seat and himself sat down at the writing-desk.
Glancing at the card which he held in his hand:

“Dr. Vernes?”

“Yes, monsieur le depute, Dr. Vernes, of Saint-Germain.”

“And I see that you come from Mme. Mergy. A patient of yours?”

“A recent patient. I did not know her until I was called in to see her,
the other day, in particularly tragic circumstances.”

“Is she ill?”

“Mme. Mergy has taken poison.”

“What!”

Daubrecq gave a start and he continued, without concealing his distress:

“What’s that you say? Poison! Is she dead?”

“No, the dose was not large enough. If no complications ensue, I
consider that Mme. Mergy’s life is saved.”

Daubrecq said nothing and sat silent, with his head turned to Lupin.

“Is he looking at me? Are his eyes open or shut?” Lupin asked himself.

It worried Lupin terribly not to see his adversary’s eyes, those eyes
hidden by the double obstacle of spectacles and black glasses: weak,
bloodshot eyes, Mme. Mergy had told him. How could he follow the secret
train of the man’s thought without seeing the expression of his face? It
was almost like fighting an enemy who wielded an invisible sword.

Presently, Daubrecq spoke:

“So Mme. Mergy’s life is saved... And she has sent you to me... I don’t
quite understand... I hardly know the lady.”

“Now for the ticklish moment,” thought Lupin. “Have at him!”

And, in a genial, good-natured and rather shy tone, he said:

“No, monsieur le depute, there are cases in which a doctor’s duty
becomes very complex... very puzzling... And you may think that, in
taking this step... However, to cut a long story short, while I was
attending Mme. Mergy, she made a second attempt to poison herself...
Yes; the bottle, unfortunately, had been left within her reach. I
snatched it from her. We had a struggle. And, railing in her fever, she
said to me, in broken words, ‘He’s the man... He’s the man... Daubrecq
the deputy... Make him give me back my son. Tell him to... or else
I would rather die... Yes, now, to-night... I would rather die.’
That’s what she said, monsieur le depute... So I thought that I ought
to let you know. It is quite certain that, in the lady’s highly nervous
state of mind... Of course, I don’t know the exact meaning of her
words... I asked no questions of anybody... obeyed a spontaneous impulse
and came straight to you.”

Daubrecq reflected for a little while and said:

“It amounts to this, doctor, that you have come to ask me if I know the
whereabouts of this child whom I presume to have disappeared. Is that
it?”

“Yes.”

“And, if I did happen to know, you would take him back to his mother?”

There was a longer pause. Lupin asked himself:

“Can he by chance have swallowed the story? Is the threat of that death
enough? Oh, nonsense it’s out of the question!... And yet... and yet...
he seems to be hesitating.”

“Will you excuse me?” asked Daubrecq, drawing the telephone, on his
writing-desk, toward him. “I have an urgent message.”

“Certainly, monsieur le depute.”

Daubrecq called out:

“Hullo!... 822.19, please, 822.19.”

Having repeated the number, he sat without moving.

Lupin smiled:

“The headquarters of police, isn’t it? The secretary-general’s
office...”

“Yes, doctor... How do you know?”

“Oh, as a divisional surgeon, I sometimes have to ring them up.”

And, within himself, Lupin asked:

“What the devil does all this mean? The secretary-general is
Prasville... Then, what?...”

Daubrecq put both receivers to his ears and said:

“Are you 822.19? I want to speak to M. Prasville, the secretary-general
... Do you say he’s not there?... Yes, yes, he is: he’s always in his
office at this time... Tell him it’s M. Daubrecq... M. Daubrecq the
deputy... a most important communication.”

“Perhaps I’m in the way?” Lupin suggested.

“Not at all, doctor, not at all,” said Daubrecq. “Besides, what I have
to say has a certain bearing on your errand.” And, into the telephone,
“Hullo! M. Prasville?... Ah, it’s you, Prasville, old cock!... Why, you
seem quite staggered! Yes, you’re right, it’s an age since you and I
met. But, after all, we’ve never been far away in thought... And I’ve
had plenty of visits from you and your henchmen... In my absence, it’s
true. Hullo!... What?... Oh, you’re in a hurry? I beg your pardon!...
So am I, for that matter... Well, to come to the point, there’s a little
service I want to do you... Wait, can’t you, you brute?... You won’t
regret it... It concerns your renown... Hullo!... Are you listening?...
Well, take half-a-dozen men with you... plain-clothes detectives, by
preference: you’ll find them at the night-office... Jump into a taxi,
two taxis, and come along here as fast as you can... I’ve got a rare
quarry for you, old chap. One of the upper ten... a lord, a marquis
Napoleon himself... in a word, Arsene Lupin!”

Lupin sprang to his feet. He was prepared for everything but this. Yet
something within him stronger than astonishment, an impulse of his whole
nature, made him say, with a laugh:

“Oh, well done, well done!”

Daubrecq bowed his head, by way of thanks, and muttered:

“I haven’t quite finished... A little patience, if you don’t mind.”
 And he continued, “Hullo! Prasville!... No, no, old chap, I’m not
humbugging... You’ll find Lupin here, with me, in my study... Lupin,
who’s worrying me like the rest of you... Oh, one more or less makes no
difference to me! But, all the same, this one’s a bit too pushing. And
I am appealing to your sense of kindness. Rid me of the fellow, do...
Half-a-dozen of your satellites and the two who are pacing up and down
outside my house will be enough... Oh, while you’re about it, go up
to the third floor and rope in my cook as well... She’s the famous
Victoire: you know, Master Lupin’s old nurse... And, look here, one
more tip, to show you how I love you: send a squad of men to the Rue
Chateaubriand, at the corner of the Rue Balzac... That’s where our
national hero lives, under the name of Michel Beaumont... Do you twig,
old cockalorum? And now to business. Hustle!”

When Daubrecq turned his head, Lupin was standing up, with clenched
fists. His burst of admiration had not survived the rest of the speech
and the revelations which Daubrecq had made about Victoire and the flat
in the Rue Chateaubriand. The humiliation was too great; and Lupin no
longer bothered to play the part of the small general practitioner. He
had but one idea in his head: not to give way to the tremendous fit of
rage that was urging him to rush at Daubrecq like a bull.

Daubrecq gave the sort of little cluck which, with him, did duty for a
laugh. He came waddling up, with his hands in his trouser-pockets, and
said, incisively:

“Don’t you think that this is all for the best? I’ve cleared the ground,
relieved the situation... At least, we now know where we stand. Lupin
versus Daubrecq; and that’s all about it. Besides, think of the time
saved! Dr. Vernes, the divisional surgeon, would have taken two hours to
spin his yarn! Whereas, like this, Master Lupin will be compelled to
get his little story told in thirty minutes... unless he wants to get
himself collared and his accomplices nabbed. What a shock! What a bolt
from the blue! Thirty minutes and not a minute more. In thirty minutes
from now, you’ll have to clear out, scud away like a hare and beat a
disordered retreat. Ha, ha, ha, what fun! I say, Polonius, you really
are unlucky, each time you come up against Bibi Daubrecq! For it was
you who were hiding behind that curtain, wasn’t it, my ill-starred
Polonius?”

Lupin did not stir a muscle. The one and only solution that would have
calmed his feelings, that is to say, for him to throttle his adversary
then and there, was so absurd that he preferred to accept Daubrecq’s
gibes without attempting to retort, though each of them cut him like the
lash of a whip. It was the second time, in the same room and in similar
circumstances, that he had to bow before that Daubrecq of misfortune and
maintain the most ridiculous attitude in silence. And he felt convinced
in his innermost being that, if he opened his mouth, it would be to spit
words of anger and insult in his victor’s face. What was the good? Was
it not essential that he should keep cool and do the things which the
new situation called for?

“Well, M. Lupin, well?” resumed the deputy. “You look as if your nose
were out of joint. Come, console yourself and admit that one sometimes
comes across a joker who’s not quite such a mug as his fellows. So you
thought that, because I wear spectacles and eye-glasses, I was blind?
Bless my soul, I don’t say that I at once suspected Lupin behind
Polonius and Polonius behind the gentleman who came and bored me in the
box at the Vaudeville. No, no! But, all the same, it worried me. I could
see that, between the police and Mme. Mergy, there was a third bounder
trying to get a finger in the pie. And, gradually, what with the words
let fall by the portress, what with watching the movements of my
cook and making inquiries about her in the proper quarter, I began to
understand. Then, the other night, came the lightning-flash. I heard the
row in the house, in spite of my being asleep. I managed to reconstruct
the incident, to follow up Mme. Mergy’s traces, first, to the Rue
Chateaubriand and, afterward, to Saint-Germain... And then... what
then? I put different facts together: the Enghien burglary... Gilbert’s
arrest... the inevitable treaty of alliance between the weeping mother
and the leader of the gang... the old nurse installed as cook...
all these people entering my house through the doors or through the
windows... And I knew what I had to do. Master Lupin was sniffing at the
secret. The scent of the Twenty-seven attracted him. I had only to wait
for his visit. The hour has arrived. Good-evening, Master Lupin.”

Daubrecq paused. He had delivered his speech with the evident
satisfaction of a man entitled to claim the appreciation of the most
captious critics.

As Lupin did not speak, he took out his watch: “I say! Only twenty-three
minutes! How time flies! At this rate, we sha’n’t have time to come to
an explanation.” And, stepping still closer to Lupin, “I’m bound to
say, I’m disappointed. I thought that Lupin was a different sort of
gentleman. So, the moment he meets a more or less serious adversary,
the colossus falls to pieces? Poor young man! Have a glass of water, to
bring you round!” Lupin did not utter a word, did not betray a gesture
of irritation. With absolute composure, with a precision of movement
that showed his perfect self-control and the clear plan of conduct which
he had adopted, he gently pushed Daubrecq aside, went to the table and,
in his turn, took down the receiver of the telephone:

“I want 565.34, please,” he said.

He waited until he was through; and then, speaking in a slow voice and
picking out every syllable, he said:

“Hullo!... Rue Chateaubriand?... Is that you, Achille?... Yes, it’s the
governor. Listen to me carefully, Achille... You must leave the flat!
Hullo!... Yes, at once. The police are coming in a few minutes. No, no,
don’t lose your head... You’ve got time. Only, do what I tell you. Is
your bag still packed?... Good. And is one of the sides empty, as I told
you?... Good. Well, go to my bedroom and stand with your face to the
chimney-piece. Press with your left hand on the little carved rosette in
front of the marble slab, in the middle, and with your right hand on the
top of the mantel-shelf. You’ll see a sort of drawer, with two little
boxes in it. Be careful. One of them contains all our papers; the other,
bank-notes and jewellery. Put them both in the empty compartment of the
bag. Take the bag in your hand and go as fast as you can, on foot, to
the corner of the Avenue Victor-Hugo and the Avenue de Montespan. You’ll
find the car waiting, with Victoire. I’ll join you there... What?... My
clothes? My knickknacks?... Never mind about all that... You be off. See
you presently.”

Lupin quietly pushed away the telephone. Then, taking Daubrecq by the
arm, he made him sit in a chair by his side and said:

“And now listen to me, Daubrecq.”

“Oho!” grinned the deputy. “Calling each other by our surnames, are we?”

“Yes,” said Lupin, “I allowed you to.” And, when Daubrecq released his
arm with a certain misgiving, he said, “No, don’t be afraid. We sha’n’t
come to blows. Neither of us has anything to gain by doing away with the
other. A stab with a knife? What’s the good? No, sir! Words, nothing but
words. Words that strike home, though. Here are mine: they are plain and
to the point. Answer me in the same way, without reflecting: that’s far
better. The boy?”

“I have him.”

“Give him back.”

“No.”

“Mme. Mergy will kill herself.”

“No, she won’t.”

“I tell you she will.”

“And I tell you she will not.”

“But she’s tried to, once.”

“That’s just the reason why she won’t try again.”

“Well, then...”

“No.”

Lupin, after a moment, went on:

“I expected that. Also, I thought, on my way here, that you would hardly
tumble to the story of Dr. Vernes and that I should have to use other
methods.”

“Lupin’s methods.”

“As you say. I had made up my mind to throw off the mask. You pulled it
off for me. Well done you! But that doesn’t change my plans.”

“Speak.”

Lupin took from a pocketbook a double sheet of foolscap paper, unfolded
it and handed it to Daubrecq, saying:

“Here is an exact, detailed inventory, with consecutive numbers, of the
things removed by my friends and myself from your Villa Marie-Therese on
the Lac d’Enghien. As you see, there are one hundred and thirteen items.
Of those one hundred and thirteen items, sixty-eight, which have a red
cross against them, have been sold and sent to America. The remainder,
numbering forty-five, are in my possession... until further orders. They
happen to be the pick of the bunch. I offer you them in return for the
immediate surrender of the child.”

Daubrecq could not suppress a movement of surprise:

“Oho!” he said. “You seem very much bent upon it.”

“Infinitely,” said Lupin, “for I am persuaded that a longer separation
from her son will mean death to Mme. Mergy.”

“And that upsets you, does it... Lothario?”

“What!”

Lupin planted himself in front of the other and repeated:

“What! What do you mean?”

“Nothing... Nothing... Something that crossed my mind... Clarisse Mergy
is a young woman still and a pretty woman at that.”

Lupin shrugged his shoulders:

“You brute!” he mumbled. “You imagine that everybody is like yourself,
heartless and pitiless. It takes your breath away, what, to think that a
shark like me can waste his time playing the Don Quixote? And you wonder
what dirty motive I can have? Don’t try to find out: it’s beyond your
powers of perception. Answer me, instead: do you accept?”

“So you’re serious?” asked Daubrecq, who seemed but little disturbed by
Lupin’s contemptuous tone.

“Absolutely. The forty-five pieces are in a shed, of which I will give
you the address, and they will be handed over to you, if you call there,
at nine o’clock this evening, with the child.”

There was no doubt about Daubrecq’s reply. To him, the kidnapping of
little Jacques had represented only a means of working upon Clarisse
Mergy’s feelings and perhaps also a warning for her to cease the contest
upon which she had engaged. But the threat of a suicide must needs show
Daubrecq that he was on the wrong track. That being so, why refuse the
favourable bargain which Arsene Lupin was now offering him?

“I accept,” he said.

“Here’s the address of my shed: 99, Rue Charles-Lafitte, Neuilly. You
have only to ring the bell.”

“And suppose I send Prasville, the secretary-general, instead?”

“If you send Prasville,” Lupin declared, “the place is so arranged
that I shall see him coming and that I shall have time to escape, after
setting fire to the trusses of hay and straw which surround and conceal
your credence-tables, clocks and Gothic virgins.”

“But your shed will be burnt down...”

“I don’t mind that: the police have their eye on it already. I am
leaving it in any case.”

“And how am I to know that this is not a trap?”

“Begin by receiving the goods and don’t give up the child till
afterward. I trust you, you see.”

“Good,” said Daubrecq; “you’ve foreseen everything. Very well, you shall
have the nipper; the fair Clarisse shall live; and we will all be happy.
And now, if I may give you a word of advice, it is to pack off as fast
as you can.”

“Not yet.”

“Eh?”

“I said, not yet.”

“But you’re mad! Prasville’s on his way!”

“He can wait. I’ve not done.”

“Why, what more do you want? Clarisse shall have her brat. Isn’t that
enough for you?”

“No.”

“Why not?”

“There is another son.”

“Gilbert.”

“Yes.”

“Well?”

“I want you to save Gilbert.”

“What are you saying? I save Gilbert!”

“You can, if you like; it only means taking a little trouble.” Until
that moment Daubrecq had remained quite calm. He now suddenly blazed out
and, striking the table with his fist:

“No,” he cried, “not that! Never! Don’t reckon on me!... No, that would
be too idiotic!”

He walked up and down, in a state of intense excitement, with that queer
step of his, which swayed him from right to left on each of his legs,
like a wild beast, a heavy, clumsy bear. And, with a hoarse voice and
distorted features, he shouted:

“Let her come here! Let her come and beg for her son’s pardon! But let
her come unarmed, not with criminal intentions, like last time! Let
her come as a supplicant, as a tamed woman, as a submissive woman, who
understands and accepts the situation... Gilbert? Gilbert’s sentence?
The scaffold? Why, that is where my strength lies! What! For more than
twenty years have I awaited my hour; and, when that hour strikes, when
fortune brings me this unhoped-for chance, when I am at last about to
know the joy of a full revenge--and such a revenge!--you think that I
will give it up, give up the thing which I have been pursuing for twenty
years? I save Gilbert? I? For nothing? For love? I, Daubrecq?... No, no,
you can’t have studied my features!”

He laughed, with a fierce and hateful laugh. Visibly, he saw before him,
within reach of his hand, the prey which he had been hunting down so
long. And Lupin also summoned up the vision of Clarisse, as he had seen
her several days before, fainting, already beaten, fatally conquered,
because all the hostile powers were in league against her.

He contained himself and said:

“Listen to me.”

And, when Daubrecq moved away impatiently, he took him by the two
shoulders, with that superhuman strength which Daubrecq knew, from
having felt it in the box at the Vaudeville, and, holding him motionless
in his grip, he said:

“One last word.”

“You’re wasting your breath,” growled the deputy.

“One last word. Listen, Daubrecq: forget Mme. Mergy, give up all the
nonsensical and imprudent acts which your pride and your passions are
making you commit; put all that on one side and think only of your
interest...”

“My interest,” said Daubrecq, jestingly, “always coincides with my pride
and with what you call my passions.”

“Up to the present, perhaps. But not now, not now that I have taken a
hand in the business. That constitutes a new factor, which you choose
to ignore. You are wrong. Gilbert is my pal. Gilbert is my chum. Gilbert
has to be saved from the scaffold. Use your influence to that end, and
I swear to you, do you hear, I swear that we will leave you in peace.
Gilbert’s safety, that’s all I ask. You will have no more battles to
wage with Mme. Mergy, with me; there will be no more traps laid for you.
You will be the master, free to act as you please. Gilbert’s safety,
Daubrecq! If you refuse...”

“What then?”

“If you refuse, it will be war, relentless war; in other words, a
certain defeat for you.”

“Meaning thereby...”

“Meaning thereby that I shall take the list of the Twenty-seven from
you.”

“Rot! You think so, do you?”

“I swear it.”

“What Prasville and all his men, what Clarisse Mergy, what nobody has
been able to do, you think that you will do!”

“I shall!”

“And why? By favour of what saint will you succeed where everybody else
has failed? There must be a reason?”

“There is.”

“What is it?”

“My name is Arsene Lupin.”

He had let go of Daubrecq, but held him for a time under the dominion
of his authoritative glance and will. At last, Daubrecq drew himself up,
gave him a couple of sharp taps on the shoulder and, with the same calm,
the same intense obstinacy, said:

“And my name’s Daubrecq. My whole life has been one desperate battle,
one long series of catastrophes and routs in which I spent all my
energies until victory came: complete, decisive, crushing, irrevocable
victory. I have against me the police, the government, France, the
world. What difference do you expect it to make to me if I have M.
Arsene Lupin against me into the bargain? I will go further: the more
numerous and skilful my enemies, the more cautiously I am obliged to
play. And that is why, my dear sir, instead of having you arrested, as
I might have done--yes, as I might have done and very easily--I let you
remain at large and beg charitably to remind you that you must quit in
less than three minutes.”

“Then the answer is no?”

“The answer is no.”

“You won’t do anything for Gilbert?”

“Yes, I shall continue to do what I have been doing since his
arrest--that is to say, to exercise indirect influence with the minister
of justice, so that the trial may be hurried on and end in the way in
which I want to see it end.”

“What!” cried Lupin, beside himself with indignation. “It’s because of
you, it’s for you...”

“Yes, it’s for me, Daubrecq; yes, by Jove! I have a trump card, the
son’s head, and I am playing it. When I have procured a nice little
death-sentence for Gilbert, when the days go by and Gilbert’s petition
for a reprieve is rejected by my good offices, you shall see, M. Lupin,
that his mummy will drop all her objections to calling herself
Mme. Alexis Daubrecq and giving me an unexceptionable pledge of her
good-will. That fortunate issue is inevitable, whether you like it or
not. It is foredoomed. All I can do for you is to invite you to the
wedding and the breakfast. Does that suit you? No? You persist in your
sinister designs? Well, good luck, lay your traps, spread your nets,
rub up your weapons and grind away at the Complete Foreign-post-paper
Burglar’s Handbook. You’ll need it. And now, good-night. The rules of
open-handed and disinterested hospitality demand that I should turn you
out of doors. Hop it!”

Lupin remained silent for some time. With his eyes fixed on Daubrecq, he
seemed to be taking his adversary’s size, gauging his weight, estimating
his physical strength, discussing, in fine, in which exact part to
attack him. Daubrecq clenched his fists and worked out his plan of
defence to meet the attack when it came.

Half a minute passed. Lupin put his hand to his hip-pocket. Daubrecq did
the same and grasped the handle of his revolver.

A few seconds more. Coolly, Lupin produced a little gold box of the kind
that ladies use for holding sweets, opened it and handed it to Daubrecq:

“A lozenge?”

“What’s that?” asked the other, in surprise.

“Cough-drops.”

“What for?”

“For the draught you’re going to feel!”

And, taking advantage of the momentary fluster into which Daubrecq was
thrown by his sally, he quickly took his hat and slipped away.

“Of course,” he said, as he crossed the hall, “I am knocked into fits.
But all the same, that bit of commercial-traveller’s waggery was rather
novel, in the circumstances. To expect a pill and receive a cough-drop
is by way of being a sort of disappointment. It left the old chimpanzee
quite flummoxed.”

As he closed the gate, a motor-car drove up and a man sprang out
briskly, followed by several others.

Lupin recognized Prasville:

“Monsieur le secretaire-general,” he muttered, “your humble servant. I
have an idea that, some day, fate will bring us face to face: and I
am sorry, for your sake; for you do not inspire me with any particular
esteem and you have a bad time before you, on that day. Meanwhile, if
I were not in such a hurry, I should wait till you leave and I should
follow Daubrecq to find out in whose charge he has placed the child whom
he is going to hand back to me. But I am in a hurry. Besides, I can’t
tell that Daubrecq won’t act by telephone. So let us not waste ourselves
in vain efforts, but rather join Victoire, Achille and our precious
bag.”

Two hours later, Lupin, after taking all his measures, was on the
lookout in his shed at Neuilly and saw Daubrecq turn out of an adjoining
street and walk along with a distrustful air.

Lupin himself opened the double doors:

“Your things are in here, monsieur le depute,” he said. “You can go
round and look. There is a job-master’s yard next door: you have only to
ask for a van and a few men. Where is the child?”

Daubrecq first inspected the articles and then took Lupin to the Avenue
de Neuilly, where two closely veiled old ladies stood waiting with
little Jacques.

Lupin carried the child to his car, where Victoire was waiting for him.

All this was done swiftly, without useless words and as though the parts
had been got by heart and the various movements settled in advance, like
so many stage entrances and exits.

At ten o’clock in the evening Lupin kept his promise and handed little
Jacques to his mother. But the doctor had to be hurriedly called in,
for the child, upset by all those happenings, showed great signs of
excitement and terror. It was more than a fortnight before he was
sufficiently recovered to bear the strain of the removal which Lupin
considered necessary. Mme. Mergy herself was only just fit to travel
when the time came. The journey took place at night, with every possible
precaution and under Lupin’s escort.

He took the mother and son to a little seaside place in Brittany and
entrusted them to Victoire’s care and vigilance.

“At last,” he reflected, when he had seen them settled, “there is no one
between the Daubrecq bird and me. He can do nothing more to Mme. Mergy
and the kid; and she no longer runs the risk of diverting the struggle
through her intervention. By Jingo, we have made blunders enough! First,
I have had to disclose myself to Daubrecq. Secondly, I have had to
surrender my share of the Enghien movables. True, I shall get those
back, sooner or later; of that there is not the least doubt. But, all
the same, we are not getting on; and, in a week from now, Gilbert and
Vaucheray will be up for trial.”

What Lupin felt most in the whole business was Daubrecq’s revelation of
the whereabouts of the flat. The police had entered his place in the
Rue Chateaubriand. The identity of Lupin and Michel Beaumont had been
recognized and certain papers discovered; and Lupin, while pursuing his
aim, while, at the same time, managing various enterprises on which
he had embarked, while avoiding the searches of the police, which were
becoming more zealous and persistent than ever, had to set to work and
reorganize his affairs throughout on a fresh basis.

His rage with Daubrecq, therefore, increased in proportion to the worry
which the deputy caused him. He had but one longing, to pocket him, as
he put it, to have him at his bidding by fair means or foul, to extract
his secret from him. He dreamt of tortures fit to unloose the tongue
of the most silent of men. The boot, the rack, red-hot pincers, nailed
planks: no form of suffering, he thought, was more than the enemy
deserved; and the end to be attained justified every means.

“Oh,” he said to himself, “oh, for a decent bench of inquisitors and a
couple of bold executioners!... What a time we should have!”

Every afternoon the Growler and the Masher watched the road which
Daubrecq took between the Square Lamartine, the Chamber of Deputies and
his club. Their instructions were to choose the most deserted street
and the most favourable moment and, one evening, to hustle him into a
motor-car.

Lupin, on his side, got ready an old building, standing in the middle
of a large garden, not far from Paris, which presented all the necessary
conditions of safety and isolation and which he called the Monkey’s
Cage.

Unfortunately, Daubrecq must have suspected something, for every time,
so to speak, he changed his route, or took the underground or a tram;
and the cage remained unoccupied.

Lupin devised another plan. He sent to Marseilles for one of his
associates, an elderly retired grocer called Brindebois, who happened
to live in Daubrecq’s electoral district and interested himself in
politics. Old Brindebois wrote to Daubrecq from Marseilles, announcing
his visit. Daubrecq gave this important constituent a hearty welcome,
and a dinner was arranged for the following week.

The elector suggested a little restaurant on the left bank of the Seine,
where the food, he said, was something wonderful. Daubrecq accepted.

This was what Lupin wanted. The proprietor of the restaurant was one
of his friends. The attempt, which was to take place on the following
Thursday, was this time bound to succeed.

Meanwhile, on the Monday of the same week, the trial of Gilbert and
Vaucheray opened.

The reader will remember--and the case took place too recently for me to
recapitulate its details--the really incomprehensible partiality which
the presiding judge showed in his cross-examination of Gilbert. The
thing was noticed and severely criticised at the time. Lupin recognized
Daubrecq’s hateful influence.

The attitude observed by the two prisoners differed greatly. Vaucheray
was gloomy, silent, hard-faced. He cynically, in curt, sneering, almost
defiant phrases, admitted the crimes of which he had formerly been
guilty. But, with an inconsistency which puzzled everybody except Lupin,
he denied any participation in the murder of Leonard the valet and
violently accused Gilbert. His object, in thus linking his fate with
Gilbert’s, was to force Lupin to take identical measures for the rescue
of both his accomplices.

Gilbert, on the other hand, whose frank countenance and dreamy,
melancholy eyes won every sympathy, was unable to protect himself
against the traps laid for him by the judge or to counteract Vaucheray’s
lies. He burst into tears, talked too much, or else did not talk when
he should have talked. Moreover, his counsel, one of the Leaders of the
bar, was taken ill at the last moment--and here again Lupin saw the hand
of Daubrecq--and he was replaced by a junior who spoke badly, muddied
the whole case, set the jury against him and failed to wipe out the
impression produced by the speeches of the advocate-general and of
Vaucheray’s counsel.

Lupin, who had the inconceivable audacity to be present on the last day
of the trial, the Thursday, had no doubt as to the result. A verdict of
guilty was certain in both cases.

It was certain because all the efforts of the prosecution, thus
supporting Vaucheray’s tactics, had tended to link the two prisoners
closely together. It was certain, also and above all, because it
concerned two of Lupin’s accomplices. From the opening of the inquiry
before the magistrate until the delivery of the verdict, all the
proceedings had been directed against Lupin; and this in spite of the
fact that the prosecution, for want of sufficient evidence and also in
order not to scatter its efforts over too wide an area, had decided not
to include Lupin in the indictment. He was the adversary aimed at, the
leader who must be punished in the person of his friends, the famous
and popular scoundrel whose fascination in the eyes of the crowd must be
destroyed for good and all. With Gilbert and Vaucheray executed, Lupin’s
halo would fade away and the legend would be exploded.

Lupin... Lupin... Arsene Lupin: it was the one name heard throughout
the four days. The advocate-general, the presiding judge, the jury, the
counsel, the witnesses had no other words on their lips. Every moment,
Lupin was mentioned and cursed at, scoffed at, insulted and held
responsible for all the crimes committed. It was as though Gilbert
and Vaucheray figured only as supernumeraries, while the real criminal
undergoing trial was he, Lupin, Master Lupin, Lupin the burglar, the
leader of a gang of thieves, the forger, the incendiary, the hardened
offender, the ex-convict, Lupin the murderer, Lupin stained with the
blood of his victim, Lupin lurking in the shade, like a coward, after
sending his friends to the foot of the scaffold.

“Oh, the rascals know what they’re about!” he muttered. “It’s my debt
which they are making my poor old Gilbert pay.”

And the terrible tragedy went on.

At seven o’clock in the evening, after a long deliberation, the jury
returned to court and the foreman read out the answers to the questions
put from the bench. The answer was “Yes” to every count of the
indictment, a verdict of guilty without extenuating circumstances.

The prisoners were brought in. Standing up, but staggering and
white-faced, they received their sentence of death.

And, amid the great, solemn silence, in which the anxiety of the
onlookers was mingled with pity, the assize-president asked:

“Have you anything more to say, Vaucheray?”

“Nothing, monsieur le president. Now that my mate is sentenced as well
as myself, I am easy... We are both on the same footing... The governor
must find a way to save the two of us.”

“The governor?”

“Yes, Arsene Lupin.”

There was a laugh among the crowd.

The president asked:

“And you, Gilbert?”

Tears streamed down the poor lad’s cheeks and he stammered a few
inarticulate sentences. But, when the judge repeated his question, he
succeeded in mastering himself and replied, in a trembling voice:

“I wish to say, monsieur le president, that I am guilty of many things,
that’s true... I have done a lot of harm... But, all the same, not this.
No, I have not committed murder... I have never committed murder... And
I don’t want to die... it would be too horrible...”

He swayed from side to side, supported by the warders, and he was heard
to cry, like a child calling for help:

“Governor... save me!... Save me!... I don’t want to die!”

Then, in the crowd, amid the general excitement, a voice rose above the
surrounding clamour:

“Don’t be afraid, little ‘un!... The governor’s here!”

A tumult and hustling followed. The municipal guards and the policemen
rushed into court and laid hold of a big, red-faced man, who was stated
by his neighbours to be the author of that outburst and who struggled
hand and foot.

Questioned without delay, he gave his name, Philippe Bonel, an
undertaker’s man, and declared that some one sitting beside him had
offered him a hundred-franc note if he would consent, at the proper
moment, to shout a few words which his neighbour scribbled on a bit of
paper. How could he refuse?

In proof of his statements, he produced the hundred-franc note and the
scrap of paper.

Philippe Bonel was let go.

Meanwhile, Lupin, who of course had assisted energetically in the
individual’s arrest and handed him over to the guards, left the
law-courts, his heart heavy with anguish. His car was waiting for him on
the quay. He flung himself into it, in despair, seized with so great a
sorrow that he had to make an effort to restrain his tears. Gilbert’s
cry, his voice wrung with affliction, his distorted features, his
tottering frame: all this haunted his brain; and he felt as if he would
never, for a single second, forget those impressions.

He drove home to the new place which he had selected among his different
residences and which occupied a corner of the Place de Clichy. He
expected to find the Growler and the Masher, with whom he was to kidnap
Daubrecq that evening. But he had hardly opened the door of his flat,
when a cry escaped him: Clarisse stood before him; Clarisse, who had
returned from Brittany at the moment of the verdict.

He at once gathered from her attitude and her pallor that she knew. And,
at once, recovering his courage in her presence, without giving her time
to speak, he exclaimed:

“Yes, yes, yes... but it doesn’t matter. We foresaw that. We couldn’t
prevent it. What we have to do is to stop the mischief. And to-night,
you understand, to-night, the thing will be done.”

Motionless and tragic in her sorrow, she stammered:

“To-night?”

“Yes. I have prepared everything. In two hours, Daubrecq will be in my
hands. To-night, whatever means I have to employ, he shall speak.”

“Do you mean that?” she asked, faintly, while a ray of hope began to
light up her face.

“He shall speak. I shall have his secret. I shall tear the list of the
Twenty-seven from him. And that list will set your son free.”

“Too late,” Clarisse murmured.

“Too late? Why? Do you think that, in exchange for such a document, I
shall not obtain Gilbert’s pretended escape?... Why, Gilbert will be at
liberty in three days! In three days...”

He was interrupted by a ring at the bell:

“Listen, here are our friends. Trust me. Remember that I keep my
promises. I gave you back your little Jacques. I shall give you back
Gilbert.”

He went to let the Growler and the Masher in and said:

“Is everything ready? Is old Brindebois at the restaurant? Quick, let us
be off!”

“It’s no use, governor,” replied the Masher.

“No use? What do you mean?”

“There’s news.”

“What news? Speak, man!”

“Daubrecq has disappeared.”

“Eh? What’s that? Daubrecq disappeared?”

“Yes, carried off from his house, in broad daylight.”

“The devil! By whom?”

“Nobody knows... four men... there were pistols fired... The police are
on the spot. Prasville is directing the investigations.”

Lupin did not move a limb. He looked at Clarisse Mergy, who lay huddled
in a chair.

He himself had to bow his head. Daubrecq carried off meant one more
chance of success lost...



CHAPTER VII. THE PROFILE OF NAPOLEON

Soon as the prefect of police, the chief of the criminal-investigation
department and the examining-magistrates had left Daubrecq’s house,
after a preliminary and entirely fruitless inquiry, Prasville resumed
his personal search.

He was examining the study and the traces of the struggle which had
taken place there, when the portress brought him a visiting-card, with a
few words in pencil scribbled upon it.

“Show the lady in,” he said.

“The lady has some one with her,” said the portress.

“Oh? Well, show the other person in as well.”

Clarisse Mergy entered at once and introduced the gentleman with her, a
gentleman in a black frock-coat, which was too tight for him and which
looked as though it had not been brushed for ages. He was shy in his
manner and seemed greatly embarrassed how to dispose of his old, rusty
top-hat, his gingham umbrella, his one and only glove and his body
generally.

“M. Nicole,” said Clarisse, “a private teacher, who is acting as tutor
to my little Jacques. M. Nicole has been of the greatest help to me with
his advice during the past year. He worked out the whole story of the
crystal stopper. I should like him, as well as myself--if you see
no objection to telling me--to know the details of this kidnapping
business, which alarms me and upsets my plans; yours too, I expect?”

Prasville had every confidence in Clarisse Mergy. He knew her relentless
hatred of Daubrecq and appreciated the assistance which she had rendered
in the case. He therefore made no difficulties about telling her what
he knew, thanks to certain clues and especially to the evidence of the
portress.

For that matter, the thing was exceedingly simple. Daubrecq, who had
attended the trial of Gilbert and Vaucheray as a witness and who was
seen in court during the speeches, returned home at six o’clock. The
portress affirmed that he came in alone and that there was nobody in the
house at the time. Nevertheless, a few minutes later, she heard shouts,
followed by the sound of a struggle and two pistol-shots; and from her
lodge she saw four masked men scuttle down the front steps, carrying
Daubrecq the deputy, and hurry toward the gate. They opened the gate.
At the same moment, a motor-car arrived outside the house. The four men
bundled themselves into it; and the motor-car, which had hardly had time
to stop, set off at full speed.

“Were there not always two policemen on duty?” asked Clarisse.

“They were there,” said Prasville, “but at a hundred and fifty yards’
distance; and Daubrecq was carried off so quickly that they were unable
to interfere, although they hastened up as fast as they could.”

“And did they discover nothing, find nothing?”

“Nothing, or hardly anything... Merely this.”

“What is that?”

“A little piece of ivory, which they picked up on the ground. There was
a fifth party in the car; and the portress saw him get down while the
others were hoisting Daubrecq in. As he was stepping back into the car,
he dropped something and picked it up again at once. But the thing,
whatever it was, must have been broken on the pavement; for this is the
bit of ivory which my men found.”

“But how did the four men manage to enter the house?” asked Clarisse.

“By means of false keys, evidently, while the portress was doing her
shopping, in the course of the afternoon; and they had no difficulty in
secreting themselves, as Daubrecq keeps no other servants. I have every
reason to believe that they hid in the room next door, which is the
dining-room, and afterward attacked Daubrecq here, in the study. The
disturbance of the furniture and other articles proves how violent the
struggle was. We found a large-bore revolver, belonging to Daubrecq,
on the carpet. One of the bullets had smashed the glass over the
mantel-piece, as you see.”

Clarisse turned to her companion for him to express an opinion. But M.
Nicole, with his eyes obstinately lowered, had not budged from his chair
and sat fumbling at the rim of his hat, as though he had not yet found a
proper place for it.

Prasville gave a smile. It was evident that he did not look upon
Clarisse’s adviser as a man of first-rate intelligence:

“The case is somewhat puzzling, monsieur,” he said, “is it not?”

“Yes... yes,” M. Nicole confessed, “most puzzling.”

“Then you have no little theory of your own upon the matter?”

“Well, monsieur le secretaire-general, I’m thinking that Daubrecq has
many enemies.”

“Ah, capital!”

“And that several of those enemies, who are interested in his
disappearance, must have banded themselves against him.”

“Capital, capital!” said Prasville, with satirical approval. “Capital!
Everything is becoming clear as daylight. It only remains for you to
furnish us with a little suggestion that will enable us to turn our
search in the right direction.”

“Don’t you think, monsieur le secretaire-general, that this broken bit
of ivory which was picked up on the ground...”

“No, M. Nicole, no. That bit of ivory belongs to something which we
do not know and which its owner will at once make it his business to
conceal. In order to trace the owner, we should at least be able to
define the nature of the thing itself.”

M. Nicole reflected and then began:

“Monsieur le secretaire-general, when Napoleon I fell from power...”

“Oh, M. Nicole, oh, a lesson in French history!”

“Only a sentence, monsieur le secretaire-general, just one sentence
which I will ask your leave to complete. When Napoleon I fell from
power, the Restoration placed a certain number of officers on half-pay.
These officers were suspected by the authorities and kept under
observation by the police. They remained faithful to the emperor’s
memory; and they contrived to reproduce the features of their idol on
all sorts of objects of everyday use; snuff-boxes, rings, breast-pins,
pen-knives and so on.”

“Well?”

“Well, this bit comes from a walking-stick, or rather a sort of loaded
cane, or life-preserver, the knob of which is formed of a piece of
carved ivory. When you look at the knob in a certain way, you end by
seeing that the outline represents the profile of the Little Corporal.
What you have in your hand, monsieur le secretaire-general, is a bit of
the ivory knob at the top of a half-pay officer’s life-preserver.”

“Yes,” said Prasville, examining the exhibit, “yes, I can make out a
profile... but I don’t see the inference...”

“The inference is very simple. Among Daubrecq’s victims, among those
whose names are inscribed on the famous list, is the descendant of a
Corsican family in Napoleon’s service, which derived its wealth and
title from the emperor and was afterward ruined under the Restoration.
It is ten to one that this descendant, who was the leader of the
Bonapartist party a few years ago, was the fifth person hiding in the
motor-car. Need I state his name?”

“The Marquis d’Albufex?” said Prasville.

“The Marquis d’Albufex,” said M. Nicole.

M. Nicole, who no longer seemed in the least worried with his hat, his
glove and his umbrella, rose and said to Prasville:

“Monsieur le secretaire-general, I might have kept my discovery to
myself, and not told you of it until after the final victory, that is,
after bringing you the list of the Twenty-seven. But matters are urgent.
Daubrecq’s disappearance, contrary to what his kidnappers expect, may
hasten on the catastrophe which you wish to avert. We must therefore act
with all speed. Monsieur le secretaire-general, I ask for your immediate
and practical assistance.”

“In what way can I help you?” asked Prasville, who was beginning to be
impressed by his quaint visitor.

“By giving me, to-morrow, those particulars about the Marquis d’Albufex
which it would take me personally several days to collect.”

Prasville seemed to hesitate and turned his head toward Mme. Mergy.
Clarisse said:

“I beg of you to accept M. Nicole’s services. He is an invaluable and
devoted ally. I will answer for him as I would for myself.”

“What particulars do you require, monsieur?” asked Prasville.

“Everything that concerns the Marquis d’Albufex: the position of his
family, the way in which he spends his time, his family connections, the
properties which he owns in Paris and in the country.”

Prasville objected:

“After all, whether it’s the marquis or another, Daubrecq’s kidnapper
is working on our behalf, seeing that, by capturing the list, he disarms
Daubrecq.”

“And who says, monsieur le secretaire-general, that he is not working on
his own behalf?”

“That is not possible, as his name is on the list.”

“And suppose he erases it? Suppose you then find yourself dealing with a
second blackmailer, even more grasping and more powerful than the first
and one who, as a political adversary, is in a better position than
Daubrecq to maintain the contest?”

The secretary-general was struck by the argument. After a moment’s
thought, he said:

“Come and see me in my office at four o’clock tomorrow. I will give you
the particulars. What is your address, in case I should want you?”

“M. Nicole, 25, Place de Clichy. I am staying at a friend’s flat, which
he has lent me during his absence.”

The interview was at an end. M. Nicole thanked the secretary-general,
with a very low bow, and walked out, accompanied by Mme. Mergy:

“That’s an excellent piece of work,” he said, outside, rubbing his
hands. “I can march into the police-office whenever I like, and set the
whole lot to work.”

Mme. Mergy, who was less hopefully inclined, said:

“Alas, will you be in time? What terrifies me is the thought that the
list may be destroyed.”

“Goodness gracious me, by whom? By Daubrecq?”

“No, but by the marquis, when he gets hold of it.”

“He hasn’t got it yet! Daubrecq will resist long enough, at any rate,
for us to reach him. Just think! Prasville is at my orders!”

“Suppose he discovers who you are? The least inquiry will prove that
there is no such person as M. Nicole.”

“But it will not prove that M. Nicole is the same person as Arsene
Lupin. Besides, make yourself easy. Prasville is not only beneath
contempt as a detective: he has but one aim in life, which is to destroy
his old enemy, Daubrecq. To achieve that aim, all means are equally
good; and he will not waste time in verifying the identity of a M.
Nicole who promises him Daubrecq. Not to mention that I was brought by
you and that, when all is said, my little gifts did dazzle him to some
extent. So let us go ahead boldly.”

Clarisse always recovered confidence in Lupin’s presence. The future
seemed less appalling to her; and she admitted, she forced herself to
admit, that the chances of saving Gilbert were not lessened by that
hideous death-sentence. But he could not prevail upon her to return to
Brittany. She wanted to fight by his side. She wanted to be there and
share all his hopes and all his disappointments.

The next day the inquiries of the police confirmed what Prasville and
Lupin already knew. The Marquis d’Albufex had been very deeply involved
in the business of the canal, so deeply that Prince Napoleon was obliged
to remove him from the management of his political campaign in France;
and he kept up his very extravagant style of living only by dint of
constant loans and makeshifts. On the other hand, in so far as concerned
the kidnapping of Daubrecq, it was ascertained that, contrary to his
usual custom, the marquis had not appeared in his club between six and
seven that evening and had not dined at home. He did not come back until
midnight; and then he came on foot.

M. Nicole’s accusation, therefore, was receiving an early proof.
Unfortunately--and Lupin was no more successful in his own attempts--it
was impossible to obtain the least clue as to the motor-car, the
chauffeur and the four people who had entered Daubrecq’s house. Were
they associates of the marquis, compromised in the canal affair like
himself? Were they men in his pay? Nobody knew.

The whole search, consequently, had to be concentrated upon the marquis
and the country-seats and houses which he might possess at a certain
distance from Paris, a distance which, allowing for the average speed
of a motor-car and the inevitable stoppages, could be put at sixty to
ninety miles.

Now d’Albufex, having sold everything that he ever had, possessed
neither country-houses nor landed estates.

They turned their attention to the marquis’ relations and intimate
friends. Was he able on this side to dispose of some safe retreat in
which to imprison Daubrecq?

The result was equally fruitless.

And the days passed. And what days for Clarisse Mergy! Each of them
brought Gilbert nearer to the terrible day of reckoning. Each of
them meant twenty-four hours less from the date which Clarisse had
instinctively fixed in her mind. And she said to Lupin, who was racked
with the same anxiety:

“Fifty-five days more... Fifty days more... What can one do in so few
days?... Oh, I beg of you... I beg of you...”

What could they do indeed? Lupin, who would not leave the task of
watching the marquis to any one but himself, practically lived without
sleeping. But the marquis had resumed his regular life; and, doubtless
suspecting something, did not risk going away.

Once alone, he went down to the Duc de Montmaur’s, in the daytime. The
duke kept a pack of boar-hounds, with which he hunted the Forest of
Durlaine. D’Albufex maintained no relations with him outside the hunt.

“It is hardly likely,” said Prasville, “that the Duc de Montmaur, an
exceedingly wealthy man, who is interested only in his estates and
his hunting and takes no part in politics, should lend himself to the
illegal detention of Daubrecq the deputy in his chateau.”

Lupin agreed; but, as he did not wish to leave anything to chance,
the next week, seeing d’Albufex go out one morning in riding-dress, he
followed him to the Gare du Nord and took the same train.

He got out at Aumale, where d’Albufex found a carriage at the station
which took him to the Chateau de Montmaur.

Lupin lunched quietly, hired a bicycle and came in view of the house at
the moment when the guests were going into the park, in motor-cars or
mounted. The Marquis d’Albufex was one of the horsemen.

Thrice, in the course of the day, Lupin saw him cantering along. And
he found him, in the evening, at the station, where d’Albufex rode up,
followed by a huntsman.

The proof, therefore, was conclusive; and there was nothing suspicious
on that side. Why did Lupin, nevertheless, resolve not to be satisfied
with appearances? And why, next day, did he send the Masher to find
out things in the neighbourhood of Montmaur? It was an additional
precaution, based upon no logical reason, but agreeing with his
methodical and careful manner of acting.

Two days later he received from the Masher, among other information of
less importance, a list of the house-party at Montmaur and of all the
servants and keepers.

One name struck him, among those of the huntsmen. He at once wired:

“Inquire about huntsman Sebastiani.”

The Masher’s answer was received the next day:

“Sebastiani, a Corsican, was recommended to the Duc de Montmaur by the
Marquis d’Albufex. He lives at two or three miles from the house, in a
hunting-lodge built among the ruins of the feudal stronghold which was
the cradle of the Montmaur family.”

“That’s it,” said Lupin to Clarisse Mergy, showing her the Masher’s
letter. “That name, Sebastiani, at once reminded me that d’Albufex is of
Corsican descent. There was a connection...”

“Then what do you intend to do?”

“If Daubrecq is imprisoned in those ruins, I intend to enter into
communication with him.”

“He will distrust you.”

“No. Lately, acting on the information of the police, I ended by
discovering the two old ladies who carried off your little Jacques at
Saint-Germain and who brought him, the same evening, to Neuilly. They
are two old maids, cousins of Daubrecq, who makes them a small monthly
allowance. I have been to call on those Demoiselles Rousselot; remember
the name and the address: 134 bis, Rue du Bac. I inspired them with
confidence, promised them to find their cousin and benefactor; and the
elder sister, Euphrasie Rousselot, gave me a letter in which she begs
Daubrecq to trust M. Nicole entirely. So you see, I have taken every
precaution. I shall leave to-night.”

“We, you mean,” said Clarisse.

“You!”

“Can I go on living like this, in feverish inaction?” And she whispered,
“I am no longer counting the days, the thirty-eight or forty days that
remain to us: I am counting the hours.”

Lupin felt that her resolution was too strong for him to try to combat
it. They both started at five o’clock in the morning, by motor-car. The
Growler went with them.

So as not to arouse suspicion, Lupin chose a large town as his
headquarters. At Amiens, where he installed Clarisse, he was only
eighteen miles from Montmaur.

At eight o’clock he met the Masher not far from the old fortress,
which was known in the neighbourhood by the name of Mortepierre, and he
examined the locality under his guidance.

On the confines of the forest, the little river Ligier, which has dug
itself a deep valley at this spot, forms a loop which is overhung by the
enormous cliff of Mortepierre.

“Nothing to be done on this side,” said Lupin. “The cliff is steep, over
two hundred feet high, and the river hugs it all round.”

Not far away they found a bridge that led to the foot of a path which
wound, through the oaks and pines, up to a little esplanade, where stood
a massive, iron-bound gate, studded with nails and flanked on either
side by a large tower.

“Is this where Sebastiani the huntsman lives?” asked Lupin.

“Yes,” said the Masher, “with his wife, in a lodge standing in the midst
of the ruins. I also learnt that he has three tall sons and that all the
four were supposed to be away for a holiday on the day when Daubrecq was
carried off.”

“Oho!” said Lupin. “The coincidence is worth remembering. It seems
likely enough that the business was done by those chaps and their
father.”

Toward the end of the afternoon Lupin availed himself of a breach to the
right of the towers to scale the curtain. From there he was able to see
the huntsman’s lodge and the few remains of the old fortress: here,
a bit of wall, suggesting the mantel of a chimney; further away, a
water-tank; on this side, the arches of a chapel; on the other, a heap
of fallen stones.

A patrol-path edged the cliff in front; and, at one of the ends of this
patrol-path, there were the remains of a formidable donjon-keep razed
almost level with the ground.

Lupin returned to Clarisse Mergy in the evening. And from that time he
went backward and forward between Amiens and Mortepierre, leaving the
Growler and the Masher permanently on the watch.

And six days passed. Sebastiani’s habits seemed to be subject solely
to the duties of his post. He used to go up to the Chateau de Montmaur,
walk about in the forest, note the tracks of the game and go his rounds
at night.

But, on the seventh day, learning that there was to be a meet and that
a carriage had been sent to Aumale Station in the morning, Lupin took
up his post in a cluster of box and laurels which surrounded the little
esplanade in front of the gate.

At two o’clock he heard the pack give tongue. They approached,
accompanied by hunting-cries, and then drew farther away. He heard them
again, about the middle of the afternoon, not quite so distinctly; and
that was all. But suddenly, amid the silence, the sound of galloping
horses reached his ears; and, a few minutes later, he saw two riders
climbing the river-path.

He recognized the Marquis d’Albufex and Sebastiani. On reaching the
esplanade, they both alighted; and a woman--the huntsman’s wife, no
doubt--opened the gate. Sebastiani fastened the horses’ bridles to rings
fixed on a post at a few yards from Lupin and ran to join the marquis.
The gate closed behind them.

Lupin did not hesitate; and, though it was still broad daylight, relying
upon the solitude of the place, he hoisted himself to the hollow of
the breach. Passing his head through cautiously, he saw the two men and
Sebastiani’s wife hurrying toward the ruins of the keep.

The huntsman drew aside a hanging screen of ivy and revealed the
entrance to a stairway, which he went down, as did d’Albufex, leaving
his wife on guard on the terrace.

There was no question of going in after them; and Lupin returned to his
hiding-place. He did not wait long before the gate opened again.

The Marquis d’Albufex seemed in a great rage. He was striking the leg of
his boot with his whip and mumbling angry words which Lupin was able to
distinguish when the distance became less great:

“Ah, the hound!... I’ll make him speak... I’ll come back to-night...
to-night, at ten o’clock, do you hear, Sebastiani?... And we shall do
what’s necessary... Oh, the brute!”

Sebastiani unfastened the horses. D’Albufex turned to the woman:

“See that your sons keep a good watch... If any one attempts to deliver
him, so much the worse for him. The trapdoor is there. Can I rely upon
them?”

“As thoroughly as on myself, monsieur le marquis,” declared the
huntsman. “They know what monsieur le marquis has done for me and what
he means to do for them. They will shrink at nothing.”

“Let us mount and get back to the hounds,” said d’Albufex.

So things were going as Lupin had supposed. During these runs,
d’Albufex, taking a line of his own, would push off to Mortepierre,
without anybody’s suspecting his trick. Sebastiani, who was devoted to
him body and soul, for reasons connected with the past into which it was
not worth while to inquire, accompanied him; and together they went to
see the captive, who was closely watched by the huntsman’s wife and his
three sons.

“That’s where we stand,” said Lupin to Clarisse Mergy, when he joined
her at a neighbouring inn. “This evening the marquis will put Daubrecq
to the question--a little brutally, but indispensably--as I intended to
do myself.”

“And Daubrecq will give up his secret,” said Clarisse, already quite
upset.

“I’m afraid so.”

“Then...”

“I am hesitating between two plans,” said Lupin, who seemed very calm.
“Either to prevent the interview...”

“How?”

“By forestalling d’Albufex. At nine o’clock, the Growler, the Masher and
I climb the ramparts, burst into the fortress, attack the keep, disarm
the garrison... and the thing’s done: Daubrecq is ours.”

“Unless Sebastiani’s sons fling him through the trapdoor to which the
marquis alluded...”

“For that reason,” said Lupin, “I intend to risk that violent
measure only as a last resort and in case my other plan should not be
practicable.”

“What is the other plan?”

“To witness the interview. If Daubrecq does not speak, it will give us
the time to prepare to carry him off under more favourable conditions.
If he speaks, if they compel him to reveal the place where the list of
the Twenty-seven is hidden, I shall know the truth at the same time as
d’Albufex, and I swear to God that I shall turn it to account before he
does.”

“Yes, yes,” said Clarisse. “But how do you propose to be present?”

“I don’t know yet,” Lupin confessed. “It depends on certain particulars
which the Masher is to bring me and on some which I shall find out for
myself.”

He left the inn and did not return until an hour later as night was
falling. The Masher joined him.

“Have you the little book?” asked Lupin.

“Yes, governor. It was what I saw at the Aumale newspaper-shop. I got it
for ten sous.”

“Give it me.”

The Masher handed him an old, soiled, torn pamphlet, entitled, on the
cover, A Visit to Mortepierre, 1824, with plans and illustrations.

Lupin at once looked for the plan of the donjon-keep.

“That’s it,” he said. “Above the ground were three stories, which have
been razed, and below the ground, dug out of the rock, two stories, one
of which was blocked up by the rubbish, while the other... There,
that’s where our friend Daubrecq lies. The name is significant: the
torture-chamber... Poor, dear friend!... Between the staircase and the
torture-chamber, two doors. Between those two doors, a recess in which
the three brothers obviously sit, gun in hand.”

“So it is impossible for you to get in that way without being seen.”

“Impossible... unless I come from above, by the story that has fallen
in, and look for a means of entrance through the ceiling... But that is
very risky...”

He continued to turn the pages of the book. Clarisse asked:

“Is there no window to the room?”

“Yes,” he said. “From below, from the river--I have just been there--you
can see a little opening, which is also marked on the plan. But it is
fifty yards up, sheer; and even then the rock overhangs the water. So
that again is out of the question.”

He glanced through a few pages of the book. The title of one chapter
struck him: The Lovers’ Towers. He read the opening lines:

 “In the old days, the donjon was known to the people of the
 neighbourhood as the Lovers’ Tower, in memory of a fatal tragedy
 that marked it in the Middle Ages.  The Comte de Mortepierre,
 having received proofs of his wife’s faithlessness, imprisoned
 her in the torture-chamber, where she spent twenty years.  One
 night, her lover, the Sire de Tancarville, with reckless courage,
 set up a ladder in the river and then clambered up the face of
 the cliff till he came to the window of the room.  After filing
 the bars, he succeeded in releasing the woman he loved and
 bringing her down with him by means of a rope.  They both reached
 the top of the ladder, which was watched by his friends, when a
 shot was fired from the patrol-path and hit the man in the
 shoulder.  The two lovers were hurled into space....”

There was a pause, after he had read this, a long pause during which
each of them drew a mental picture of the tragic escape. So, three or
four centuries earlier, a man, risking his life, had attempted that
surprising feat and would have succeeded but for the vigilance of some
sentry who heard the noise. A man had ventured! A man had dared! A man
done it!

Lupin raised his eyes to Clarisse. She was looking at him... with such a
desperate, such a beseeching look! The look of a mother who demanded the
impossible and who would have sacrificed anything to save her son.

“Masher,” he said, “get a strong rope, but very slender, so that I
can roll it round my waist, and very long: fifty or sixty yards. You,
Growler, go and look for three or four ladders and fasten them end to
end.”

“Why, what are you thinking of, governor?” cried the two accomplices.
“What, you mean to... But it’s madness!”

“Madness? Why? What another has done I can do.”

“But it’s a hundred chances to one that you break your neck.”

“Well, you see, Masher, there’s one chance that I don’t.”

“But, governor...”

“That’s enough, my friends. Meet me in an hour on the river-bank.”

The preparations took long in the making. It was difficult to find the
material for a fifty-foot ladder that would reach the first ledge of the
cliff; and it required an endless effort and care to join the different
sections.

At last, a little after nine o’clock, it was set up in the middle of
the river and held in position by a boat, the bows of which were wedged
between two of the rungs, while the stern was rammed into the bank.

The road through the river-valley was little used, and nobody came to
interrupt the work. The night was dark, the sky heavy with moveless
clouds.

Lupin gave the Masher and the Growler their final instructions and said,
with a laugh:

“I can’t tell you how amused I am at the thought of seeing Daubrecq’s
face when they proceed to take his scalp or slice his skin into ribbons.
Upon my word, it’s worth the journey.”

Clarisse also had taken a seat in the boat. He said to her:

“Until we meet again. And, above all, don’t stir. Whatever happens, not
a movement, not a cry.”

“Can anything happen?” she asked.

“Why, remember the Sire de Tancarville! It was at the very moment when
he was achieving his object, with his true love in his arms, that an
accident betrayed him. But be easy: I shall be all right.”

She made no reply. She seized his hand and grasped it warmly between her
own.

He put his foot on the ladder and made sure that it did not sway too
much. Then he went up.

He soon reached the top rung.

This was where the dangerous ascent began, a difficult ascent at the
start, because of the excessive steepness, and developing, mid-way, into
an absolute escalade.

Fortunately, here and there were little hollows, in which his feet found
a resting-place, and projecting stones, to which his hands clung. But
twice those stones gave way and he slipped; and twice he firmly believed
that all was lost. Finding a deeper hollow, he took a rest. He was worn
out, felt quite ready to throw up the enterprise, asked himself if it
was really worth while for him to expose himself to such danger:

“I say!” he thought. “Seems to me you’re showing the white feather,
Lupin, old boy. Throw up the enterprise? Then Daubrecq will babble his
secret, the marquis will possess himself of the list, Lupin will return
empty-handed, and Gilbert...”

The long rope which he had fastened round his waist caused him needless
inconvenience and fatigue. He fixed one of the ends to the strap of his
trousers and let the rope uncoil all the way down the ascent, so that he
could use it, on returning, as a hand-rail.

Then he once more clutched at the rough surface of the cliff and
continued the climb, with bruised nails and bleeding fingers. At every
moment he expected the inevitable fall. And what discouraged him
most was to hear the murmur of voices rising from the boat, murmur so
distinct that it seemed as though he were not increasing the distance
between his companions and himself.

And he remembered the Sire de Tancarville, alone, he too, amid the
darkness, who must have shivered at the noise of the stones which
he loosened and sent bounding down the cliff. How the least sound
reverberated through the silence! If one of Daubrecq’s guards was
peering into the gloom from the Lovers’ Tower, it meant a shot... and
death.

And he climbed... he climbed... He had climbed so long that he ended
by imagining that the goal was passed. Beyond a doubt, he had slanted
unawares to the right or left and he would finish at the patrol-path.
What a stupid upshot! And what other upshot could there be to an
attempt which the swift force of events had not allowed him to study and
prepare?

Madly, he redoubled his efforts, raised himself by a number of yards,
slipped, recovered the lost ground, clutched a bunch of roots that came
loose in his hand, slipped once more and was abandoning the game in
despair when, suddenly, stiffening himself and contracting his whole
frame, his muscles and his will, he stopped still: a sound of voices
seemed to issue from the very rock which he was grasping.

He listened. It came from the right. Turning his head, he thought that
he saw a ray of light penetrating the darkness of space. By what effort
of energy, by what imperceptible movements he succeeded in dragging
himself to the spot he was never able exactly to realize. But suddenly
he found himself on the ledge of a fairly wide opening, at least three
yards deep, which dug into the wall of the cliff like a passage, while
its other end, much narrower, was closed by three bars.

Lupin crawled along. His head reached the bars. And he saw...



CHAPTER VIII. THE LOVERS’ TOWER

The torture-chamber showed beneath him. It was a large, irregular room,
divided into unequal portions by the four wide, massive pillars that
supported its arched roof. A smell of damp and mildew came from its
walls and from its flags moistened by the water that trickled from
without. Its appearance at any time must have been gruesome. But, at
that moment, with the tall figures of Sebastiani and his sons, with the
slanting gleams of light that fell between the pillars, with the vision
of the captive chained down upon the truckle-bed, it assumed a sinister
and barbarous aspect.

Daubrecq was in the front part of the room, four or five yards down from
the window at which Lupin lurked. In addition to the ancient chains that
had been used to fasten him to his bed and to fasten the bed to an iron
hook in the wall, his wrists and ankles were girt with leather thongs;
and an ingenious arrangement caused his least movement to set in motion
a bell hung to the nearest pillar.

A lamp placed on a stool lit him full in the face.

The Marquis d’Albufex was standing beside him. Lupin could see his pale
features, his grizzled moustache, his long, lean form as he looked at
his prisoner with an expression of content and of gratified hatred.

A few minutes passed in profound silence. Then the marquis gave an
order:

“Light those three candles, Sebastiani, so that I can see him better.”

And, when the three candles were lit and he had taken a long look at
Daubrecq, he stooped over him and said, almost gently:

“I can’t say what will be the end of you and me. But at any rate I shall
have had some deuced happy moments in this room. You have done me so
much harm, Daubrecq! The tears you have made me shed! Yes, real tears,
real sobs of despair... The money you have robbed me of! A fortune!...
And my terror at the thought that you might give me away! You had but
to utter my name to complete my ruin and bring about my disgrace!... Oh,
you villain!...”

Daubrecq did not budge. He had been deprived of his black glasses, but
still kept his spectacles, which reflected the light from the candles.
He had lost a good deal of flesh; and the bones stood out above his
sunken cheeks.

“Come along,” said d’Albufex. “The time has come to act. It seems that
there are rogues prowling about the neighbourhood. Heaven forbid that
they are here on your account and try to release you; for that would
mean your immediate death, as you know... Is the trapdoor still in
working order, Sebastiani?”

Sebastiani came nearer, knelt on one knee and lifted and turned a
ring, at the foot of the bed, which Lupin had not noticed. One of the
flagstones moved on a pivot, disclosing a black hole.

“You see,” the marquis continued, “everything is provided for; and I
have all that I want at hand, including dungeons: bottomless dungeons,
says the legend of the castle. So there is nothing to hope for, no help
of any kind. Will you speak?”

Daubrecq did not reply; and he went on:

“This is the fourth time that I am questioning you, Daubrecq. It is the
fourth time that I have troubled to ask you for the document which you
possess, in order that I may escape your blackmailing proceedings. It is
the fourth time and the last. Will you speak?”

The same silence as before. D’Albufex made a sign to Sebastiani. The
huntsman stepped forward, followed by two of his sons. One of them held
a stick in his hand.

“Go ahead,” said d’Albufex, after waiting a few seconds.

Sebastiani slackened the thongs that bound Daubrecq’s wrists and
inserted and fixed the stick between the thongs.

“Shall I turn, monsieur le marquis?”

A further silence. The marquis waited. Seeing that Daubrecq did not
flinch, he whispered:

“Can’t you speak? Why expose yourself to physical suffering?”

No reply.

“Turn away, Sebastiani.”

Sebastiani made the stick turn a complete circle. The thongs stretched
and tightened. Daubrecq gave a groan.

“You won’t speak? Still, you know that I won’t give way, that I can’t
give way, that I hold you and that, if necessary, I shall torture you
till you die of it. You won’t speak? You won’t?... Sebastiani, once
more.”

The huntsman obeyed. Daubrecq gave a violent start of pain and fell back
on his bed with a rattle in his throat.

“You fool!” cried the marquis, shaking with rage. “Why don’t you speak?
What, haven’t you had enough of that list? Surely it’s somebody else’s
turn! Come, speak... Where is it? One word. One word only... and we will
leave you in peace... And, to-morrow, when I have the list, you shall be
free. Free, do you understand? But, in Heaven’s name, speak!... Oh, the
brute! Sebastiani, one more turn.”

Sebastiani made a fresh effort. The bones cracked.

“Help! Help!” cried Daubrecq, in a hoarse voice, vainly struggling to
release himself. And, in a spluttering whisper, “Mercy... mercy.”

It was a dreadful sight... The faces of the three sons were
horror-struck. Lupin shuddered, sick at heart, and realized that he
himself could never have accomplished that abominable thing. He
listened for the words that were bound to come. He must learn the truth.
Daubrecq’s secret was about to be expressed in syllables, in words wrung
from him by pain. And Lupin began to think of his retreat, of the car
which was waiting for him, of the wild rush to Paris, of the victory at
hand.

“Speak,” whispered d’Albufex. “Speak and it will be over.”

“Yes... yes...” gasped Daubrecq.

“Well...?”

“Later... to-morrow...”

“Oh, you’re mad!... What are you talking about: to-morrow?...
Sebastiani, another turn!”

“No, no!” yelled Daubrecq. “Stop!”

“Speak!”

“Well, then... the paper... I have hidden the paper...”

But his pain was too great. He raised his head with a last effort,
uttered incoherent words, succeeded in twice saying, “Marie... Marie...”
 and fell back, exhausted and lifeless.

“Let go at once!” said d’Albufex to Sebastiani. “Hang it all, can we
have overdone it?”

But a rapid examination showed him that Daubrecq had only fainted.
Thereupon, he himself, worn out with the excitement, dropped on the
foot of the bed and, wiping the beads of perspiration from his forehead,
stammered:

“Oh, what a dirty business!”

“Perhaps that’s enough for to-day,” said the huntsman, whose rough face
betrayed a certain emotion. “We might try again to-morrow or the next
day...”

The marquis was silent. One of the sons handed him a flask of brandy. He
poured out half a glass and drank it down at a draught:

“To-morrow?” he said. “No. Here and now. One little effort more. At
the stage which he has reached, it won’t be difficult.” And, taking the
huntsman aside, “Did you hear what he said? What did he mean by that
word, ‘Marie’? He repeated it twice.”

“Yes, twice,” said the huntsman. “Perhaps he entrusted the document to a
person called Marie.”

“Not he!” protested d’Albufex. “He never entrusts anything to anybody.
It means something different.”

“But what, monsieur le marquis?”

“We’ll soon find out, I’ll answer for it.”

At that moment, Daubrecq drew a long breath and stirred on his couch.

D’Albufex, who had now recovered all his composure and who did not take
his eyes off the enemy, went up to him and said:

“You see, Daubrecq, it’s madness to resist... Once you’re beaten,
there’s nothing for it but to submit to your conqueror, instead of
allowing yourself to be tortured like an idiot... Come, be sensible.”

He turned to Sebastiani:

“Tighten the rope... let him feel it a little that will wake him up...
He’s shamming death...” Sebastiani took hold of the stick again and
turned until the cord touched the swollen flesh. Daubrecq gave a start.

“That’ll do, Sebastiani,” said the marquis. “Our friend seems favourably
disposed and understands the need for coming to terms. That’s so,
Daubrecq, is it not? You prefer to have done with it? And you’re quite
right!”

The two men were leaning over the sufferer, Sebastiani with his hand
on the stick, d’Albufex holding the lamp so as to throw the light on
Daubrecq’s face: “His lips are moving... he’s going to speak. Loosen
the rope a little, Sebastiani: I don’t want our friend to be hurt... No,
tighten it: I believe our friend is hesitating... One turn more... stop!
... That’s done it! Oh, my dear Daubrecq, if you can’t speak plainer
than that, it’s no use! What? What did you say?”

Arsene Lupin muttered an oath. Daubrecq was speaking and he, Lupin,
could not hear a word of what he said! In vain, he pricked up his ears,
suppressed the beating of his heart and the throbbing of his temples:
not a sound reached him.

“Confound it!” he thought. “I never expected this. What am I to do?”

He was within an ace of covering Daubrecq with his revolver and
putting a bullet into him which would cut short any explanation. But he
reflected that he himself would then be none the wiser and that it was
better to trust to events in the hope of making the most of them.

Meanwhile the confession continued beneath him, indistinctly,
interrupted by silences and mingled with moans. D’Albufex clung to his
prey:

“Go on!... Finish, can’t you?...”

And he punctuated the sentences with exclamations of approval:

“Good!... Capital!... Oh, how funny!... And no one suspected?... Not
even Prasville?... What an ass!... Loosen a bit, Sebastiani: don’t you
see that our friend is out of breath?... Keep calm, Daubrecq... don’t
tire yourself... And so, my dear fellow, you were saying...”

That was the last. There was a long whispering to which d’Albufex
listened without further interruption and of which Arsene Lupin could
not catch the least syllable. Then the marquis drew himself up and
exclaimed, joyfully:

“That’s it!... Thank you, Daubrecq. And, believe me, I shall never
forget what you have just done. If ever you’re in need, you have only
to knock at my door and there will always be a crust of bread for you in
the kitchen and a glass of water from the filter. Sebastiani, look after
monsieur le depute as if he were one of your sons. And, first of all,
release him from his bonds. It’s a heartless thing to truss one’s
fellow-man like that, like a chicken on the spit!”

“Shall we give him something to drink?” suggested the huntsman.

“Yes, that’s it, give him a drink.”

Sebastiani and his sons undid the leather straps, rubbed the bruised
wrists, dressed them with an ointment and bandaged them. Then Daubrecq
swallowed a few drops of brandy.

“Feeling better?” said the marquis. “Pooh, it’s nothing much! In a
few hours, it won’t show; and you’ll be able to boast of having been
tortured, as in the good old days of the Inquisition. You lucky dog!”

He took out his watch. “Enough said! Sebastiani, let your sons watch him
in turns. You, take me to the station for the last train.”

“Then are we to leave him like that, monsieur le marquis, free to move
as he pleases?”

“Why not? You don’t imagine that we are going to keep him here to the
day of his death? No, Daubrecq, sleep quietly. I shall go to your
place tomorrow afternoon; and, if the document is where you told me,
a telegram shall be sent off at once and you shall be set free. You
haven’t told me a lie, I suppose?”

He went back to Daubrecq and, stooping over him again:

“No humbug, eh? That would be very silly of you. I should lose a day,
that’s all. Whereas you would lose all the days that remain to you to
live. But no, the hiding-place is too good. A fellow doesn’t invent
a thing like that for fun. Come on, Sebastiani. You shall have the
telegram to-morrow.”

“And suppose they don’t let you into the house, monsieur le marquis?”

“Why shouldn’t they?”

“The house in the Square Lamartine is occupied by Prasville’s men.”

“Don’t worry, Sebastiani. I shall get in. If they don’t open the door,
there’s always the window. And, if the window won’t open, I shall
arrange with one of Prasville’s men. It’s a question of money, that’s
all. And, thank goodness, I shan’t be short of that, henceforth!
Good-night, Daubrecq.”

He went out, accompanied by Sebastiani, and the heavy door closed after
them.

Lupin at once effected his retreat, in accordance with a plan which he
had worked out during this scene.

The plan was simple enough: to scramble, by means of his rope, to the
bottom of the cliff, take his friends with him, jump into the motor-car
and attack d’Albufex and Sebastiani on the deserted road that leads to
Aumale Station. There could be no doubt about the issue of the contest.
With d’Albufex and Sebastiani prisoners; it would be an easy matter to
make one of them speak. D’Albufex had shown him how to set about it; and
Clarisse Mergy would be inflexible where it was a question of saving her
son.

He took the rope with which he had provided himself and groped about to
find a jagged piece of rock round which to pass it, so as to leave two
equal lengths hanging, by which he could let himself down. But, when he
found what he wanted, instead of acting swiftly--for the business was
urgent--he stood motionless, thinking. His scheme failed to satisfy him
at the last moment.

“It’s absurd, what I’m proposing,” he said to himself. “Absurd and
illogical. How can I tell that d’Albufex and Sebastiani will not escape
me? How can I even tell that, once they are in my power, they will
speak? No, I shall stay. There are better things to try... much better
things. It’s not those two I must be at, but Daubrecq. He’s done for; he
has not a kick left in him. If he has told the marquis his secret, there
is no reason why he shouldn’t tell it to Clarisse and me, when we employ
the same methods. That’s settled! We’ll kidnap the Daubrecq bird.”
 And he continued, “Besides, what do I risk? If the scheme miscarries,
Clarisse and I will rush off to Paris and, together with Prasville,
organize a careful watch in the Square Lamartine to prevent d’Albufex
from benefiting by Daubrecq’s revelations. The great thing is for
Prasville to be warned of the danger. He shall be.”

The church-clock in a neighbouring village struck twelve. That gave
Lupin six or seven hours to put his new plan into execution. He set to
work forthwith.

When moving away from the embrasure which had the window at the bottom
of it, he had come upon a clump of small shrubs in one of the hollows
of the cliff. He cut away a dozen of these, with his knife, and whittled
them all down to the same size. Then he cut off two equal lengths from
his rope. These were the uprights of the ladder. He fastened the twelve
little sticks between the uprights and thus contrived a rope-ladder
about six yards long.

When he returned to this post, there was only one of the three sons
beside Daubrecq’s bed in the torture-chamber. He was smoking his pipe by
the lamp. Daubrecq was asleep.

“Hang it!” thought Lupin. “Is the fellow going to sit there all night?
In that case, there’s nothing for me to do but to slip off...”

The idea that d’Albufex was in possession of the secret vexed him
mightily. The interview at which he had assisted had left the clear
impression in his mind that the marquis was working “on his own” and
that, in securing the list, he intended not only to escape Daubrecq’s
activity, but also to gain Daubrecq’s power and build up his fortune
anew by the identical means which Daubrecq had employed.

That would have meant, for Lupin, a fresh battle to wage against a fresh
enemy. The rapid march of events did not allow of the contemplation of
such a possibility. He must at all costs spike the Marquis d’Albufex’
guns by warning Prasville.

However, Lupin remained held back by the stubborn hope of some incident
that would give him the opportunity of acting.

The clock struck half-past twelve.

It struck one.

The waiting became terrible, all the more so as an icy mist rose from
the valley and Lupin felt the cold penetrate to his very marrow.

He heard the trot of a horse in the distance:

“Sebastiani returning from the station,” he thought.

But the son who was watching in the torture-chamber, having finished his
packet of tobacco, opened the door and asked his brothers if they had
a pipeful for him. They made some reply; and he went out to go to the
lodge.

And Lupin was astounded. No sooner was the door closed than Daubrecq,
who had been so sound asleep, sat up on his couch, listened, put one
foot to the ground, followed by the other, and, standing up, tottering
a little, but firmer on his legs than one would have expected, tried his
strength.

“Well” said Lupin, “the beggar doesn’t take long recovering. He can very
well help in his own escape. There’s just one point that ruffles me:
will he allow himself to be convinced? Will he consent to go with me?
Will he not think that this miraculous assistance which comes to him
straight from heaven is a trap laid by the marquis?”

But suddenly Lupin remembered the letter which he had made Daubrecq’s
old cousins write, the letter of recommendation, so to speak, which the
elder of the two sisters Rousselot had signed with her Christian name,
Euphrasie.

It was in his pocket. He took it and listened. Not a sound, except the
faint noise of Daubrecq’s footsteps on the flagstones. Lupin considered
that the moment had come. He thrust his arm through the bars and threw
the letter in.

Daubrecq seemed thunderstruck.

The letter had fluttered through the room and lay on the floor, at three
steps from him. Where did it come from? He raised his head toward the
window and tried to pierce the darkness that hid all the upper part
of the room from his eyes. Then he looked at the envelope, without yet
daring to touch it, as though he dreaded a snare. Then, suddenly, after
a glance at the door, he stooped briskly, seized the envelope and opened
it.

“Ah,” he said, with a sigh of delight, when he saw the signature.

He read the letter half-aloud:

 “Rely implicitly on the bearer of this note.  He has succeeded
 in discovering the marquis’ secret, with the money which we gave
 him, and has contrived a plan of escape.  Everything is prepared
 for your flight.

       “EUPHRASIE ROUSSELOT”

He read the letter again, repeated, “Euphrasie... Euphrasie...” and
raised his head once more.

Lupin whispered:

“It will take me two or three hours to file through one of the bars. Are
Sebastiani and his sons coming back?”

“Yes, they are sure to,” replied Daubrecq, in the same low voice, “but I
expect they will leave me to myself.”

“But they sleep next door?”

“Yes.”

“Won’t they hear?”

“No, the door is too thick.”

“Very well. In that case, it will soon be done. I have a rope-ladder.
Will you be able to climb up alone, without my assistance?”

“I think so... I’ll try... It’s my wrists that they’ve broken... Oh, the
brutes! I can hardly move my hands... and I have very little strength
left. But I’ll try all the same... needs must...”

He stopped, listened and, with his finger to his mouth, whispered:

“Hush!”

When Sebastiani and his sons entered the room, Daubrecq, who had hidden
the letter and lain down on his bed, pretended to wake with a start.

The huntsman brought him a bottle of wine, a glass and some food:

“How goes it, monsieur le depute?” he cried. “Well, perhaps we did
squeeze a little hard... It’s very painful, that thumbscrewing. Seems
they often did it at the time of the Great Revolution and Bonaparte...
in the days of the chauffeurs. [*] A pretty invention! Nice and clean...
no bloodshed... And it didn’t last long either! In twenty minutes, you
came out with the missing word!” Sebastiani burst out laughing. “By the
way, monsieur le depute, my congratulations! A capital hiding-place. Who
would ever suspect it?... You see, what put us off, monsieur le marquis
and me, was that name of Marie which you let out at first. You
weren’t telling a lie; but there you are, you know: the word was only
half-finished. We had to know the rest. Say what you like, it’s amusing!
Just think, on your study-table! Upon my word, what a joke!”


     * The name given to the brigands in the Vendee, who tortured
     their victims with fire to make them confess where their
     money was hidden.--Translator’s Note.


The huntsman rose and walked up and down the room, rubbing his hands:

“Monsieur le marquis is jolly well pleased, so pleased, in fact, that he
himself is coming to-morrow evening to let you out. Yes, he has thought
it over; there will be a few formalities: you may have to sign a cheque
or two, stump up, what, and make good monsieur le marquis’ expense and
trouble. But what’s that to you? A trifle! Not to mention that, from now
on, there will be no more chains, no more straps round your wrists; in
short, you will be treated like a king! And I’ve even been told--look
here!--to allow you a good bottle of old wine and a flask of brandy.”

Sebastiani let fly a few more jests, then took the lamp, made a last
examination of the room and said to his sons:

“Let’s leave him to sleep. You also, take a rest, all three of you. But
sleep with one eye open. One never can tell...” They withdrew.

Lupin waited a little longer and asked, in a low voice:

“Can I begin?”

“Yes, but be careful. It’s not impossible that they may go on a round in
an hour or two.”

Lupin set to work. He had a very powerful file; and the iron of the
bars, rusted and gnawed away by time, was, in places, almost reduced to
dust. Twice Lupin stopped to listen, with ears pricked up. But it was
only the patter of a rat over the rubbish in the upper story, or the
flight of some night-bird; and he continued his task, encouraged by
Daubrecq, who stood by the door, ready to warn him at the least alarm.

“Oof!” he said, giving a last stroke of the file. “I’m glad that’s over,
for, on my word, I’ve been a bit cramped in this cursed tunnel... to say
nothing of the cold...”

He bore with all his strength upon the bar, which he had sawn from
below, and succeeded in forcing it down sufficiently for a man’s body to
slip between the two remaining bars. Next, he had to go back to the end
of the embrasure, the wider part, where he had left the rope-ladder.
After fixing it to the bars, he called Daubrecq:

“Psst!... It’s all right... Are you ready?”

“Yes... coming... One more second, while I listen... All right...
They’re asleep... give me the ladder.”

Lupin lowered it and asked:

“Must I come down?”

“No... I feel a little weak... but I shall manage.”

Indeed, he reached the window of the embrasure pretty quickly and crept
along the passage in the wake of his rescuer. The open air, however,
seemed to make him giddy. Also, to give himself strength, he had drunk
half the bottle of wine; and he had a fainting-fit that kept him lying
on the stones of the embrasure for half an hour. Lupin, losing patience,
was fastening him to one end of the rope, of which the other end was
knotted round the bars and was preparing to let him down like a bale of
goods, when Daubrecq woke up, in better condition:

“That’s over,” he said. “I feel fit now. Will it take long?”

“Pretty long. We are a hundred and fifty yards up.”

“How was it that d’Albufex did not foresee that it was possible to
escape this way?”

“The cliff is perpendicular.”

“And you were able to...”

“Well, your cousins insisted... And then one has to live, you know, and
they were free with their money.”

“The dear, good souls!” said Daubrecq. “Where are they?”

“Down below, in a boat.”

“Is there a river, then?”

“Yes, but we won’t talk, if you don’t mind. It’s dangerous.”

“One word more. Had you been there long when you threw me the letter?”

“No, no. A quarter of an hour or so. I’ll tell you all about it...
Meanwhile, we must hurry.”

Lupin went first, after recommending Daubrecq to hold tight to the rope
and to come down backward. He would give him a hand at the difficult
places.

It took them over forty minutes to reach the platform of the ledge
formed by the cliff; and Lupin had several times to help his companion,
whose wrists, still bruised from the torture, had lost all their
strength and suppleness.

Over and over again, he groaned:

“Oh, the swine, they’ve done for me!... The swine!... Ah, d’Albufex,
I’ll make you pay dear for this!...”

“Ssh!” said Lupin.

“What’s the matter?”

“A noise... up above...”

Standing motionless on the platform, they listened. Lupin thought of the
Sire de Tancarville and the sentry who had killed him with a shot from
his harquebus. He shivered, feeling all the anguish of the silence and
the darkness.

“No,” he said, “I was mistaken... Besides, it’s absurd... They can’t hit
us here.”

“Who would hit us?”

“No one... no one... it was a silly notion...”

He groped about till he found the uprights of the ladder; then he said:

“There, here’s the ladder. It is fixed in the bed of the river. A friend
of mine is looking after it, as well as your cousins.”

He whistled:

“Here I am,” he said, in a low voice. “Hold the ladder fast.” And, to
Daubrecq, “I’ll go first.”

Daubrecq objected:

“Perhaps it would be better for me to go down first.”

“Why?”

“I am very tired. You can tie your rope round my waist and hold me...
Otherwise, there is a danger that I might...”

“Yes, you are right,” said Lupin. “Come nearer.”

Daubrecq came nearer and knelt down on the rock. Lupin fastened the
rope to him and then, stooping over, grasped one of the uprights in both
hands to keep the ladder from shaking:

“Off you go,” he said.

At the same moment, he felt a violent pain in the shoulder:

“Blast it!” he said, sinking to the ground.

Daubrecq had stabbed him with a knife below the nape of the neck, a
little to the right.

“You blackguard! You blackguard!”

He half-saw Daubrecq, in the dark, ridding himself of his rope, and
heard him whisper:

“You’re a bit of a fool, you know!... You bring me a letter from my
Rousselot cousins, in which I recognize the writing of the elder,
Adelaide, but which that sly puss of an Adelaide, suspecting something
and meaning to put me on my guard, if necessary, took care to sign with
the name of the younger sister, Euphrasie Rousselot. You see, I tumbled
to it! So, with a little reflection... you are Master Arsene Lupin, are
you not? Clarisse’s protector, Gilbert’s saviour... Poor Lupin, I fear
you’re in a bad way... I don’t use the knife often; but, when I do, I
use it with a vengeance.”

He bent over the wounded man and felt in his pockets:

“Give me your revolver, can’t you? You see, your friends will know at
once that it is not their governor; and they will try to secure me...
And, as I have not much strength left, a bullet or two... Good-bye,
Lupin. We shall meet in the next world, eh? Book me a nice flat, with
all the latest conveniences.

“Good-bye, Lupin. And my best thanks. For really I don’t know what I
should have done without you. By Jove, d’Albufex was hitting me hard!
It’ll be a joke to meet the beggar again!”

Daubrecq had completed his preparations. He whistled once more. A reply
came from the boat.

“Here I am,” he said.

With a last effort, Lupin put out his arm to stop him. But his
hand touched nothing but space. He tried to call out, to warn his
accomplices: his voice choked in his throat.

He felt a terrible numbness creep over his whole being. His temples
buzzed.

Suddenly, shouts below. Then a shot. Then another, followed by a
triumphant chuckle. And a woman’s wail and moans. And, soon after, two
more shots.

Lupin thought of Clarisse, wounded, dead perhaps; of Daubrecq, fleeing
victoriously; of d’Albufex; of the crystal stopper, which one or other
of the two adversaries would recover unresisted. Then a sudden vision
showed him the Sire de Tancarville falling with the woman he loved. Then
he murmured, time after time:

“Clarisse... Clarisse... Gilbert...” A great silence overcame him;
an infinite peace entered into him; and, without the least revolt, he
received the impression that his exhausted body, with nothing now to
hold it back, was rolling to the very edge of the rock, toward the
abyss.



CHAPTER IX. IN THE DARK

An hotel bedroom at Amiens.

Lupin was recovering a little consciousness for the first time. Clarisse
and the Masher were seated by his bedside.

Both were talking; and Lupin listened to them, without opening his eyes.
He learned that they had feared for his life, but that all danger was
now removed. Next, in the course of the conversation, he caught certain
words that revealed to him what had happened in the tragic night at
Mortepierre: Daubrecq’s descent; the dismay of the accomplices, when
they saw that it was not the governor; then the short struggle: Clarisse
flinging herself on Daubrecq and receiving a wound in the shoulder;
Daubrecq leaping to the bank; the Growler firing two revolver-shots and
darting off in pursuit of him; the Masher clambering up the ladder and
finding the governor in a swoon:

“True as I live,” said the Masher, “I can’t make out even now how he did
not roll over. There was a sort of hollow at that place, but it was a
sloping hollow; and, half dead as he was, he must have hung on with his
ten fingers. Crikey, it was time I came!”

Lupin listened, listened in despair. He collected his strength to grasp
and understand the words. But suddenly a terrible sentence was uttered:
Clarisse, weeping, spoke of the eighteen days that had elapsed, eighteen
more days lost to Gilbert’s safety.

Eighteen days! The figure terrified Lupin. He felt that all was over,
that he would never be able to recover his strength and resume the
struggle and that Gilbert and Vaucheray were doomed... His brain slipped
away from him. The fever returned and the delirium.

And more days came and went. It was perhaps the time of his life of
which Lupin speaks with the greatest horror. He retained just enough
consciousness and had sufficiently lucid moments to realize the position
exactly. But he was not able to coordinate his ideas, to follow a line
of argument nor to instruct or forbid his friends to adopt this or that
line of conduct.

Often, when he emerged from his torpor, he found his hand in Clarisse’s
and, in that half-slumbering condition in which a fever keeps you, he
would address strange words to her, words of love and passion, imploring
her and thanking her and blessing her for all the light and joy which
she had brought into his darkness.

Then, growing calmer and not fully understanding what he had said, he
tried to jest:

“I have been delirious, have I not? What a heap of nonsense I must have
talked!”

But Lupin felt by Clarisse’s silence that he could safely talk as much
nonsense as ever his fever suggested to him. She did not hear. The
care and attention which she lavished on the patient, her devotion, her
vigilance, her alarm at the least relapse: all this was meant not for
him, but for the possible saviour of Gilbert. She anxiously watched the
progress of his convalescence. How soon would he be fit to resume the
campaign? Was it not madness to linger by his side, when every day
carried away a little hope?

Lupin never ceased repeating to himself, with the inward belief that, by
so doing, he could influence the course of his illness:

“I will get well... I will get well...”

And he lay for days on end without moving, so as not to disturb the
dressing of his wound nor increase the excitement of his nerves in the
smallest degree.

He also strove not to think of Daubrecq. But the image of his dire
adversary haunted him; and he reconstituted the various phases of the
escape, the descent of the cliff.... One day, struck by a terrible
memory, he exclaimed:

“The list! The list of the Twenty-seven! Daubrecq must have it by now...
or else d’Albufex. It was on the table!”

Clarisse reassured him:

“No one can have taken it,” she declared. “The Growler was in Paris that
same day, with a note from me for Prasville, entreating him to redouble
his watch in the Square Lamartine, so that no one should enter,
especially d’Albufex...”

“But Daubrecq?”

“He is wounded. He cannot have gone home.”

“Ah, well,” he said, “that’s all right!... But you too were wounded...”

“A mere scratch on the shoulder.”

Lupin was easier in his mind after these revelations. Nevertheless, he
was pursued by stubborn notions which he was unable either to drive from
his brain or to put into words. Above all, he thought incessantly of
that name of “Marie” which Daubrecq’s sufferings had drawn from him.
What did the name refer to? Was it the title of one of the books on the
shelves, or a part of the title? Would the book in question supply the
key to the mystery? Or was it the combination word of a safe? Was it a
series of letters written somewhere: on a wall, on a paper, on a wooden
panel, on the mount of a drawing, on an invoice?

These questions, to which he was unable to find a reply, obsessed and
exhausted him.

One morning Arsene Lupin woke feeling a great deal better. The wound was
closed, the temperature almost normal. The doctor, a personal friend,
who came every day from Paris, promised that he might get up two days
later. And, on that day, in the absence of his accomplices and of
Mme. Mergy, all three of whom had left two days before, in quest of
information, he had himself moved to the open window.

He felt life return to him with the sunlight, with the balmy air that
announced the approach of spring. He recovered the concatenation of
his ideas; and facts once more took their place in his brain in their
logical sequence and in accordance with their relations one to the
other.

In the evening he received a telegram from Clarisse to say that things
were going badly and that she, the Growler and the Masher were all
staying in Paris. He was much disturbed by this wire and had a less
quiet night. What could the news be that had given rise to Clarisse’s
telegram?

But, the next day, she arrived in his room looking very pale, her eyes
red with weeping, and, utterly worn out, dropped into a chair:

“The appeal has been rejected,” she stammered.

He mastered his emotion and asked, in a voice of surprise:

“Were you relying on that?”

“No, no,” she said, “but, all the same... one hopes in spite of one’s
self.”

“Was it rejected yesterday?”

“A week ago. The Masher kept it from me; and I have not dared to read
the papers lately.”

“There is always the commutation of sentence,” he suggested.

“The commutation? Do you imagine that they will commute the sentence of
Arsene Lupin’s accomplices?”

She ejaculated the words with a violence and a bitterness which he
pretended not to notice; and he said:

“Vaucheray perhaps not... But they will take pity on Gilbert, on his
youth...”

“They will do nothing of the sort.”

“How do you know?”

“I have seen his counsel.”

“You have seen his counsel! And you told him...”

“I told him that I was Gilbert’s mother and I asked him whether, by
proclaiming my son’s identity, we could not influence the result... or
at least delay it.”

“You would do that?” he whispered. “You would admit...”

“Gilbert’s life comes before everything. What do I care about my name!
What do I care about my husband’s name!”

“And your little Jacques?” he objected. “Have you the right to ruin
Jacques, to make him the brother of a man condemned to death?”

She hung her head. And he resumed:

“What did the counsel say?”

“He said that an act of that sort would not help Gilbert in the remotest
degree. And, in spite of all his protests, I could see that, as far
as he was concerned, he had no illusions left and that the pardoning
commission are bound to find in favour of the execution.”

“The commission, I grant you; but what of the president of the
Republic?”

“The president always goes by the advice of the commission.”

“He will not do so this time.”

“And why not?”

“Because we shall bring influence to bear upon him.”

“How?”

“By the conditional surrender of the list of the Twenty-seven!”

“Have you it?”

“No, but I shall have it.”

His certainty had not wavered. He made the statement with equal calmness
and faith in the infinite power of his will.

She had lost some part of her confidence in him and she shrugged her
shoulders lightly:

“If d’Albufex has not purloined the list, one man alone can exercise any
influence; one man alone: Daubrecq.”

She spoke these words in a low and absent voice that made him shudder.
Was she still thinking, as he had often seemed to feel, of going back to
Daubrecq and paying him for Gilbert’s life?

“You have sworn an oath to me,” he said. “I’m reminding you of it. It
was agreed that the struggle with Daubrecq should be directed by me and
that there would never be a possibility of any arrangement between you
and him.”

She retorted:

“I don’t even know where he is. If I knew, wouldn’t you know?”

It was an evasive answer. But he did not insist, resolving to watch her
at the opportune time; and he asked her, for he had not yet been told
all the details:

“Then it’s not known what became of Daubrecq?”

“No. Of course, one of the Growler’s bullets struck him. For, next day,
we picked up, in a coppice, a handkerchief covered with blood. Also,
it seems that a man was seen at Aumale Station, looking very tired and
walking with great difficulty. He took a ticket for Paris, stepped into
the first train and that is all...”

“He must be seriously wounded,” said Lupin, “and he is nursing himself
in some safe retreat. Perhaps, also, he considers it wise to lie low for
a few weeks and avoid any traps on the part of the police, d’Albufex,
you, myself and all his other enemies.”

He stopped to think and continued:

“What has happened at Mortepierre since Daubrecq’s escape? Has there
been no talk in the neighbourhood?”

“No, the rope was removed before daybreak, which proves that Sebastiani
or his sons discovered Daubrecq’s flight on the same night. Sebastiani
was away the whole of the next day.”

“Yes, he will have informed the marquis. And where is the marquis
himself?”

“At home. And, from what the Growler has heard, there is nothing
suspicious there either.”

“Are they certain that he has not been inside Daubrecq’s house?”

“As certain as they can be.”

“Nor Daubrecq?”

“Nor Daubrecq.”

“Have you seen Prasville?”

“Prasville is away on leave. But Chief-inspector Blanchon, who has
charge of the case, and the detectives who are guarding the house
declare that, in accordance with Prasville’s instructions, their watch
is not relaxed for a moment, even at night; that one of them, turn and
turn about, is always on duty in the study; and that no one, therefore,
can have gone in.”

“So, on principle,” Arsene Lupin concluded, “the crystal stopper must
still be in Daubrecq’s study?”

“If it was there before Daubrecq’s disappearance, it should be there
now.”

“And on the study-table.”

“On the study-table? Why do you say that?”

“Because I know,” said Lupin, who had not forgotten Sebastiani’s words.

“But you don’t know the article in which the stopper is hidden?”

“No. But a study-table, a writing-desk, is a limited space. One can
explore it in twenty minutes. One can demolish it, if necessary, in
ten.”

The conversation had tired Arsene Lupin a little. As he did not wish to
commit the least imprudence, he said to Clarisse:

“Listen. I will ask you to give me two or three days more. This is
Monday, the 4th of March. On Wednesday or Thursday, at latest, I shall
be up and about. And you can be sure that we shall succeed.”

“And, in the meantime...”

“In the meantime, go back to Paris. Take rooms, with the Growler and the
Masher, in the Hotel Franklin, near the Trocadero, and keep a watch on
Daubrecq’s house. You are free to go in and out as you please. Stimulate
the zeal of the detectives on duty.”

“Suppose Daubrecq returns?”

“If he returns, that will be so much the better: we shall have him.”

“And, if he only passes?”

“In that case, the Growler and the Masher must follow him.”

“And if they lose sight of him?”

Lupin did not reply. No one felt more than he how fatal it was to remain
inactive in a hotel bedroom and how useful his presence would have been
on the battlefield! Perhaps even this vague idea had already prolonged
his illness beyond the ordinary limits.

He murmured:

“Go now, please.”

There was a constraint between them which increased as the awful day
drew nigh. In her injustice, forgetting or wishing to forget that it was
she who had forced her son into the Enghien enterprise, Mme. Mergy did
not forget that the law was pursuing Gilbert with such rigour not so
much because he was a criminal as because he was an accomplice of Arsene
Lupin’s. And then, notwithstanding all his efforts, notwithstanding his
prodigious expenditure of energy, what result had Lupin achieved, when
all was said? How far had his intervention benefited Gilbert?

After a pause, she rose and left him alone.

The next day he was feeling rather low. But on the day after, the
Wednesday, when his doctor wanted him to keep quiet until the end of the
week, he said:

“If not, what have I to fear?”

“A return of the fever.”

“Nothing worse?”

“No. The wound is pretty well healed.”

“Then I don’t care. I’ll go back with you in your car. We shall be in
Paris by mid-day.”

What decided Lupin to start at once was, first, a letter in which
Clarisse told him that she had found Daubrecq’s traces, and, also, a
telegram, published in the Amiens papers, which stated that the Marquis
d’Albufex had been arrested for his complicity in the affair of the
canal.

Daubrecq was taking his revenge.

Now the fact that Daubrecq was taking his revenge proved that the
marquis had not been able to prevent that revenge by seizing the
document which was on the writing-desk in the study. It proved that
Chief-inspector Blanchon and the detectives had kept a good watch. It
proved that the crystal stopper was still in the Square Lamartine.

It was still there; and this showed either that Daubrecq had not
ventured to go home, or else that his state of health hindered him
from doing so, or else again that he had sufficient confidence in the
hiding-place not to trouble to put himself out.

In any case, there was no doubt as to the course to be pursued: Lupin
must act and he must act smartly. He must forestall Daubrecq and get
hold of the crystal stopper.

When they had crossed the Bois de Boulogne and were nearing the Square
Lamartine, Lupin took leave of the doctor and stopped the car. The
Growler and the Masher, to whom he had wired, met him.

“Where’s Mme. Mergy?” he asked.

“She has not been back since yesterday; she sent us an express message
to say that she saw Daubrecq leaving his cousins’ place and getting into
a cab. She knows the number of the cab and will keep us informed.”

“Nothing further?”

“Nothing further.”

“No other news?”

“Yes, the Paris-Midi says that d’Albufex opened his veins last night,
with a piece of broken glass, in his cell at the Sante. He seems to
have left a long letter behind him, confessing his fault, but accusing
Daubrecq of his death and exposing the part played by Daubrecq in the
canal affair.”

“Is that all?”

“No. The same paper stated that it has reason to believe that the
pardoning commission, after examining the record, has rejected Vaucheray
and Gilbert’s petition and that their counsel will probably be received
in audience by the president on Friday.”

Lupin gave a shudder.

“They’re losing no time,” he said. “I can see that Daubrecq, on the very
first day, put the screw on the old judicial machine. One short week
more... and the knife falls. My poor Gilbert! If, on Friday next, the
papers which your counsel submits to the president of the Republic do
not contain the conditional offer of the list of the Twenty-seven, then,
my poor Gilbert, you are done for!”

“Come, come, governor, are you losing courage?”

“I? Rot! I shall have the crystal stopper in an hour. In two hours, I
shall see Gilbert’s counsel. And the nightmare will be over.”

“Well done, governor! That’s like your old self. Shall we wait for you
here?”

“No, go back to your hotel. I’ll join you later.”

They parted. Lupin walked straight to the house and rang the bell.

A detective opened the door and recognized him:

“M. Nicole, I believe?”

“Yes,” he said. “Is Chief-inspector Blanchon here?”

“He is.”

“Can I speak to him?”

The man took him to the study, where Chief-inspector Blanchon welcomed
him with obvious pleasure.

“Well, chief-inspector, one would say there was something new?”

“M. Nicole, my orders are to place myself entirely at your disposal; and
I may say that I am very glad to see you to-day.”

“Why so?”

“Because there is something new.”

“Something serious?”

“Something very serious.”

“Quick, speak.”

“Daubrecq has returned.”

“Eh, what!” exclaimed Lupin, with a start. “Daubrecq returned? Is he
here?”

“No, he has gone.”

“And did he come in here, in the study?”

“Yes.”

“This morning.”

“And you did not prevent him?”

“What right had I?”

“And you left him alone?”

“By his positive orders, yes, we left him alone.”

Lupin felt himself turn pale. Daubrecq had come back to fetch the
crystal stopper!

He was silent for some time and repeated to himself:

“He came back to fetch it... He was afraid that it would be found and he
has taken it... Of course, it was inevitable... with d’Albufex arrested,
with d’Albufex accused and accusing him, Daubrecq was bound to defend
himself. It’s a difficult game for him. After months and months of
mystery, the public is at last learning that the infernal being who
contrived the whole tragedy of the Twenty-Seven and who ruins and kills
his adversaries is he, Daubrecq. What would become of him if, by a
miracle, his talisman did not protect him? He has taken it back.”

And, trying to make his voice sound firm, he asked:

“Did he stay long?”

“Twenty seconds, perhaps.”

“What! Twenty seconds? No longer?”

“No longer.”

“What time was it?”

“Ten o’clock.”

“Could he have known of the Marquis d’Albufex’ suicide by then?”

“Yes. I saw the special edition of the Paris-Midi in his pocket.”

“That’s it, that’s it,” said Lupin. And he asked, “Did M. Prasville give
you no special instructions in case Daubrecq should return?”

“No. So, in M. Prasville’s absence, I telephoned to the police-office
and I am waiting. The disappearance of Daubrecq the deputy caused a
great stir, as you know, and our presence here has a reason, in the eyes
of the public, as long as that disappearance continues. But, now that
Daubrecq has returned, now that we have proofs that he is neither under
restraint nor dead, how can we stay in the house?”

“It doesn’t matter,” said Lupin, absently. “It doesn’t matter whether
the house is guarded or not. Daubrecq has been; therefore the crystal
stopper is no longer here.”

He had not finished the sentence, when a question quite naturally forced
itself upon his mind. If the crystal stopper was no longer there, would
this not be obvious from some material sign? Had the removal of that
object, doubtless contained within another object, left no trace, no
void?

It was easy to ascertain. Lupin had simply to examine the writing-desk,
for he knew, from Sebastiani’s chaff, that this was the spot of the
hiding-place. And the hiding-place could not be a complicated one,
seeing that Daubrecq had not remained in the study for more than twenty
seconds, just long enough, so to speak, to walk in and walk out again.

Lupin looked. And the result was immediate. His memory had so faithfully
recorded the picture of the desk, with all the articles lying on it,
that the absence of one of them struck him instantaneously, as
though that article and that alone were the characteristic sign which
distinguished this particular writing-table from every other table in
the world.

“Oh,” he thought, quivering with delight, “everything fits in!
Everything! ... Down to that half-word which the torture drew from
Daubrecq in the tower at Mortepierre! The riddle is solved. There
need be no more hesitation, no more groping in the dark. The end is in
sight.”

And, without answering the inspector’s questions, he thought of
the simplicity of the hiding-place and remembered Edgar Allan Poe’s
wonderful story in which the stolen letter, so eagerly sought for, is,
in a manner of speaking, displayed to all eyes. People do not suspect
what does not appear to be hidden.

“Well, well,” said Lupin, as he went out, greatly excited by his
discovery, “I seem doomed, in this confounded adventure, to knock up
against disappointments to the finish. Everything that I build crumbles
to pieces at once. Every victory ends in disaster.”

Nevertheless, he did not allow himself to be cast down. On the one hand,
he now knew where Daubrecq the deputy hid the crystal stopper. On the
other hand, he would soon learn from Clarisse Mergy where Daubrecq
himself was lurking. The rest, to him, would be child’s play.

The Growler and the Masher were waiting for him in the drawing-room of
the Hotel Franklin, a small family-hotel near the Trocadero. Mme. Mergy
had not yet written to him.

“Oh,” he said, “I can trust her! She will hang on to Daubrecq until she
is certain.”

However, toward the end of the afternoon, he began to grow impatient and
anxious. He was fighting one of those battles--the last, he hoped--in
which the least delay might jeopardize everything. If Daubrecq threw
Mme. Mergy off the scent, how was he to be caught again? They no longer
had weeks or days, but only a few hours, a terribly limited number of
hours, in which to repair any mistakes that they might commit.

He saw the proprietor of the hotel and asked him:

“Are you sure that there is no express letter for my two friends?”

“Quite sure, sir.”

“Nor for me, M. Nicole?”

“No, sir.”

“That’s curious,” said Lupin. “We were certain that we should hear from
Mme. Audran.”

Audran was the name under which Clarisse was staying at the hotel.

“But the lady has been,” said the proprietor.

“What’s that?”

“She came some time ago and, as the gentlemen were not there, left a
letter in her room. Didn’t the porter tell you?”

Lupin and his friends hurried upstairs. There was a letter on the table.

“Hullo!” said Lupin. “It’s been opened! How is that? And why has it been
cut about with scissors?”

The letter contained the following lines:

 “Daubrecq has spent the week at the Hotel Central.  This morning
 he had his luggage taken to the Gare de ---  and telephoned to
 reserve a berth in the sleeping-car --- for ---

 “I do not know when the train starts.  But I shall be at the
 station all the afternoon.  Come as soon as you can, all three
 of you.  We will arrange to kidnap him.”

“What next?” said the Masher. “At which station? And where’s the
sleeping-car for? She has cut out just the words we wanted!”

“Yes,” said the Growler. “Two snips with the scissors in each place; and
the words which we most want are gone. Who ever saw such a thing? Has
Mme. Mergy lost her head?”

Lupin did not move. A rush of blood was beating at his temples with such
violence that he glued his fists to them and pressed with all his might.
His fever returned, burning and riotous, and his will, incensed to the
verge of physical suffering, concentrated itself upon that stealthy
enemy, which must be controlled then and there, if he himself did not
wish to be irretrievably beaten.

He muttered, very calmly:

“Daubrecq has been here.”

“Daubrecq!”

“We can’t suppose that Mme. Mergy has been amusing herself by cutting
out those two words. Daubrecq has been here. Mme. Mergy thought that she
was watching him. He was watching her instead.”

“How?”

“Doubtless through that hall-porter who did not tell us that Mme. Mergy
had been to the hotel, but who must have told Daubrecq. He came. He
read the letter. And, by way of getting at us, he contented himself with
cutting out the essential words.”

“We can find out... we can ask...”

“What’s the good? What’s the use of finding out how he came, when we
know that he did come?”

He examined the letter for some time, turned it over and over, then
stood up and said:

“Come along.”

“Where to?”

“Gare de Lyon.”

“Are you sure?”

“I am sure of nothing with Daubrecq. But, as we have to choose,
according to the contents of the letter, between the Gare de l’Est and
the Gare de Lyon, [*] I am presuming that his business, his pleasure
and his health are more likely to take Daubrecq in the direction of
Marseilles and the Riviera than to the Gare de l’Est.”

     * These are the only two main-line stations in Paris with the
     word de in their name.  The others have du, as the Gare du
     Nord or the Gare du Luxembourg, d’ as the Gare d’Orleans, or
     no participle at all, as the Gare Saint-Lazare or the Gare
     Montparnasse.--Translator’s Note.

It was past seven when Lupin and his companions left the Hotel Franklin.
A motor-car took them across Paris at full speed, but they soon saw that
Clarisse Mergy was not outside the station, nor in the waiting-rooms,
nor on any of the platforms.

“Still,” muttered Lupin, whose agitation grew as the obstacles
increased, “still, if Daubrecq booked a berth in a sleeping-car, it can
only have been in an evening train. And it is barely half-past seven!”

A train was starting, the night express. They had time to rush along the
corridor. Nobody... neither Mme. Mergy nor Daubrecq...

But, as they were all three going, a porter accosted them near the
refreshment-room:

“Is one of you gentlemen looking for a lady?”

“Yes, yes,... I am,” said Lupin. “Quick, what is it?”

“Oh, it’s you, sir! The lady told me there might be three of you or two
of you.... And I didn’t know...”

“But, in heaven’s name, speak, man! What lady?”

“The lady who spent the whole day on the pavement, with the luggage,
waiting.”

“Well, out with it! Has she taken a train?”

“Yes, the train-de-luxe, at six-thirty: she made up her mind at the last
moment, she told me to say. And I was also to say that the gentleman was
in the same train and that they were going to Monte Carlo.”

“Damn it!” muttered Lupin. “We ought to have taken the express just now!
There’s nothing left but the evening trains, and they crawl! We’ve lost
over three hours.”

The wait seemed interminable. They booked their seats. They telephoned
to the proprietor of the Hotel Franklin to send on their letters to
Monte Carlo. They dined. They read the papers. At last, at half-past
nine, the train started.

And so, by a really tragic series of circumstances, at the most critical
moment of the contest, Lupin was turning his back on the battlefield and
going away, at haphazard, to seek, he knew not where, and beat, he knew
not how, the most formidable and elusive enemy that he had ever fought.

And this was happening four days, five days at most, before the
inevitable execution of Gilbert and Vaucheray.

It was a bad and painful night for Lupin. The more he studied the
situation the more terrible it appeared to him. On every side he was
faced with uncertainty, darkness, confusion, helplessness.

True, he knew the secret of the crystal stopper. But how was he to know
that Daubrecq would not change or had not already changed his tactics?
How was he to know that the list of the Twenty-seven was still inside
that crystal stopper or that the crystal stopper was still inside the
object where Daubrecq had first hidden it?

And there was a further serious reason for alarm in the fact that
Clarisse Mergy thought that she was shadowing and watching Daubrecq at
a time when, on the contrary, Daubrecq was watching her, having her
shadowed and dragging her, with diabolical cleverness, toward the places
selected by himself, far from all help or hope of help.

Oh, Daubrecq’s game was clear as daylight! Did not Lupin know the
unhappy woman’s hesitations? Did he not know--and the Growler and the
Masher confirmed it most positively--that Clarisse looked upon the
infamous bargain planned by Daubrecq in the light of a possible, an
acceptable thing? In that case, how could he, Lupin, succeed? The logic
of events, so powerfully moulded by Daubrecq, led to a fatal result: the
mother must sacrifice herself and, to save her son, throw her scruples,
her repugnance, her very honour, to the winds!

“Oh, you scoundrel!” snarled Lupin, in a fit of rage. “If I get hold of
you, I’ll make you dance to a pretty tune! I wouldn’t be in your shoes
for a great deal, when that happens.”

They reached Monte Carlo at three o’clock in the afternoon. Lupin was at
once disappointed not to see Clarisse on the platform at the station.

He waited. No messenger came up to him.

He asked the porters and ticket-collectors if they had noticed, among
the crowd, two travellers answering to the description of Daubrecq and
Clarisse. They had not.

He had, therefore, to set to work and hunt through all the hotels and
lodging-houses in the principality. Oh, the time wasted!

By the following evening, Lupin knew, beyond a doubt, that Daubrecq and
Clarisse were not at Monte Carlo, nor at Monaco, nor at the Cap d’Ail,
nor at La Turbie, nor at Cap Martin.

“Where can they be then?” he wondered, trembling with rage.

At last, on the Saturday, he received, at the poste restante, a telegram
which had been readdressed from the Hotel Franklin and which said:

 “He got out at Cannes and is going on to San Remo, Hotel Palace
 des Ambassadeurs.

         “CLARISSE.”

The telegram was dated the day before.

“Hang it!” exclaimed Lupin. “They passed through Monte Carlo. One of us
ought to have remained at the station. I did think of it; but, in the
midst of all that bustle...”

Lupin and his friends took the first train for Italy.

They crossed the frontier at twelve o’clock. The train entered the
station at San Remo at twelve-forty.

They at once saw an hotel-porter, with “Ambassadeurs-Palace” on his
braided cap, who seemed to be looking for some one among the arrivals.

Lupin went up to him:

“Are you looking for M. Nicole?”

“Yes, M. Nicole and two gentlemen.”

“From a lady?”

“Yes, Mme. Mergy.”

“Is she staying at your hotel?”

“No. She did not get out. She beckoned to me, described you three
gentlemen and told me to say that she was going on to Genoa, to the
Hotel Continental.”

“Was she by herself?”

“Yes.”

Lupin tipped the man, dismissed him and turned to his friends:

“This is Saturday. If the execution takes place on Monday, there’s
nothing to be done. But Monday is not a likely day... What I have to do
is to lay hands on Daubrecq to-night and to be in Paris on Monday, with
the document. It’s our last chance. Let’s take it.”

The Growler went to the booking-office and returned with three tickets
for Genoa.

The engine whistled.

Lupin had a last hesitation:

“No, really, it’s too childish! What are we doing? We ought to be in
Paris, not here!... Just think!...”

He was on the point of opening the door and jumping out on the permanent
way. But his companions held him back. The train started. He sat down
again.

And they continued their mad pursuit, travelling at random, toward the
unknown...

And this happened two days before the inevitable execution of Gilbert
and Vaucheray.



CHAPTER X. EXTRA-DRY?

On one of the hills that girdle Nice with the finest scenery in the
world, between the Vallon de Saint-Silvestre and the Vallon de La
Mantega, stands a huge hotel which overlooks the town and the wonderful
Baie des Anges. A crowd flocks to it from all parts, forming a medley of
every class and nation.

On the evening of the same Saturday when Lupin, the Growler and the
Masher were plunging into Italy, Clarisse Mergy entered this hotel,
asked for a bedroom facing south and selected No. 130, on the second
floor, a room which had been vacant since that morning.

The room was separated from No. 129 by two partition-doors. As soon as
she was alone, Clarisse pulled back the curtain that concealed the first
door, noiselessly drew the bolt and put her ear to the second door:

“He is here,” she thought. “He is dressing to go to the club... as he
did yesterday.”

When her neighbour had gone, she went into the passage and, availing
herself of a moment when there was no one in sight, walked up to the
door of No. 129. The door was locked.

She waited all the evening for her neighbour’s return and did not go to
bed until two o’clock. On Sunday morning, she resumed her watch.

The neighbour went out at eleven. This time he left the key in the door.

Hurriedly turning the key, Clarisse entered boldly, went to the
partition-door, raised the curtain, drew the bolt and found herself in
her own room.

In a few minutes, she heard two chambermaids doing the room in No. 129.

She waited until they were gone. Then, feeling sure that she would not
be disturbed, she once more slipped into the other room.

Her excitement made her lean against a chair. After days and nights of
stubborn pursuit, after alternate hopes and disappointments, she had at
last succeeded in entering a room occupied by Daubrecq. She could look
about at her ease; and, if she did not discover the crystal stopper, she
could at least hide in the space between the partition-doors, behind the
hanging, see Daubrecq, spy upon his movements and surprise his secret.

She looked around her. A travelling-bag at once caught her attention.
She managed to open it; but her search was useless.

She ransacked the trays of a trunk and the compartments of a
portmanteau. She searched the wardrobe, the writing-table, the chest
of drawers, the bathroom, all the tables, all the furniture. She found
nothing.

She gave a start when she saw a scrap of paper on the balcony, lying as
though flung there by accident:

“Can it be a trick of Daubrecq’s?” she thought, out loud. “Can that
scrap of paper contain...”

“No,” said a voice behind her, as she put her hand on the latch.

She turned and saw Daubrecq.

She felt neither astonishment nor alarm, nor even any embarrassment at
finding herself face to face with him. She had suffered too deeply for
months to trouble about what Daubrecq could think of her or say, at
catching her in the act of spying.

She sat down wearily.

He grinned:

“No, you’re out of it, dear friend. As the children say, you’re not
‘burning’ at all. Oh, not a bit of it! And it’s so easy! Shall I help
you? It’s next to you, dear friend, on that little table... And yet,
by Jove, there’s not much on that little table! Something to read,
something to write with, something to smoke, something to eat... and
that’s all... Will you have one of these candied fruits?... Or perhaps
you would rather wait for the more substantial meal which I have
ordered?”

Clarisse made no reply. She did not even seem to listen to what he was
saying, as though she expected other words, more serious words, which he
could not fail to utter.

He cleared the table of all the things that lay upon it and put them on
the mantel-piece. Then he rang the bell.

A head-waiter appeared. Daubrecq asked:

“Is the lunch which I ordered ready?”

“Yes, sir.”

“It’s for two, isn’t it?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And the champagne?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Extra-dry?”

“Yes, sir.”

Another waiter brought a tray and laid two covers on the table: a cold
lunch, some fruit and a bottle of champagne in an ice-pail.

Then the two waiters withdrew.

“Sit down, dear lady. As you see, I was thinking of you and your cover
is laid.”

And, without seeming to observe that Clarisse was not at all prepared to
do honour to his invitation, he sat down, began to eat and continued:

“Yes, upon my word, I hoped that you would end by consenting to this
little private meeting. During the past week, while you were keeping so
assiduous a watch upon me, I did nothing but say to myself, ‘I wonder
which she prefers: sweet champagne, dry champagne, or extra-dry?’ I was
really puzzled. Especially after our departure from Paris. I had
lost your tracks, that is to say, I feared that you had lost mine and
abandoned the pursuit which was so gratifying to me. When I went for a
walk, I missed your beautiful dark eyes, gleaming with hatred under your
hair just touched with gray. But, this morning, I understood: the room
next to mine was empty at last; and my friend Clarisse was able to take
up her quarters, so to speak, by my bedside. From that moment I was
reassured. I felt certain that, on coming back--instead of lunching in
the restaurant as usual--I should find you arranging my things to your
convenience and suiting your own taste. That was why I ordered two
covers: one for your humble servant, the other for his fair friend.”

She was listening to him now and in the greatest terror. So Daubrecq
knew that he was spied upon! For a whole week he had seen through her
and all her schemes!

In a low voice, anxious-eyed, she asked:

“You did it on purpose, did you not? You only went away to drag me with
you?”

“Yes,” he said.

“But why? Why?”

“Do you mean to say that you don’t know?” retorted Daubrecq, laughing
with a little cluck of delight.

She half-rose from her chair and, bending toward him, thought, as she
thought each time, of the murder which she could commit, of the murder
which she would commit. One revolver-shot and the odious brute was done
for.

Slowly her hand glided to the weapon concealed in her bodice.

Daubrecq said:

“One second, dear friend... You can shoot presently; but I beg you first
to read this wire which I have just received.”

She hesitated, not knowing what trap he was laying for her; but he went
on, as he produced a telegram:

“It’s about your son.”

“Gilbert?” she asked, greatly concerned.

“Yes, Gilbert... Here, read it.”

She gave a yell of dismay. She had read:

 “Execution on Tuesday morning.”

And she at once flung herself on Daubrecq, crying:

“It’s not true!... It’s a lie... to madden me... Oh, I know you: you are
capable of anything! Confess! It won’t be on Tuesday, will it? In two
days! No, no... I tell you, we have four days yet, five days, in which
to save him... Confess it, confess it!”

She had no strength left, exhausted by this fit of rebellion; and her
voice uttered none but inarticulate sounds.

He looked at her for a moment, then poured himself out a glass of
champagne and drank it down at a gulp. He took a few steps up and down
the room, came back to her and said:

“Listen to me, darling...”

The insult made her quiver with an unexpected energy. She drew herself
up and, panting with indignation, said:

“I forbid you... I forbid you to speak to me like that. I will not
accept such an outrage. You wretch!...”

He shrugged his shoulders and resumed:

“Pah, I see you’re not quite alive to the position. That comes,
of course, because you still hope for assistance in some quarter.
Prasville, perhaps? The excellent Prasville, whose right hand you are...
My dear friend, a forlorn hope... You must know that Prasville is mixed
up in the Canal affair! Not directly: that is to say, his name is not on
the list of the Twenty-seven; but it is there under the name of one of
his friends, an ex-deputy called Vorenglade, Stanislas Vorenglade, his
man of straw, apparently: a penniless individual whom I left alone and
rightly. I knew nothing of all that until this morning, when, lo and
behold, I received a letter informing me of the existence of a bundle of
documents which prove the complicity of our one and only Prasville!
And who is my informant? Vorenglade himself! Vorenglade, who, tired of
living in poverty, wants to extort money from Prasville, at the risk of
being arrested, and who will be delighted to come to terms with me. And
Prasville will get the sack. Oh, what a lark! I swear to you that
he will get the sack, the villain! By Jove, but he’s annoyed me long
enough! Prasville, old boy, you’ve deserved it...”

He rubbed his hands together, revelling in his coming revenge. And he
continued:

“You see, my dear Clarisse... there’s nothing to be done in that
direction. What then? What straw will you cling to? Why, I was
forgetting: M. Arsene Lupin! Mr. Growler! Mr. Masher!... Pah, you’ll
admit that those gentlemen have not shone and that all their feats of
prowess have not prevented me from going my own little way. It was bound
to be. Those fellows imagine that there’s no one to equal them. When
they meet an adversary like myself, one who is not to be bounced, it
upsets them and they make blunder after blunder, while still believing
that they are hoodwinking him like mad. Schoolboys, that’s what
they are! However, as you seem to have some illusions left about the
aforesaid Lupin, as you are counting on that poor devil to crush me and
to work a miracle in favour of your innocent Gilbert, come, let’s dispel
that illusion. Oh! Lupin! Lord above, she believes in Lupin! She
places her last hopes in Lupin! Lupin! Just wait till I prick you, my
illustrious windbag!”

He took up the receiver of the telephone which communicated with the
hall of the hotel and said:

“I’m No. 129, mademoiselle. Would you kindly ask the person sitting
opposite your office to come up to me?... Huh!... Yes, mademoiselle, the
gentleman in a gray felt hat. He knows. Thank you, mademoiselle.”

Hanging up the receiver, he turned to Clarisse:

“Don’t be afraid. The man is discretion itself. Besides, it’s the motto
of his trade: ‘Discretion and dispatch.’ As a retired detective, he has
done me a number of services, including that of following you while you
were following me. Since our arrival in the south, he has been less
busy with you; but that was because he was more busy elsewhere. Come in,
Jacob.”

He himself opened the door, and a short, thin man, with a red moustache,
entered the room.

“Please tell this lady, Jacob, in a few brief words, what you have
done since Wednesday evening, when, after letting her get into the
train-de-luxe which was taking me from the Gare de Lyon to the south,
you yourself remained on the platform at the station. Of course, I am
not asking how you spent your time, except in so far as concerns the
lady and the business with which I entrusted you.”

Jacob dived into the inside-pocket of his jacket and produced a little
note-book of which he turned over the pages and read them aloud in the
voice of a man reading a report:

“Wednesday evening, 8.15. Gare de Lyon. Wait for two gents, Growler and
Masher. They come with another whom I don’t know yet, but who can only
be M. Nicole. Give a porter ten francs for the loan of his cap and
blouse. Accost the gents and tell them, from a lady, ‘that they were
gone to Monte Carlo.’ Next, telephone to the porter at the Hotel
Franklin. All telegrams sent to his boss and dispatched by said boss
will be read by said hotel-porter and, if necessary, intercepted.

“Thursday. Monte Carlo. The three gents search the hotels.

“Friday. Flying visits to La Turbie, the Cap d’Ail, Cap Martin. M.
Daubrecq rings me up. Thinks it wiser to send the gents to Italy. Make
the porter of the Hotel Franklin send them a telegram appointing a
meeting at San Remo.

“Saturday. San Remo. Station platform. Give the porter of the
Ambassadeurs-Palace ten francs for the loan of his cap. The three gents
arrive. They speak to me. Explain to them that a lady traveller,
Mme. Mergy, is going on to Genoa, to the Hotel Continental. The gents
hesitate. M. Nicole wants to get out. The others hold him back. The
train starts. Good luck, gents! An hour later, I take the train for
France and get out at Nice, to await fresh orders.”

Jacob closed his note-book and concluded:

“That’s all. To-day’s doings will be entered this evening.”

“You can enter them now, M. Jacob. ‘12 noon. M. Daubrecq sends me to the
Wagon-Lits Co. I book two berths in the Paris sleeping-car, by the 2.48
train, and send them to M. Daubrecq by express messenger. Then I take
the 12.58 train for Vintimille, the frontier-station, where I spend
the day on the platform watching all the travellers who come to France.
Should Messrs. Nicole, Growler and Masher take it into their heads to
leave Italy and return to Paris by way of Nice, my instructions are to
telegraph to the headquarters of police that Master Arsene Lupin and two
of his accomplices are in train number so-and-so.”

While speaking, Daubrecq led Jacob to the door. He closed it after him,
turned the key, pushed the bolt and, going up to Clarisse, said:

“And now, darling, listen to me.”

This time, she uttered no protest. What could she do against such an
enemy, so powerful, so resourceful, who provided for everything, down to
the minutest details, and who toyed with his adversaries in such an airy
fashion? Even if she had hoped till then for Lupin’s interference, how
could she do so now, when he was wandering through Italy in pursuit of a
shadow?

She understood at last why three telegrams which she had sent to the
Hotel Franklin had remained unanswered. Daubrecq was there, lurking in
the dark, watching, establishing a void around her, separating her from
her comrades in the fight, bringing her gradually, a beaten prisoner,
within the four walls of that room.

She felt her weakness. She was at the monster’s mercy. She must be
silent and resigned.

He repeated, with an evil delight:

“Listen to me, darling. Listen to the irrevocable words which I am about
to speak. Listen to them well. It is now 12 o’clock. The last train
starts at 2.48: you understand, the last train that can bring me to
Paris to-morrow, Monday, in time to save your son. The evening-trains
would arrive too late. The trains-de-luxe are full up. Therefore I shall
have to start at 2.48. Am I to start?”

“Yes.”

“Our berths are booked. Will you come with me?”

“Yes.”

“You know my conditions for interfering?”

“Yes.”

“Do you accept them?”

“Yes.”

“You will marry me?”

“Yes.”

Oh, those horrible answers! The unhappy woman gave them in a sort of
awful torpor, refusing even to understand what she was promising. Let
him start first, let him snatch Gilbert from the engine of death whose
vision haunted her day and night... And then... and then... let what
must come come...

He burst out laughing:

“Oh, you rogue, it’s easily said!... You’re ready to pledge yourself to
anything, eh? The great thing is to save Gilbert, isn’t it? Afterward,
when that noodle of a Daubrecq comes with his engagement-ring, not a
bit of it! Nothing doing! We’ll laugh in his face!... No, no, enough
of empty words. I don’t want promises that won’t be kept: I want facts,
immediate facts.”

He came and sat close beside her and stated, plainly:

“This is what I propose... what must be... what shall be... I will ask,
or rather I will demand, not Gilbert’s pardon, to begin with, but a
reprieve, a postponement of the execution, a postponement of three
or four weeks. They will invent a pretext of some sort: that’s not my
affair. And, when Mme. Mergy has become Mme. Daubrecq, then and not till
then will I ask for his pardon, that is to say, the commutation of his
sentence. And make yourself quite easy: they’ll grant it.”

“I accept... I accept,” she stammered.

He laughed once more:

“Yes, you accept, because that will happen in a month’s time... and
meanwhile you reckon on finding some trick, an assistance of some kind
or another... M. Arsene Lupin...”

“I swear it on the head of my son.”

“The head of your son!... Why, my poor pet, you would sell yourself to
the devil to save it from falling!...”

“Oh, yes,” she whispered, shuddering. “I would gladly sell my soul!”

He sidled up against her and, in a low voice:

“Clarisse, it’s not your soul I ask for... It’s something else... For
more than twenty years my life has spun around that longing. You are the
only woman I have ever loved... Loathe me, hate me--I don’t care--but do
not spurn me... Am I to wait? To wait another month?... No, Clarisse, I
have waited too many years already...”

He ventured to touch her hand. Clarisse shrank back with such disgust
that he was seized with fury and cried:

“Oh, I swear to heaven, my beauty, the executioner won’t stand on such
ceremony when he catches hold of your son!... And you give yourself
airs! Why, think, it’ll happen in forty hours! Forty hours, no more, and
you hesitate... and you have scruples, when your son’s life is at stake!
Come, come, no whimpering, no silly sentimentality... Look things in
the face. By your own oath, you are my wife, you are my bride from this
moment... Clarisse, Clarisse, give me your lips...”

Half-fainting, she had hardly the strength to put out her arm and push
him away; and, with a cynicism in which all his abominable nature stood
revealed, Daubrecq, mingling words of cruelty and words of passion,
continued:

“Save your son!... Think of the last morning: the preparations for the
scaffold, when they snip away his shirt and cut his hair... Clarisse,
Clarisse, I will save him... Be sure of it... All my life shall be yours
... Clarisse...”

She no longer resisted. It was over. The loathsome brute’s lips were
about to touch hers; and it had to be, and nothing could prevent it.
It was her duty to obey the decree of fate. She had long known it. She
understood it; and, closing her eyes, so as not to see the foul face
that was slowly raised to hers, she repeated to herself:

“My son... my poor son.”

A few seconds passed: ten, twenty perhaps. Daubrecq did not move.
Daubrecq did not speak. And she was astounded at that great silence and
that sudden quiet. Did the monster, at the last moment, feel a scruple
of remorse?

She raised her eyelids.

The sight which she beheld struck her with stupefaction. Instead of
the grinning features which she expected to see, she saw a motionless,
unrecognizable face, contorted by an expression of unspeakable terror:
and the eyes, invisible under the double impediment of the spectacles,
seemed to be staring above her head, above the chair in which she lay
prostrate.

Clarisse turned her face. Two revolver-barrels, pointed at Daubrecq,
showed on the right, a little above the chair. She saw only that: those
two huge, formidable revolvers, gripped in two clenched hands. She saw
only that and also Daubrecq’s face, which fear was discolouring little
by little, until it turned livid. And, almost at the same time, some one
slipped behind Daubrecq, sprang up fiercely, flung one of his arms round
Daubrecq’s neck, threw him to the ground with incredible violence and
applied a pad of cotton-wool to his face. A sudden smell of chloroform
filled the room.

Clarisse had recognized M. Nicole.

“Come along, Growler!” he cried. “Come along, Masher! Drop your
shooters: I’ve got him! He’s a limp rag... Tie him up.”

Daubrecq, in fact, was bending in two and falling on his knees like a
disjointed doll. Under the action of the chloroform, the fearsome brute
sank into impotence, became harmless and grotesque.

The Growler and the Masher rolled him in one of the blankets of the bed
and tied him up securely.

“That’s it! That’s it!” shouted Lupin, leaping to his feet.

And, in a sudden reaction of mad delight, he began to dance a wild jig
in the middle of the room, a jig mingled with bits of can-can and the
contortions of the cakewalk and the whirls of a dancing dervish and the
acrobatic movements of a clown and the lurching steps of a drunken
man. And he announced, as though they were the numbers in a music-hall
performance:

“The prisoner’s dance!... The captive’s hornpipe!... A fantasia on the
corpse of a representative of the people!... The chloroform polka!...
The two-step of the conquered goggles! Olle! Olle! The blackmailer’s
fandango! Hoot! Hoot! The McDaubrecq’s fling!... The turkey trot!...
And the bunny hug!... And the grizzly bear!... The Tyrolean dance:
tra-la-liety!... Allons, enfants de la partie!... Zing, boum, boum!
Zing, boum, boum!...”

All his street-arab nature, all his instincts of gaiety, so long
suppressed by his constant anxiety and disappointment, came out and
betrayed themselves in roars of laughter, bursts of animal spirits and a
picturesque need of childlike exuberance and riot.

He gave a last high kick, turned a series of cartwheels round the
room and ended by standing with his hands on his hips and one foot on
Daubrecq’s lifeless body.

“An allegorical tableau!” he announced. “The angel of virtue destroying
the hydra of vice!”

And the humour of the scene was twice as great because Lupin was
appearing under the aspect of M. Nicole, in the clothes and figure of
that wizened, awkward, nervous private tutor.

A sad smile flickered across Mme. Mergy’s face, her first smile for
many a long month. But, at once returning to the reality of things, she
besought him:

“Please, please... think of Gilbert!”

He ran up to her, caught her in his arms and, obeying a spontaneous
impulse, so frank that she could but laugh at it, gave her a resounding
kiss on either cheek:

“There, lady, that’s the kiss of a decent man! Instead of Daubrecq, it’s
I kissing you... Another word and I’ll do it again... and I’ll call you
darling next... Be angry with me, if you dare. Oh, how happy I am!”

He knelt before her on one knee. And, respectfully:

“I beg your pardon, madame. The fit is over.”

And, getting up again, resuming his whimsical manner, he continued,
while Clarisse wondered what he was driving at:

“What’s the next article, madame? Your son’s pardon, perhaps? Certainly!
Madame, I have the honour to grant you the pardon of your son, the
commutation of his sentence to penal servitude for life and, to wind
up with, his early escape. It’s settled, eh, Growler? Settled, Masher,
what? You’ll both go with the boy to New Caledonia and arrange for
everything. Oh, my dear Daubrecq, we owe you a great debt! But I’m not
forgetting you, believe me! What would you like? A last pipe? Coming,
coming!”

He took one of the pipes from the mantel-piece, stooped over the
prisoner, shifted his pad and thrust the amber mouth-piece between his
teeth:

“Draw, old chap, draw. Lord, how funny you look, with your plug over
your nose and your cutty in your mouth. Come, puff away. By Jove, I
forgot to fill your pipe! Where’s your tobacco, your favourite Maryland?
... Oh, here we are!...”

He took from the chimney an unopened yellow packet and tore off the
government band:

“His lordship’s tobacco! Ladies and gentlemen, keep your eyes on me!
This is a great moment. I am about to fill his lordship’s pipe: by
Jupiter, what an honour! Observe my movements! You see, I have nothing
in my hands, nothing up my sleeves!...”

He turned back his cuffs and stuck out his elbows. Then he opened the
packet and inserted his thumb and fore-finger, slowly, gingerly, like a
conjurer performing a sleight-of-hand trick before a puzzled audience,
and, beaming all over his face, extracted from the tobacco a glittering
object which he held out before the spectators.

Clarisse uttered a cry.

It was the crystal stopper.

She rushed at Lupin and snatched it from him:

“That’s it; that’s the one!” she exclaimed, feverishly. “There’s no
scratch on the stem! And look at this line running down the middle,
where the gilt finishes... That’s it; it unscrews!... Oh, dear, my
strength’s going!...” She trembled so violently that Lupin took back the
stopper and unscrewed it himself.

The inside of the knob was hollow; and in the hollow space was a piece
of paper rolled into a tiny pellet.

“The foreign-post-paper,” he whispered, himself greatly excited, with
quivering hands.

There was a long silence. All four felt as if their hearts were ready to
burst from their bodies; and they were afraid of what was coming.

“Please, please...” stammered Clarisse.

Lupin unfolded the paper.

There was a set of names written one below the other, twenty-seven of
them, the twenty-seven names of the famous list: Langeroux, Dechaumont,
Vorenglade, d’Albufex, Victorien Mergy and the rest.

And, at the foot, the signature of the chairman of the Two-Seas Canal
Company, the signature written in letters of blood.

Lupin looked at his watch:

“A quarter to one,” he said. “We have twenty minutes to spare. Let’s
have some lunch.”

“But,” said Clarisse, who was already beginning to lose her head, “don’t
forget...”

He simply said:

“All I know is that I’m dying of hunger.”

He sat down at the table, cut himself a large slice of cold pie and said
to his accomplices:

“Growler? A bite? You, Masher?”

“I could do with a mouthful, governor.”

“Then hurry up, lads. And a glass of champage to wash it down with: it’s
the chloroform-patient’s treat. Your health, Daubrecq! Sweet champagne?
Dry champagne? Extra-dry?”



CHAPTER XI. THE CROSS OF LORRAINE

The moment Lupin had finished lunch, he at once and, so to speak,
without transition, recovered all his mastery and authority. The
time for joking was past; and he must no longer yield to his love of
astonishing people with claptrap and conjuring tricks. Now that he had
discovered the crystal stopper in the hiding-place which he had
guessed with absolute certainty, now that he possessed the list of the
Twenty-seven, it became a question of playing off the last game of the
rubber without delay.

It was child’s play, no doubt, and what remained to be done presented no
difficulty. Nevertheless, it was essential that he should perform these
final actions with promptness, decision and infallible perspicacity. The
smallest blunder was irretrievable. Lupin knew this; but his strangely
lucid brain had allowed for every contingency. And the movements and
words which he was now about to make and utter were all fully prepared
and matured:

“Growler, the commissionaire is waiting on the Boulevard Gambetta with
his barrow and the trunk which we bought. Bring him here and have the
trunk carried up. If the people of the hotel ask any questions, say it’s
for the lady in No. 130.”

Then, addressing his other companion:

“Masher, go back to the station and take over the limousine. The price
is arranged: ten thousand francs. Buy a chauffeur’s cap and overcoat and
bring the car to the hotel.”

“The money, governor.”

Lupin opened a pocketbook which had been removed from Daubrecq’s jacket
and produced a huge bundle of bank-notes. He separated ten of them:

“Here you are. Our friend appears to have been doing well at the club.
Off with you, Masher!”

The two men went out through Clarisse’s room. Lupin availed himself of
a moment when Clarisse Mergy was not looking to stow away the pocketbook
with the greatest satisfaction:

“I shall have done a fair stroke of business,” he said to himself. “When
all the expenses are paid, I shall still be well to the good; and it’s
not over yet.”

Then turning to Clarisse Mergy, he asked:

“Have you a bag?”

“Yes, I bought one when I reached Nice, with some linen and a few
necessaries; for I left Paris unprepared.”

“Get all that ready. Then go down to the office. Say that you are
expecting a trunk which a commissionaire is bringing from the station
cloakroom and that you will want to unpack and pack it again in your
room; and tell them that you are leaving.”

When alone, Lupin examined Daubrecq carefully, felt in all his pockets
and appropriated everything that seemed to present any sort of interest.

The Growler was the first to return. The trunk, a large wicker hamper
covered with black moleskin, was taken into Clarisse’s room. Assisted by
Clarisse and the Growler, Lupin moved Daubrecq and put him in the trunk,
in a sitting posture, but with his head bent so as to allow of the lid
being fastened:

“I don’t say that it’s as comfortable as your berth in a sleeping-car,
my dear deputy,” Lupin observed. “But, all the same, it’s better than a
coffin. At least, you can breathe. Three little holes in each side. You
have nothing to complain of!”

Then, unstopping a flask:

“A drop more chloroform? You seem to love it!...”

He soaked the pad once more, while, by his orders, Clarisse and the
Growler propped up the deputy with linen, rugs and pillows, which they
had taken the precaution to heap in the trunk.

“Capital!” said Lupin. “That trunk is fit to go round the world. Lock it
and strap it.”

The Masher arrived, in a chauffeur’s livery:

“The car’s below, governor.”

“Good,” he said. “Take the trunk down between you. It would be dangerous
to give it to the hotel-servants.”

“But if any one meets us?”

“Well, what then, Masher? Aren’t you a chauffeur? You’re carrying the
trunk of your employer here present, the lady in No. 130, who will
also go down, step into her motor... and wait for me two hundred yards
farther on. Growler, you help to hoist the trunk up. Oh, first lock the
partition-door!”

Lupin went to the next room, closed the other door, shot the bolt,
walked out, locked the door behind him and went down in the lift.

In the office, he said:

“M. Daubrecq has suddenly been called away to Monte Carlo. He asked me
to say that he would not be back until Tuesday and that you were to keep
his room for him. His things are all there. Here is the key.”

He walked away quietly and went after the car, where he found Clarisse
lamenting:

“We shall never be in Paris to-morrow! It’s madness! The least
breakdown...”

“That’s why you and I are going to take the train. It’s safer...”

He put her into a cab and gave his parting instructions to the two men:

“Thirty miles an hour, on the average, do you understand? You’re to
drive and rest, turn and turn about. At that rate, you ought to be in
Paris between six and seven to-morrow evening. But don’t force the pace.
I’m keeping Daubrecq, not because I want him for my plans, but as a
hostage... and then by way of precaution... I like to feel that I can
lay my hands on him during the next few days. So look after the dear
fellow... Give him a few drops of chloroform every three or four hours:
it’s his one weakness... Off with you, Masher... And you, Daubrecq,
don’t get excited up there. The roof’ll bear you all right... If you
feel at all sick, don’t mind... Off you go, Masher!”

He watched the car move into the distance and then told the cabman to
drive to a post-office, where he dispatched a telegram in these words:

 “M. Prasville, Prefecture de Police, Paris:

 “Person found.  Will bring you document eleven o’clock
 to-morrow morning.  Urgent communication.

        “CLARISSE.”

Clarisse and Lupin reached the station by half-past two.

“If only there’s room!” said Clarisse, who was alarmed at the least
thing.

“Room? Why, our berths are booked!”

“By whom?”

“By Jacob... by Daubrecq.”

“How?”

“Why, at the office of the hotel they gave me a letter which had come
for Daubrecq by express. It was the two berths which Jacob had sent him.
Also, I have his deputy’s pass. So we shall travel under the name of M.
and Mme. Daubrecq and we shall receive all the attention due to our rank
and station. You see, my dear madam, that everything’s arranged.”

The journey, this time, seemed short to Lupin. Clarisse told him what
she had done during the past few days. He himself explained the miracle
of his sudden appearance in Daubrecq’s bedroom at the moment when his
adversary believed him in Italy:

“A miracle, no,” he said. “But still a remarkable phenomenon took
place in me when I left San Remo, a sort of mysterious intuition which
prompted me first to try and jump out of the train--and the Masher
prevented me--and next to rush to the window, let down the glass and
follow the porter of the Ambassadeurs-Palace, who had given me your
message, with my eyes. Well, at that very minute, the porter aforesaid
was rubbing his hands with an air of such satisfaction that, for no
other reason, suddenly, I understood everything: I had been diddled,
taken in by Daubrecq, as you yourself were. Heaps of little details
flashed across my mind. My adversary’s scheme became clear to me from
start to finish. Another minute... and the disaster would have been
beyond remedy. I had, I confess, a few moments of real despair, at the
thought that I should not be able to repair all the mistakes that had
been made. It depended simply on the time-table of the trains, which
would either allow me or would not allow me to find Daubrecq’s emissary
on the railway-platform at San Remo. This time, at last, chance favoured
me. We had hardly alighted at the first station when a train passed, for
France. When we arrived at San Remo, the man was there. I had guessed
right. He no longer wore his hotel-porter’s cap and frock-coat, but a
jacket and bowler. He stepped into a second-class compartment. From that
moment, victory was assured.”

“But... how...?” asked Clarisse, who, in spite of the thoughts that
obsessed her, was interested in Lupin’s story.

“How did I find you? Lord, simply by not losing sight of Master Jacob,
while leaving him free to move about as he pleased, knowing that he was
bound to account for his actions to Daubrecq. In point of fact, this
morning, after spending the night in a small hotel at Nice, he met
Daubrecq on the Promenade des Anglais. They talked for some time. I
followed them. Daubrecq went back to the hotel, planted Jacob in one
of the passages on the ground-floor, opposite the telephone-office, and
went up in the lift. Ten minutes later I knew the number of his room and
knew that a lady had been occupying the next room, No. 130, since the
day before. ‘I believe we’ve done it,’ I said to the Growler and the
Masher. I tapped lightly at your door. No answer. And the door was
locked.”

“Well?” asked Clarisse.

“Well, we opened it. Do you think there’s only one key in the world
that will work a lock? So I walked in. Nobody in your room. But the
partition-door was ajar. I slipped through it. Thenceforth, a mere
hanging separated me from you, from Daubrecq and from the packet of
tobacco which I saw on the chimney-slab.”

“Then you knew the hiding-place?”

“A look round Daubrecq’s study in Paris showed me that that packet of
tobacco had disappeared. Besides...”

“What?”

“I knew, from certain confessions wrung from Daubrecq in the Lovers’
Tower, that the word Marie held the key to the riddle. Since then I had
certainly thought of this word, but with the preconceived notion that
it was spelt M A R I E. Well, it was really the first two syllables of
another word, which I guessed, so to speak, only at the moment when I
was struck by the absence of the packet of tobacco.”

“What word do you mean?”

“Maryland, Maryland tobacco, the only tobacco that Daubrecq smokes.”

And Lupin began to laugh:

“Wasn’t it silly? And, at the same time, wasn’t it clever of Daubrecq?
We looked everywhere, we ransacked everything. Didn’t I unscrew the
brass sockets of the electric lights to see if they contained a crystal
stopper? But how could I have thought, how could any one, however great
his perspicacity, have thought of tearing off the paper band of a packet
of Maryland, a band put on, gummed, sealed, stamped and dated by the
State, under the control of the Inland Revenue Office? Only think! The
State the accomplice of such an act of infamy! The Inland R-r-r-revenue
Awfice lending itself to such a trick! No, a thousand times no!
The Regie [*] is not perfect. It makes matches that won’t light and
cigarettes filled with hay. But there’s all the difference in the world
between recognizing that fact and believing the Inland Revenue to be
in league with Daubrecq with the object of hiding the list of the
Twenty-seven from the legitimate curiosity of the government and the
enterprising efforts of Arsene Lupin! Observe that all Daubrecq had to
do, in order to introduce the crystal stopper, was to bear upon the band
a little, loosen it, draw it back, unfold the yellow paper, remove the
tobacco and fasten it up again. Observe also that all we had to do, in
Paris, was to take the packet in our hands and examine it, in order to
discover the hiding-place. No matter! The packet itself, the plug of
Maryland made up and passed by the State and by the Inland Revenue
Office, was a sacred, intangible thing, a thing above suspicion! And
nobody opened it. That was how that demon of a Daubrecq allowed that
untouched packet of tobacco to lie about for months on his table, among
his pipes and among other unopened packets of tobacco. And no power on
earth could have given any one even the vaguest notion of looking into
that harmless little cube. I would have you observe, besides...” Lupin
went on pursuing his remarks relative to the packet of Maryland and the
crystal stopper. His adversary’s ingenuity and shrewdness interested him
all the more inasmuch as Lupin had ended by getting the better of him.
But to Clarisse these topics mattered much less than did her anxiety as
to the acts which must be performed to save her son; and she sat wrapped
in her own thoughts and hardly listened to him.

     * The department of the French excise which holds the
     monopoly for the manufacture and sale of tobacco, cigars,
     cigarettes and matches--Translator’s Note.


“Are you sure,” she kept on repeating, “that you will succeed?”

“Absolutely sure.”

“But Prasville is not in Paris.”

“If he’s not there, he’s at the Havre. I saw it in the paper yesterday.
In any case, a telegram will bring him to Paris at once.”

“And do you think that he has enough influence?”

“To obtain the pardon of Vaucheray and Gilbert personally. No. If he
had, we should have set him to work before now. But he is intelligent
enough to understand the value of what we are bringing him and to act
without a moment’s delay.”

“But, to be accurate, are you not deceived as to that value?”

“Was Daubrecq deceived? Was Daubrecq not in a better position than
any of us to know the full power of that paper? Did he not have twenty
proofs of it, each more convincing than the last? Think of all that he
was able to do, for the sole reason that people knew him to possess the
list. They knew it; and that was all. He did not use the list, but he
had it. And, having it, he killed your husband. He built up his fortune
on the ruin and the disgrace of the Twenty-seven. Only last week, one of
the gamest of the lot, d’Albufex, cut his throat in a prison. No, take
it from me, as the price of handing over that list, we could ask for
anything we pleased. And we are asking for what? Almost nothing ... less
than nothing... the pardon of a child of twenty. In other words, they
will take us for idiots. What! We have in our hands...”

He stopped. Clarisse, exhausted by so much excitement, sat fast asleep
in front of him.

They reached Paris at eight o’clock in the morning.

Lupin found two telegrams awaiting him at his flat in the Place de
Clichy.

One was from the Masher, dispatched from Avignon on the previous day
and stating that all was going well and that they hoped to keep their
appointment punctually that evening. The other was from Prasville, dated
from the Havre and addressed to Clarisse:

 “Impossible return to-morrow Monday morning.  Come to my office
 five o’clock.  Reckon on you absolutely.”

“Five o’clock!” said Clarisse. “How late!”

“It’s a first-rate hour,” declared Lupin.

“Still, if...”

“If the execution is to take place to-morrow morning: is that what you
mean to say?... Don’t be afraid to speak out, for the execution will not
take place.”

“The newspapers...”

“You haven’t read the newspapers and you are not to read them. Nothing
that they can say matters in the least. One thing alone matters: our
interview with Prasville. Besides...”

He took a little bottle from a cupboard and, putting his hand on
Clarisse’s shoulder, said:

“Lie down here, on the sofa, and take a few drops of this mixture.”

“What’s it for?”

“It will make you sleep for a few hours... and forget. That’s always so
much gained.”

“No, no,” protested Clarisse, “I don’t want to. Gilbert is not asleep.
He is not forgetting.”

“Drink it,” said Lupin, with gentle insistence. She yielded all of a
sudden, from cowardice, from excessive suffering, and did as she was
told and lay on the sofa and closed her eyes. In a few minutes she was
asleep.

Lupin rang for his servant:

“The newspapers... quick!... Have you bought them?”

“Here they are, governor.”

Lupin opened one of them and at once read the following lines:

   “ARSENE LUPIN’S ACCOMPLICES”

  “We know from a positive source that Arsene Lupin’s
  accomplices, Gilbert and Vaucheray, will be executed
  to-morrow, Tuesday, morning. M. Deibler has inspected
  the scaffold.  Everything is ready.”

He raised his head with a defiant look.

“Arsene Lupin’s accomplices! The execution of Arsene Lupin’s
accomplices! What a fine spectacle! And what a crowd there will be to
witness it! Sorry, gentlemen, but the curtain will not rise. Theatre
closed by order of the authorities. And the authorities are myself!”

He struck his chest violently, with an arrogant gesture:

“The authorities are myself!”

At twelve o’clock Lupin received a telegram which the Masher had sent
from Lyons:

“All well. Goods will arrive without damage.”

At three o’clock Clarisse woke. Her first words were:

“Is it to be to-morrow?”

He did not answer. But she saw him look so calm and smiling that she
felt herself permeated with an immense sense of peace and received the
impression that everything was finished, disentangled, settled according
to her companion’s will.

They left the house at ten minutes past four. Prasville’s secretary, who
had received his chief’s instructions by telephone, showed them into the
office and asked them to wait. It was a quarter to five.

Prasville came running in at five o’clock exactly and, at once, cried:

“Have you the list?”

“Yes.”

“Give it me.”

He put out his hand. Clarisse, who had risen from her chair, did not
stir.

Prasville looked at her for a moment, hesitated and sat down. He
understood. In pursuing Daubrecq, Clarisse Mergy had not acted only
from hatred and the desire for revenge. Another motive prompted her. The
paper would not be handed over except upon conditions.

“Sit down, please,” he said, thus showing that he accepted the
discussion.

Clarisse resumed her seat and, when she remained silent, Prasville said:

“Speak, my friend, and speak quite frankly. I do not scruple to say that
we wish to have that paper.”

“If it is only a wish,” remarked Clarisse, whom Lupin had coached in
her part down to the least detail, “if it is only a wish, I fear that we
shall not be able to come to an arrangement.”

Prasville smiled:

“The wish, obviously, would lead us to make certain sacrifices.”

“Every sacrifice,” said Mme. Mergy, correcting him.

“Every sacrifice, provided, of course, that we keep within the bounds of
acceptable requirements.”

“And even if we go beyond those bounds,” said Clarisse, inflexibly.

Prasville began to lose patience:

“Come, what is it all about? Explain yourself.”

“Forgive me, my friend, but I wanted above all to mark the great
importance which you attach to that paper and, in view of the immediate
transaction which we are about to conclude, to specify--what shall I
say?--the value of my share in it. That value, which has no limits,
must, I repeat, be exchanged for an unlimited value.”

“Agreed,” said Prasville, querulously.

“I presume, therefore, that it is unnecessary for me to trace the whole
story of the business or to enumerate, on the one hand, the disasters
which the possession of that paper would have allowed you to avert and,
on the other hand, the incalculable advantages which you will be able to
derive from its possession?”

Prasville had to make an effort to contain himself and to answer in a
tone that was civil, or nearly so:

“I admit everything. Is that enough?”

“I beg your pardon, but we cannot explain ourselves too plainly. And
there is one point that remains to be cleared up. Are you in a position
to treat, personally?”

“How do you mean?”

“I want to know not, of course, if you are empowered to settle this
business here and now, but if, in dealing with me, you represent the
views of those who know the business and who are qualified to settle
it.”

“Yes,” declared Prasville, forcibly.

“So that I can have your answer within an hour after I have told you my
conditions?”

“Yes.”

“Will the answer be that of the government?”

“Yes.”

Clarisse bent forward and, sinking her voice:

“Will the answer be that of the Elysee?”

Prasville appeared surprised. He reflected for a moment and then said:

“Yes.”

“It only remains for me to ask you to give me your word of honour that,
however incomprehensible my conditions may appear to you, you will not
insist on my revealing the reason. They are what they are. Your answer
must be yes or no.”

“I give you my word of honour,” said Prasville, formally.

Clarisse underwent a momentary agitation that made her turn paler still.
Then, mastering herself, with her eyes fixed on Prasville’s eyes, she
said:

“You shall have the list of the Twenty-seven in exchange for the pardon
of Gilbert and Vaucheray.”

“Eh? What?”

Prasville leapt from his chair, looking absolutely dumbfounded:

“The pardon of Gilbert and Vaucheray? Of Arsene Lupin’s accomplices?”

“Yes,” she said.

“The murderers of the Villa Marie-Therese? The two who are due to die
to-morrow?”

“Yes, those two,” she said, in a loud voice. “I ask? I demand their
pardon.”

“But this is madness! Why? Why should you?”

“I must remind you, Prasville, that you gave me your word...”

“Yes... yes... I know... But the thing is so unexpected...”

“Why?”

“Why? For all sorts of reasons!”

“What reasons?”

“Well... well, but... think! Gilbert and Vaucheray have been sentenced
to death!”

“Send them to penal servitude: that’s all you have to do.”

“Impossible! The case has created an enormous sensation. They are Arsene
Lupin’s accomplices. The whole world knows about the verdict.”

“Well?”

“Well, we cannot, no, we cannot go against the decrees of justice.”

“You are not asked to do that. You are asked for a commutation of
punishment as an act of mercy. Mercy is a legal thing.”

“The pardoning-commission has given its finding...”

“True, but there remains the president of the Republic.”

“He has refused.”

“He can reconsider his refusal.”

“Impossible!”

“Why?”

“There’s no excuse for it.”

“He needs no excuse. The right of mercy is absolute. It is exercised
without control, without reason, without excuse or explanation. It is a
royal prerogative; the president of the Republic can wield it according
to his good pleasure, or rather according to his conscience, in the best
interests of the State.”

“But it is too late! Everything is ready. The execution is to take place
in a few hours.”

“One hour is long enough to obtain your answer; you have just told us
so.”

“But this is confounded madness! There are insuperable obstacles to your
conditions. I tell you again, it’s impossible, physically impossible.”

“Then the answer is no?”

“No! No! A thousand times no!”

“In that case, there is nothing left for us to do but to go.”

She moved toward the door. M. Nicole followed her. Prasville bounded
across the room and barred their way:

“Where are you going?”

“Well, my friend, it seems to me that our conversation is at an end. As
you appear to think, as, in fact, you are certain that the president of
the Republic will not consider the famous list of the Twenty-seven to be
worth...”

“Stay where you are,” said Prasville.

He turned the key in the door and began to pace the room, with his hands
behind his back and his eyes fixed on the floor.

And Lupin, who had not breathed a word during the whole of this scene
and who had prudently contented himself with playing a colourless part,
said to himself:

“What a fuss! What a lot of affectation to arrive at the inevitable
result! As though Prasville, who is not a genius, but not an absolute
blockhead either, would be likely to lose the chance of revenging
himself on his mortal enemy! There, what did I say? The idea of hurling
Daubrecq into the bottomless pit appeals to him. Come, we’ve won the
rubber.”

Prasville was opening a small inner door which led to the office of his
private secretary.

He gave an order aloud:

“M. Lartigue, telephone to the Elysee and say that I request the favour
of an audience for a communication of the utmost importance.”

He closed the door, came back to Clarisse and said:

“In any case, my intervention is limited to submitting your proposal.”

“Once you submit it, it will be accepted.”

A long silence followed. Clarisse’s features expressed so profound a
delight that Prasville was struck by it and looked at her with attentive
curiosity. For what mysterious reason did Clarisse wish to save Gilbert
and Vaucheray? What was the incomprehensible link that bound her to
those two men? What tragedy connected those three lives and, no doubt,
Daubrecq’s in addition?

“Go ahead, old boy,” thought Lupin, “cudgel your brains: you’ll never
spot it! Ah, if we had asked for Gilbert’s pardon only, as Clarisse
wished, you might have twigged the secret! But Vaucheray, that brute of
a Vaucheray, there really could not be the least bond between Mme. Mergy
and him.... Aha, by Jingo, it’s my turn now!... He’s watching me ... The
inward soliloquy is turning upon myself... ‘I wonder who that M. Nicole
can be? Why has that little provincial usher devoted himself body and
soul to Clarisse Mergy? Who is that old bore, if the truth were known? I
made a mistake in not inquiring... I must look into this.... I must
rip off the beggar’s mask. For, after all, it’s not natural that a man
should take so much trouble about a matter in which he is not directly
interested. Why should he also wish to save Gilbert and Vaucheray?
Why? Why should he?...” Lupin turned his head away. “Look out!... Look
out!... There’s a notion passing through that red-tape-merchant’s skull:
a confused notion which he can’t put into words. Hang it all, he mustn’t
suspect M. Lupin under M. Nicole! The thing’s complicated enough as it
is, in all conscience!...”

But there was a welcome interruption. Prasville’s secretary came to say
that the audience would take place in an hour’s time.

“Very well. Thank you,” said Prasville. “That will do.”

And, resuming the interview, with no further circumlocution, speaking
like a man who means to put a thing through, he declared:

“I think that we shall be able to manage it. But, first of all, so that
I may do what I have undertaken to do, I want more precise information,
fuller details. Where was the paper?”

“In the crystal stopper, as we thought,” said Mme. Mergy.

“And where was the crystal stopper?”

“In an object which Daubrecq came and fetched, a few days ago, from the
writing-desk in his study in the Square Lamartine, an object which I
took from him yesterday.”

“What sort of object?”

“Simply a packet of tobacco, Maryland tobacco, which used to lie about
on the desk.”

Prasville was petrified. He muttered, guilelessly:

“Oh, if I had only known! I’ve had my hand on that packet of Maryland a
dozen times! How stupid of me!”

“What does it matter?” said Clarisse. “The great thing is that the
discovery is made.”

Prasville pulled a face which implied that the discovery would have been
much pleasanter if he himself had made it. Then he asked:

“So you have the list?”

“Yes.”

“Show it to me.”

And, when Clarisse hesitated, he added:

“Oh, please, don’t be afraid! The list belongs to you, and I will give
it back to you. But you must understand that I cannot take the step in
question without making certain.”

Clarisse consulted M. Nicole with a glance which did not escape
Prasville. Then she said:

“Here it is.”

He seized the scrap of paper with a certain excitement, examined it and
almost immediately said:

“Yes, yes... the secretary’s writing: I recognize it.... And the
signature of the chairman of the company: the signature in red....
Besides, I have other proofs.... For instance, the torn piece which
completes the left-hand top corner of this sheet...”

He opened his safe and, from a special cash-box, produced a tiny piece
of paper which he put against the top left corner:

“That’s right. The torn edges fit exactly. The proof is undeniable. All
that remains is to verify the make of this foreign-post-paper.”

Clarisse was radiant with delight. No one would have believed that the
most terrible torture had racked her for weeks and weeks and that she
was still bleeding and quivering from its effects.

While Prasville was holding the paper against a window-pane, she said to
Lupin:

“I insist upon having Gilbert informed this evening. He must be so
awfully unhappy!”

“Yes,” said Lupin. “Besides, you can go to his lawyer and tell him.”

She continued:

“And then I must see Gilbert to-morrow. Prasville can think what he
likes.”

“Of course. But he must first gain his cause at the Elysee.”

“There can’t be any difficulty, can there?”

“No. You saw that he gave way at once.”

Prasville continued his examination with the aid of a magnifying-glass
and compared the sheet with the scrap of torn paper. Next, he took from
the cash-box some other sheets of letter-paper and examined one of these
by holding it up to the light:

“That’s done,” he said. “My mind is made up. Forgive me, dear friend: it
was a very difficult piece of work.... I passed through various stages.
When all is said, I had my suspicions... and not without cause...”

“What do you mean?” asked Clarisse.

“One second.... I must give an order first.”

He called his secretary:

“Please telephone at once to the Elysee, make my apologies and say
that I shall not require the audience, for reasons which I will explain
later.”

He closed the door and returned to his desk. Clarisse and Lupin stood
choking, looking at him in stupefaction, failing to understand this
sudden change. Was he mad? Was it a trick on his part? A breach of
faith? And was he refusing to keep his promise, now that he possessed
the list?

He held it out to Clarisse:

“You can have it back.”

“Have it back?”

“And return it to Daubrecq.”

“To Daubrecq?”

“Unless you prefer to burn it.”

“What do you say?”

“I say that, if I were in your place, I would burn it.”

“Why do you say that? It’s ridiculous!”

“On the contrary, it is very sensible.”

“But why? Why?”

“Why? I will tell you. The list of the Twenty-seven, as we know for
absolutely certain, was written on a sheet of letter-paper belonging to
the chairman of the Canal Company, of which there are a few samples in
this cash-box. Now all these samples have as a water-mark a little cross
of Lorraine which is almost invisible, but which can just be seen in the
thickness of the paper when you hold it up to the light. The sheet which
you have brought me does not contain that little cross of Lorraine.” [*]

     * The Cross of Lorraine is a cross with two horizontal lines
     or bars across the upper half of the perpendicular beam.
     --Translator’s Note.

Lupin felt a nervous trembling shake him from head to foot and he dared
not turn his eyes on Clarisse, realizing what a terrible blow this was
to her. He heard her stammer:

“Then are we to suppose... that Daubrecq was taken in?”

“Not a bit of it!” exclaimed Prasville. “It is you who have been taken
in, my poor friend. Daubrecq has the real list, the list which he stole
from the dying man’s safe.”

“But this one...”

“This one is a forgery.”

“A forgery?”

“An undoubted forgery. It was an admirable piece of cunning on
Daubrecq’s part. Dazzled by the crystal stopper which he flashed before
your eyes, you did nothing but look for that stopper in which he had
stowed away no matter what, the first bit of paper that came to hand,
while he quietly kept...”

Prasville interrupted himself. Clarisse was walking up to him with
short, stiff steps, like an automaton. She said:

“Then...”

“Then what, dear friend?”

“You refuse?”

“Certainly, I am obliged to; I have no choice.”

“You refuse to take that step?”

“Look here, how can I do what you ask? It’s not possible, on the
strength of a valueless document...”

“You won’t do it?... You won’t do it?... And, to-morrow morning... in a
few hours... Gilbert...”

She was frightfully pale, her face sunk, like the face of one dying. Her
eyes opened wider and wider and her teeth chattered...

Lupin, fearing the useless and dangerous words which she was about to
utter, seized her by the shoulders and tried to drag her away. But she
thrust him back with indomitable strength, took two or three more steps,
staggered, as though on the point of falling, and, suddenly, in a burst
of energy and despair, laid hold of Prasville and screamed:

“You shall go to the Elysee!... You shall go at once!... You must!...
You must save Gilbert!”

“Please, please, my dear friend, calm yourself...”

She gave a strident laugh:

“Calm myself!... When, to-morrow morning, Gilbert... Ah, no, no, I am
terrified... it’s appalling.... Oh, run, you wretch, run! Obtain his
pardon!... Don’t you understand? Gilbert... Gilbert is my son! My son!
My son!”

Prasville gave a cry. The blade of a knife flashed in Clarisse’s hand
and she raised her arm to strike herself. But the movement was not
completed. M. Nicole caught her arm in its descent and, taking the knife
from Clarisse, reducing her to helplessness, he said, in a voice that
rang through the room like steel:

“What you are doing is madness!... When I gave you my oath that I would
save him! You must... live for him... Gilbert shall not die.... How can
he die, when... I gave you my oath?...”

“Gilbert... my son...” moaned Clarisse.

He clasped her fiercely, drew her against himself and put his hand over
her mouth:

“Enough! Be quiet!... I entreat you to be quiet.... Gilbert shall not
die...”

With irresistible authority, he dragged her away like a subdued child
that suddenly becomes obedient; but, at the moment of opening the door,
he turned to Prasville:

“Wait for me here, monsieur,” he commanded, in an imperative tone. “If
you care about that list of the Twenty-seven, the real list, wait for
me. I shall be back in an hour, in two hours, at most; and then we will
talk business.”

And abruptly, to Clarisse:

“And you, madame, a little courage yet. I command you to show courage,
in Gilbert’s name.”

He went away, through the passages, down the stairs, with a jerky step,
holding Clarisse under the arm, as he might have held a lay-figure,
supporting her, carrying her almost. A court-yard, another court-yard,
then the street.

Meanwhile, Prasville, surprised at first, bewildered by the course of
events, was gradually recovering his composure and thinking. He thought
of that M. Nicole, a mere supernumerary at first, who played beside
Clarisse the part of one of those advisers to whom we cling in the
serious crises of our lives and who suddenly, shaking off his torpor,
appeared in the full light of day, resolute, masterful, mettlesome,
brimming over with daring, ready to overthrow all the obstacles that
fate placed on his path.

Who was there that was capable of acting thus?

Prasville started. The question had no sooner occurred to his mind than
the answer flashed on him, with absolute certainty. All the proofs rose
up, each more exact, each more convincing than the last.

Hurriedly he rang. Hurriedly he sent for the chief detective-inspector
on duty. And, feverishly:

“Were you in the waiting-room, chief-inspector?”

“Yes, monsieur le secretaire-general.”

“Did you see a gentleman and a lady go out?”

“Yes.”

“Would you know the man again?”

“Yes.”

“Then don’t lose a moment, chief-inspector. Take six inspectors with
you. Go to the Place de Clichy. Make inquiries about a man called Nicole
and watch the house. The Nicole man is on his way back there.”

“And if he comes out, monsieur le secretaire-general?”

“Arrest him. Here’s a warrant.”

He sat down to his desk and wrote a name on a form:

“Here you are, chief-inspector. I will let the chief-detective know.”

The chief-inspector seemed staggered:

“But you spoke to me of a man called Nicole, monsieur le
secretaire-general.”

“Well?”

“The warrant is in the name of Arsene Lupin.”

“Arsene Lupin and the Nicole man are one and the same individual.”



CHAPTER XII. THE SCAFFOLD

“I will save him, I will save him,” Lupin repeated, without ceasing, in
the taxicab in which he and Clarisse drove away. “I swear that I will
save him.”

Clarisse did not listen, sat as though numbed, as though possessed by
some great nightmare of death, which left her ignorant of all that was
happening outside her. And Lupin set forth his plans, perhaps more to
reassure himself than to convince Clarisse. “No, no, the game is not
lost yet. There is one trump left, a huge trump, in the shape of the
letters and documents which Vorenglade, the ex-deputy, is offering to
sell to Daubrecq and of which Daubrecq spoke to you yesterday at Nice.
I shall buy those letters and documents of Stanislas Vorenglade
at whatever price he chooses to name. Then we shall go back to the
police-office and I shall say to Prasville, ‘Go to the Elysee at once
... Use the list as though it were genuine, save Gilbert from death and
be content to acknowledge to-morrow, when Gilbert is saved, that the
list is forged.

“‘Be off, quickly!... If you refuse, well, if you refuse, the Vorenglade
letters and documents shall be reproduced to-morrow, Tuesday, morning
in one of the leading newspapers.’ Vorenglade will be arrested. And M.
Prasville will find himself in prison before night.”

Lupin rubbed his hands:

“He’ll do as he’s told!... He’ll do as he’s told!... I felt that at
once, when I was with him. The thing appeared to me as a dead certainty.
And I found Vorenglade’s address in Daubrecq’s pocket-books, so...
driver, Boulevard Raspail!”

They went to the address given. Lupin sprang from the cab, ran up three
flights of stairs.

The servant said that M. Vorenglade was away and would not be back until
dinner-time next evening.

“And don’t you know where he is?”

“M. Vorenglade is in London, sir.”

Lupin did not utter a word on returning to the cab. Clarisse, on her
side, did not even ask him any questions, so indifferent had she become
to everything, so absolutely did she look upon her son’s death as an
accomplished fact.

They drove to the Place de Cichy. As Lupin entered the house he
passed two men who were just leaving the porter’s box. He was too much
engrossed to notice them. They were Prasville’s inspectors.

“No telegram?” he asked his servant.

“No, governor,” replied Achille.

“No news of the Masher and the Growler?”

“No, governor, none.”

“That’s all right,” he said to Clarisse, in a casual tone. “It’s only
seven o’clock and we mustn’t reckon on seeing them before eight or nine.
Prasville will have to wait, that’s all. I will telephone to him to
wait.”

He did so and was hanging up the receiver, when he heard a moan behind
him. Clarisse was standing by the table, reading an evening-paper. She
put her hand to her heart, staggered and fell.

“Achille, Achille!” cried Lupin, calling his man. “Help me put her on my
bed... And then go to the cupboard and get me the medicine-bottle marked
number four, the bottle with the sleeping-draught.”

He forced open her teeth with the point of a knife and compelled her to
swallow half the bottle:

“Good,” he said. “Now the poor thing won’t wake till to-morrow...
after.”

He glanced through the paper, which was still clutched in Clarisse’
hand, and read the following lines:

 “The strictest measures have been taken to keep order at the
 execution of Gilbert and Vaucheray, lest Arsene Lupin should make
 an attempt to rescue his accomplices from the last penalty. At
 twelve o’clock to-night a cordon of troops will be drawn across
 all the approaches to the Sante Prison.  As already stated, the
 execution will take place outside the prison-walls, in the square
 formed by the Boulevard Arago and the Rue de la Sante.

 “We have succeeded in obtaining some details of the attitude of
 the two condemned men.  Vaucheray observes a stolid sullenness and
 is awaiting the fatal event with no little courage:

 “‘Crikey,’ he says, ‘I can’t say I’m delighted; but I’ve got to
 go through it and I shall keep my end up.’  And he adds, ‘Death
 I don’t care a hang about!  What worries me is the thought that
 they’re going to cut my head off.  Ah, if the governor could only
 hit on some trick to send me straight off to the next world before
 I had time to say knife! A drop of Prussic acid, governor, if you
 please!’

 “Gilbert’s calmness is even more impressive, especially when we
 remember how he broke down at the trial.  He retains an unshaken
 confidence in the omnipotence of Arsene Lupin:

 “‘The governor shouted to me before everybody not to be afraid,
 that he was there, that he answered for everything.  Well, I’m not
 afraid.  I shall rely on him until the last day, until the last
 minute, at the very foot of the scaffold.  I know the governor!
 There’s no danger with him.  He has promised and he will keep his
 word.  If my head were off, he’d come and clap it on my shoulders
 and firmly!  Arsene Lupin allow his chum Gilbert to die?  Not he!
 Excuse my humour!’

 “There is a certain touching frankness in all this enthusiasm
 which is not without a dignity of its own.  We shall see if Arsene
 Lupin deserves the confidence so blindly placed in him.”

Lupin was hardly able to finish reading the article for the tears that
dimmed his eyes: tears of affection, tears of pity, tears of distress.

No, he did not deserve the confidence of his chum Gilbert. Certainly, he
had performed impossibilities; but there are circumstances in which we
must perform more than impossibilities, in which we must show ourselves
stronger than fate; and, this time, fate had been stronger than he. Ever
since the first day and throughout this lamentable adventure, events had
gone contrary to his anticipations, contrary to logic itself. Clarisse
and he, though pursuing an identical aim, had wasted weeks in fighting
each other. Then, at the moment when they were uniting their efforts, a
series of ghastly disasters had come one after the other: the kidnapping
of little Jacques, Daubrecq’s disappearance, his imprisonment in the
Lovers’ Tower, Lupin’s wound, his enforced inactivity, followed by the
cunning manoeuvres that dragged Clarisse--and Lupin after her--to
the south, to Italy. And then, as a crowning catastrophe, when, after
prodigies of will-power, after miracles of perseverance, they were
entitled to think that the Golden Fleece was won, it all came to
nothing. The list of the Twenty-seven had no more value than the most
insignificant scrap of paper.

“The game’s up!” said Lupin. “It’s an absolute defeat. What if I do
revenge myself on Daubrecq, ruin him and destroy him? He is the real
victor, once Gilbert is going to die.”

He wept anew, not with spite or rage, but with despair. Gilbert was
going to die! The lad whom he called his chum, the best of his pals
would be gone for ever, in a few hours. He could not save him. He was at
the end of his tether. He did not even look round for a last expedient.
What was the use?

And his persuasion of his own helplessness was so deep, so definite that
he felt no shock of any kind on receiving a telegram from the Masher
that said:

 “Motor accident.  Essential part broken.  Long repair.
  Arrive to-morrow morning.”

It was a last proof to show that fate had uttered its decree. He no
longer thought of rebelling against the decision.

He looked at Clarisse. She was peacefully sleeping; and this total
oblivion, this absence of all consciousness, seemed to him so enviable
that, suddenly yielding to a fit of cowardice, he seized the bottle,
still half-filled with the sleeping-draught, and drank it down.

Then he stretched himself on a couch and rang for his man:

“Go to bed, Achille, and don’t wake me on any pretence whatever.”

“Then there’s nothing to be done for Gilbert and Vaucheray, governor?”
 said Achille.

“Nothing.”

“Are they going through it?”

“They are going through it.”

Twenty minutes later Lupin fell into a heavy sleep. It was ten o’clock
in the evening.

The night was full of incident and noise around the prison. At one
o’clock in the morning the Rue de la Sante, the Boulevard Arago and all
the streets abutting on the gaol were guarded by police, who allowed no
one to pass without a regular cross-examination.

For that matter, it was raining in torrents; and it seemed as though
the lovers of this sort of show would not be very numerous. The
public-houses were all closed by special order. At four o’clock three
companies of infantry came and took up their positions along the
pavements, while a battalion occupied the Boulevard Arago in case of
a surprise. Municipal guards cantered up and down between the lines; a
whole staff of police-magistrates, officers and functionaries, brought
together for the occasion, moved about among the troops.

The guillotine was set up in silence, in the middle of the square formed
by the boulevard and the street; and the sinister sound of hammering was
heard.

But, at five o’clock, the crowd gathered, notwithstanding the rain, and
people began to sing. They shouted for the footlights, called for the
curtain to rise, were exasperated to see that, at the distance at which
the barriers had been fixed, they could hardly distinguish the uprights
of the guillotine.

Several carriages drove up, bringing official persons dressed in black.
There were cheers and hoots, whereupon a troop of mounted municipal
guards scattered the groups and cleared the space to a distance of three
hundred yards from the square. Two fresh companies of soldiers lined up.

And suddenly there was a great silence. A vague white light fell from
the dark sky. The rain ceased abruptly.

Inside the prison, at the end of the passage containing the condemned
cells, the men in black were conversing in low voices. Prasville was
talking to the public prosecutor, who expressed his fears:

“No, no,” declared Prasville, “I assure you, it will pass without an
incident of any kind.”

“Do your reports mention nothing at all suspicious, monsieur le
secretaire-general?”

“Nothing. And they can’t mention anything, for the simple reason that we
have Lupin.”

“Do you mean that?”

“Yes, we know his hiding-place. The house where he lives, on the Place
de Clichy, and where he went at seven o’clock last night, is surrounded.
Moreover, I know the scheme which he had contrived to save his two
accomplices. The scheme miscarried at the last moment. We have nothing
to fear, therefore. The law will take its course.”

Meanwhile, the hour had struck.

They took Vaucheray first; and the governor of the prison ordered the
door of his cell to be opened. Vaucheray leapt out of bed and cast eyes
dilated with terror upon the men who entered.

“Vaucheray, we have come to tell you...”

“Stow that, stow that,” he muttered. “No words. I know all about it. Get
on with the business.”

One would have thought that he was in a hurry for it to be over as fast
as possible, so readily did he submit to the usual preparations. But he
would not allow any of them to speak to him:

“No words,” he repeated. “What? Confess to the priest? Not worth while.
I have shed blood. The law sheds my blood. It’s the good old rule. We’re
quits.”

Nevertheless, he stopped short for a moment:

“I say, is my mate going through it too?”

And, when he heard that Gilbert would go to the scaffold at the same
time as himself, he had two or three seconds of hesitation, glanced
at the bystanders, seemed about to speak, was silent and, at last,
muttered:

“It’s better so.... They’ll pull us through together... we’ll clink
glasses together.”

Gilbert was not asleep either, when the men entered his cell.

Sitting on his bed, he listened to the terrible words, tried to stand
up, began to tremble frightfully, from head to foot, like a skeleton
when shaken, and then fell back, sobbing:

“Oh, my poor mummy, poor mummy!” he stammered.

They tried to question him about that mother, of whom he had never
spoken; but his tears were interrupted by a sudden fit of rebellion and
he cried:

“I have done no murder... I won’t die. I have done no murder...”

“Gilbert,” they said, “show yourself a man.”

“Yes, yes... but I have done no murder... Why should I die?”

His teeth chattered so loudly that words which he uttered became
unintelligible. He let the men do their work, made his confession, heard
mass and then, growing calmer and almost docile, with the voice of a
little child resigning itself, murmured:

“Tell my mother that I beg her forgiveness.”

“Your mother?”

“Yes... Put what I say in the papers... She will understand... And
then...”

“What, Gilbert?”

“Well, I want the governor to know that I have not lost confidence.”

He gazed at the bystanders, one after the other, as though he
entertained the mad hope that “the governor” was one of them, disguised
beyond recognition and ready to carry him off in his arms:

“Yes,” he said, gently and with a sort of religious piety, “yes, I still
have confidence, even at this moment... Be sure and let him know, won’t
you?... I am positive that he will not let me die. I am certain of
it...”

They guessed, from the fixed look in his eyes, that he saw Lupin, that
he felt Lupin’s shadow prowling around and seeking an inlet through
which to get to him. And never was anything more touching than the sight
of that stripling--clad in the strait-jacket, with his arms and legs
bound, guarded by thousands of men--whom the executioner already held in
his inexorable hand and who, nevertheless, hoped on.

Anguish wrung the hearts of all the beholders. Their eyes were dimmed
with tears:

“Poor little chap!” stammered some one.

Prasville, touched like the rest and thinking of Clarisse, repeated, in
a whisper:

“Poor little chap!”

But the hour struck, the preparations were finished. They set out.

The two processions met in the passage. Vaurheray, on seeing Gilbert,
snapped out:

“I say, kiddie, the governor’s chucked us!”

And he added a sentence which nobody, save Prasville, was able to
understand:

“Expect he prefers to pocket the proceeds of the crystal stopper.”

They went down the staircases. They crossed the prison-yards. An
endless, horrible distance.

And, suddenly, in the frame of the great doorway, the wan light of day,
the rain, the street, the outlines of houses, while far-off sounds came
through the awful silence.

They walked along the wall, to the corner of the boulevard.

A few steps farther Vaucheray started back: he had seen!

Gilbert crept along, with lowered head, supported by an executioner’s
assistant and by the chaplain, who made him kiss the crucifix as he
went.

There stood the guillotine.

“No, no,” shouted Gilbert, “I won’t... I won’t... Help! Help!”

A last appeal, lost in space.

The executioner gave a signal. Vaucheray was laid hold of, lifted,
dragged along, almost at a run.

And then came this staggering thing: a shot, a shot fired from the other
side, from one of the houses opposite.

The assistants stopped short.

The burden which they were dragging had collapsed in their arms.

“What is it? What’s happened?” asked everybody.

“He’s wounded...”

Blood spurted from Vaucheray’s forehead and covered his face.

He spluttered:

“That’s done it... one in a thousand! Thank you, governor, thank you.”

“Finish him off! Carry him there!” said a voice, amid the general
confusion.

“But he’s dead!”

“Get on with it... finish him off!”

Tumult was at its height, in the little group of magistrates, officials
and policemen. Every one was giving orders:

“Execute him!... The law must take its course!... We have no right to
delay! It would be cowardice!... Execute him!”

“But the man’s dead!”

“That makes no difference!... The law must be obeyed!... Execute him!”

The chaplain protested, while two warders and Prasville kept their eyes
on Gilbert. In the meantime, the assistants had taken up the corpse
again and were carrying it to the guillotine.

“Hurry up!” cried the executioner, scared and hoarse-voiced. “Hurry up!
... And the other one to follow... Waste no time...”

He had not finished speaking, when a second report rang out. He spun
round on his heels and fell, groaning:

“It’s nothing... a wound in the shoulder... Go on... The next one’s
turn!”

But his assistants were running away, yelling with terror. The space
around the guillotine was cleared. And the prefect of police, rallying
his men, drove everybody back to the prison, helter-skelter, like a
disordered rabble: the magistrates, the officials, the condemned man,
the chaplain, all who had passed through the archway two or three
minutes before.

In the meanwhile, a squad of policemen, detectives and soldiers were
rushing upon the house, a little old-fashioned, three-storied house,
with a ground-floor occupied by two shops which happened to be empty.
Immediately after the first shot, they had seen, vaguely, at one of
the windows on the second floor, a man holding a rifle in his hand and
surrounded with a cloud of smoke.

Revolver-shots were fired at him, but missed him. He, standing calmly on
a table, took aim a second time, fired from the shoulder; and the crack
of the second report was heard. Then he withdrew into the room.

Down below, as nobody answered the peal at the bell, the assailants
demolished the door, which gave way almost immediately. They made for
the staircase, but their onrush was at once stopped, on the first
floor, by an accumulation of beds, chairs and other furniture, forming
a regular barricade and so close-entangled that it took the aggressors
four or five minutes to clear themselves a passage.

Those four or five minutes lost were enough to render all pursuit
hopeless. When they reached the second floor they heard a voice shouting
from above:

“This way, friends! Eighteen stairs more. A thousand apologies for
giving you so much trouble!”

They ran up those eighteen stairs and nimbly at that! But, at the top,
above the third story, was the garret, which was reached by a ladder and
a trapdoor. And the fugitive had taken away the ladder and bolted the
trapdoor.

The reader will not have forgotten the sensation created by this amazing
action, the editions of the papers issued in quick succession, the
newsboys tearing and shouting through the streets, the whole metropolis
on edge with indignation and, we may say, with anxious curiosity.

But it was at the headquarters of police that the excitement developed
into a paroxysm. Men flung themselves about on every side. Messages,
telegrams, telephone calls followed one upon the other.

At last, at eleven o’clock in the morning, there was a meeting in
the office of the prefect of police, and Prasville was there. The
chief-detective read a report of his inquiry, the results of which
amounted to this: shortly before midnight yesterday some one had rung
at the house on the Boulevard Arago. The portress, who slept in a small
room on the ground-floor, behind one of the shops pulled the rope. A man
came and tapped at her door. He said that he had come from the police on
an urgent matter concerning to-morrow’s execution. The portress opened
the door and was at once attacked, gagged and bound.

Ten minutes later a lady and gentleman who lived on the first floor and
who had just come home were also reduced to helplessness by the same
individual and locked up, each in one of the two empty shops. The
third-floor tenant underwent a similar fate, but in his own flat and his
own bedroom, which the man was able to enter without being heard. The
second floor was unoccupied, and the man took up his quarters there. He
was now master of the house.

“And there we are!” said the prefect of police, beginning to laugh, with
a certain bitterness. “There we are! It’s as simple as shelling peas.
Only, what surprises me is that he was able to get away so easily.”

“I will ask you to observe, monsieur le prefet, that, being absolute
master of the house from one o’clock in the morning, he had until five
o’clock to prepare his flight.”

“And that flight took place...?”

“Over the roofs. At that spot the houses in the next street, the Rue de
la Glaciere, are quite near and there is only one break in the roofs,
about three yards wide, with a drop of one yard in height.”

“Well?”

“Well, our man had taken away the ladder leading to the garret and used
it as a foot-bridge. After crossing to the next block of buildings, all
he had to do was to look through the windows until he found an empty
attic, enter one of the houses in the Rue de la Glaciere and walk out
quietly with his hands in his pockets. In this way his flight, duly
prepared beforehand, was effected very simply and without the least
obstacle.”

“But you had taken the necessary measures.”

“Those which you ordered, monsieur le prefet. My men spent three hours
last evening visiting all the houses, so as to make sure that there was
no stranger hiding there. At the moment when they were leaving the last
house I had the street barred. Our man must have slipped through during
that few minutes’ interval.”

“Capital! Capital! And there is no doubt in your minds, of course: it’s
Arsene Lupin?”

“Not a doubt. In the first place, it was all a question of his
accomplices. And then... and then... no one but Arsene Lupin was
capable of contriving such a master-stroke and carrying it out with that
inconceivable boldness.”

“But, in that case,” muttered the prefect of police--and, turning to
Prasville, he continued--“but, in that case, my dear Prasville,
the fellow of whom you spoke to me, the fellow whom you and the
chief-detective have had watched since yesterday evening, in his flat in
the Place de Clichy, that fellow is not Arsene Lupin?”

“Yes, he is, monsieur le prefet. There is no doubt about that either.”

“Then why wasn’t he arrested when he went out last night?”

“He did not go out.”

“I say, this is getting complicated!”

“It’s quite simple, monsieur le prefet. Like all the houses in which
traces of Arsene Lupin are to be found, the house in the Place de Cichy
has two outlets.”

“And you didn’t know it?”

“I didn’t know it. I only discovered it this morning, on inspecting the
flat.”

“Was there no one in the flat?”

“No. The servant, a man called Achille, went away this morning, taking
with him a lady who was staying with Lupin.”

“What was the lady’s name?”

“I don’t know,” replied Prasville, after an imperceptible hesitation.

“But you know the name under which Arsene Lupin passed?”

“Yes. M. Nicole, a private tutor, master of arts and so on. Here is his
card.”

As Prasville finished speaking, an office-messenger came to tell the
prefect of police that he was wanted immediately at the Elysee. The
prime minister was there already.

“I’m coming,” he said. And he added, between his teeth, “It’s to decide
upon Gilbert’s fate.”

Prasville ventured:

“Do you think they will pardon him, monsieur le prefet?”

“Never! After last night’s affair, it would make a most deplorable
impression. Gilbert must pay his debt to-morrow morning.”

The messenger had, at the same time, handed Prasville a visiting-card.
Prasville now looked at it, gave a start and muttered:

“Well, I’m hanged! What a nerve!”

“What’s the matter?” asked the prefect of police.

“Nothing, nothing, monsieur le prefet,” declared Prasville, who did not
wish to share with another the honour of seeing this business through.
“Nothing... an unexpected visit... I hope soon to have the pleasure of
telling you the result.”

And he walked away, mumbling, with an air of amazement:

“Well, upon my word! What a nerve the beggar has! What a nerve!”

The visiting-card which he held in his hand bore these words:

     M. Nicole,

      Master of Arts, Private Tutor.



CHAPTER XIII. THE LAST BATTLE

When Prasville returned to his office he saw M. Nicole sitting on a
bench in the waiting-room, with his bent back, his ailing air, his
gingham umbrella, his rusty hat and his single glove:

“It’s he all right,” said Prasville, who had feared for a moment that
Lupin might have sent another M. Nicole to see him. “And the fact that
he has come in person proves that he does not suspect that I have seen
through him.” And, for the third time, he said, “All the same, what a
nerve!”

He shut the door of his office and called his secretary:

“M. Lartigue, I am having a rather dangerous person shown in here. The
chances are that he will have to leave my office with the bracelets on.
As soon as he is in my room, make all the necessary arrangements: send
for a dozen inspectors and have them posted in the waiting-room and in
your office. And take this as a definite instruction: the moment I ring,
you are all to come in, revolvers in hand, and surround the fellow. Do
you quite understand?”

“Yes, monsieur le secretaire-general.”

“Above all, no hesitation. A sudden entrance, in a body, revolvers in
hand. Send M. Nicole in, please.”

As soon as he was alone, Prasville covered the push of an electric bell
on his desk with some papers and placed two revolvers of respectable
dimensions behind a rampart of books.

“And now,” he said to himself, “to sit tight. If he has the list, let’s
collar it. If he hasn’t, let’s collar him. And, if possible, let’s
collar both. Lupin and the list of the Twenty-seven, on the same day,
especially after the scandal of this morning, would be a scoop in a
thousand.”

There was a knock at the door.

“Come in!” said Prasville.

And, rising from his seat:

“Come in, M. Nicole, come in.”

M. Nicole crept timidly into the room, sat down on the extreme edge of
the chair to which Prasville pointed and said:

“I have come...to resume... our conversation of yesterday... Please
excuse the delay, monsieur.”

“One second,” said Prasville. “Will you allow me?”

He stepped briskly to the outer room and, seeing his secretary:

“I was forgetting, M. Lartigue. Have the staircases and passages
searched... in case of accomplices.”

He returned, settled himself comfortably, as though for a long and
interesting conversation, and began:

“You were saying, M. Nicole?”

“I was saying, monsieur le secretaire-general, that I must apologize
for keeping you waiting yesterday evening. I was detained by different
matters. First of all, Mme. Mergy....”

“Yes, you had to see Mme. Mergy home.”

“Just so, and to look after her. You can understand the poor thing’s
despair... Her son Gilbert so near death... And such a death!... At that
time we could only hope for a miracle... an impossible miracle. I myself
was resigned to the inevitable... You know as well as I do, when fate
shows itself implacable, one ends by despairing.”

“But I thought,” observed Prasville, “that your intention, on leaving
me, was to drag Daubrecq’s secret from him at all costs.”

“Certainly. But Daubrecq was not in Paris.”

“Oh?”

“No. He was on his way to Paris in a motor-car.”

“Have you a motor-car, M. Nicole?”

“Yes, when I need it: an out-of-date concern, an old tin kettle of
sorts. Well, he was on his way to Paris in a motor-car, or rather on
the roof of a motor-car, inside a trunk in which I packed him. But,
unfortunately, the motor was unable to reach Paris until after the
execution. Thereupon...”

Prasville stared at M. Nicole with an air of stupefaction. If he had
retained the least doubt of the individual’s real identity, this manner
of dealing with Daubrecq would have removed it. By Jingo! To pack a man
in a trunk and pitch him on the top of a motorcar!... No one but Lupin
would indulge in such a freak, no one but Lupin would confess it with
that ingenuous coolness!

“Thereupon,” echoed Prasville, “you decided what?”

“I cast about for another method.”

“What method?”

“Why, surely, monsieur le secretaire-general, you know as well as I do!”

“How do you mean?”

“Why, weren’t you at the execution?”

“I was.”

“In that case, you saw both Vaucheray and the executioner hit, one
mortally, the other with a slight wound. And you can’t fail to see...”

“Oh,” exclaimed Prasville, dumbfounded, “you confess it? It was you who
fired the shots, this morning?”

“Come, monsieur le secretaire-general, think! What choice had I? The
list of the Twenty-seven which you examined was a forgery. Daubrecq, who
possessed the genuine one, would not arrive until a few hours after the
execution. There was therefore but one way for me to save Gilbert and
obtain his pardon; and that was to delay the execution by a few hours.”

“Obviously.”

“Well, of course. By killing that infamous brute, that hardened
criminal, Vaucheray, and wounding the executioner, I spread disorder and
panic; I made Gilbert’s execution physically and morally impossible; and
I thus gained the few hours which were indispensable for my purpose.”

“Obviously,” repeated Prasville.

“Well, of course,” repeated Lupin, “it gives us all--the government,
the president and myself--time to reflect and to see the question in a
clearer light. What do you think of it, monsieur le secretaire-general?”

Prasville thought a number of things, especially that this Nicole was
giving proof, to use a vulgar phrase, of the most infernal cheek, of
a cheek so great that Prasville felt inclined to ask himself if he was
really right in identifying Nicole with Lupin and Lupin with Nicole.

“I think, M. Nicole, that a man has to be a jolly good shot to kill a
person whom he wants to kill, at a distance of a hundred yards, and to
wound another person whom he only wants to wound.”

“I have had some little practice,” said M. Nicole, with modest air.

“And I also think that your plan can only be the fruit of a long
preparation.”

“Not at all! That’s where you’re wrong! It was absolutely spontaneous!
If my servant, or rather the servant of the friend who lent me his flat
in the Place de Clichy, had not shaken me out of my sleep, to tell
me that he had once served as a shopman in that little house on the
Boulevard Arago, that it did not hold many tenants and that there might
be something to be done there, our poor Gilbert would have had his head
cut off by now... and Mme. Mergy would most likely be dead.”

“Oh, you think so?”

“I am sure of it. And that was why I jumped at that faithful
retainer’s suggestion. Only, you interfered with my plans, monsieur le
secretaire-general.”

“I did?”

“Yes. You must needs go and take the three-cornered precaution of
posting twelve men at the door of my house. I had to climb five flights
of back stairs and go out through the servants’ corridor and the next
house. Such useless fatigue!”

“I am very sorry, M. Nicole. Another time...”

“It was the same thing at eight o’clock this morning, when I was waiting
for the motor which was bringing Daubrecq to me in his trunk: I had to
march up and down the Place de Clichy, so as to prevent the car from
stopping outside the door of my place and your men from interfering in
my private affairs. Otherwise, once again, Gilbert and Clarisse Mergy
would have been lost.”

“But,” said Prasville, “those painful events, it seems to me, are only
delayed for a day, two days, three days at most. To avert them for good
and all we should want...”

“The real list, I suppose?”

“Exactly. And I daresay you haven’t got it.”

“Yes, I have.”

“The genuine list?”

“The genuine, the undoubtedly genuine list.”

“With the cross of Lorraine?”

“With the cross of Lorraine.”

Prasville was silent. He was labouring under violent emotion, now
that the duel was commencing with that adversary of whose terrifying
superiority he was well aware; and he shuddered at the idea that Arsene
Lupin, the formidable Arsene Lupin, was there, in front of him, calm and
placid, pursuing his aims with as much coolness as though he had all the
weapons in his hands and were face to face with a disarmed enemy.

Not yet daring to deliver a frontal attack, feeling almost intimidated,
Prasville said:

“So Daubrecq gave it up to you?”

“Daubrecq gives nothing up. I took it.”

“By main force, therefore?”

“Oh, dear, no!” said M. Nicole, laughing. “Of course, I was ready to go
to all lengths; and, when that worthy Daubrecq was dug out of the basket
in which he had been travelling express, with an occasional dose of
chloroform to keep his strength up, I had prepared things so that the
fun might begin at once. Oh, no useless tortures... no vain sufferings!
No... Death, simply... You press the point of a long needle on the
chest, where the heart is, and insert it gradually, softly and gently.
That’s all but the point would have been driven by Mme. Mergy. You
understand: a mother is pitiless, a mother whose son is about to die!...
‘Speak, Daubrecq, or I’ll go deeper.... You won’t speak?... Then I’ll
push another quarter of an inch... and another still.’ And the patient’s
heart stops beating, the heart that feels the needle coming... And
another quarter of an inch... and one more... I swear before Heaven that
the villain would have spoken!... We leant over him and waited for him
to wake, trembling with impatience, so urgent was our hurry... Can’t you
picture the scene, monsieur le secretaire-general? The scoundrel lying
on a sofa, well bound, bare-chested, making efforts to throw off the
fumes of chloroform that dazed him. He breathes quicker... He gasps...
He recovers consciousness...his lips move.... Already, Clarisse Mergy
whispers, ‘It’s I... it’s I, Clarisse... Will you answer, you wretch?’
She has put her finger on Daubrecq’s chest, at the spot where the heart
stirs like a little animal hidden under the skin. But she says to me,
‘His eyes... his eyes... I can’t see them under the spectacles... I want
to see them... ‘And I also want to see those eyes which I do not know,
I want to see their anguish and I want to read in them, before I hear a
word, the secret which is about to burst from the inmost recesses of
the terrified body. I want to see. I long to see. The action which I am
about to accomplish excites me beyond measure. It seems to me that,
when I have seen the eyes, the veil will be rent asunder. I shall know
things. It is a presentiment. It is the profound intuition of the truth
that keeps me on tenterhooks. The eye-glasses are gone. But the thick
opaque spectacles are there still. And I snatch them off, suddenly. And,
suddenly, startled by a disconcerting vision, dazzled by the quick light
that breaks in upon me and laughing, oh, but laughing fit to break my
jaws, with my thumb--do you understand? with my thumb--hop, I force out
the left eye!”

M. Nicole was really laughing, as he said, fit to break his jaws. And he
was no longer the timid little unctuous and obsequious provincial usher,
but a well-set-up fellow, who, after reciting and mimicking the whole
scene with impressive ardour, was now laughing with a shrill laughter
the sound of which made Prasville’s flesh creep:

“Hop! Jump, Marquis! Out of your kennel, Towzer! What’s the use of two
eyes? It’s one more than you want. Hop! I say, Clarisse, look at it
rolling over the carpet! Mind Daubrecq’s eye! Be careful with the
grate!”

M. Nicole, who had risen and pretended to be hunting after something
across the room, now sat down again, took from his pocket a thing shaped
like a marble, rolled it in the hollow of his hand, chucked it in the
air, like a ball, put it back in his fob and said, coolly:

“Daubrecq’s left eye.”

Prasville was utterly bewildered. What was his strange visitor driving
at? What did all this story mean? Pale with excitement, he said:

“Explain yourself.”

“But it’s all explained, it seems to me. And it fits in so well with
things as they were, fits in with all the conjectures which I had been
making in spite of myself and which would inevitably have led to my
solving the mystery, if that damned Daubrecq had not so cleverly sent me
astray! Yes, think, follow the trend of my suppositions: ‘As the list is
not to be discovered away from Daubrecq,’ I said to myself, ‘it cannot
exist away from Daubrecq. And, as it is not to be discovered in the
clothes he wears, it must be hidden deeper still, in himself, to speak
plainly, in his flesh, under his skin...”

“In his eye, perhaps?” suggested Prasville, by way of a joke...

“In his eye? Monsieur le secretaire-general, you have said the word.”

“What?”

“I repeat, in his eye. And it is a truth that ought to have occurred to
my mind logically, instead of being revealed to me by accident. And I
will tell you why. Daubrecq knew that Clarisse had seen a letter from
him instructing an English manufacturer to ‘empty the crystal within,
so as to leave a void which it was unpossible to suspect.’ Daubrecq was
bound, in prudence, to divert any attempt at search. And it was for this
reason that he had a crystal stopper made, ‘emptied within,’ after a
model supplied by himself. And it is this crystal stopper which you and
I have been after for months; and it is this crystal stopper which I dug
out of a packet of tobacco. Whereas all I had to do...”

“Was what?” asked Prasville, greatly puzzled.

M. Nicole burst into a fresh fit of laughter:

“Was simply to go for Daubrecq’s eye, that eye ‘emptied within so as to
leave a void which it is impossible to suspect,’ the eye which you see
before you.”

And M. Nicole once more took the thing from his pocket and rapped the
table with it, producing the sound of a hard body with each rap.

Prasville whispered, in astonishment:

“A glass eye!”

“Why, of course!” cried M. Nicole, laughing gaily. “A glass eye! A
common or garden decanter-stopper, which the rascal stuck into his
eyesocket in the place of an eye which he had lost--a decanter-stopper,
or, if you prefer, a crystal stopper, but the real one, this time, which
he faked, which he hid behind the double bulwark of his spectacles
and eye-glasses, which contained and still contains the talisman that
enabled Daubrecq to work as he pleased in safety.”

Prasville lowered his head and put his hand to his forehead to hide his
flushed face: he was almost possessing the list of the Twenty-seven. It
lay before him, on the table.

Mastering his emotion, he said, in a casual tone:

“So it is there still?”

“At least, I suppose so,” declared M. Nicole.

“What! You suppose so?”

“I have not opened the hiding-place. I thought, monsieur le
secretaire-general, I would reserve that honour for you.”

Prasville put out his hand, took the thing up and inspected it. It was
a block of crystal, imitating nature to perfection, with all the details
of the eyeball, the iris, the pupil, the cornea.

He at once saw a movable part at the back, which slid in a groove. He
pushed it. The eye was hollow.

There was a tiny ball of paper inside. He unfolded it, smoothed it out
and, quickly, without delaying to make a preliminary examination of the
names, the hand-writing or the signatures, he raised his arms and turned
the paper to the light from the windows.

“Is the cross of Lorraine there?” asked M. Nicole.

“Yes, it is there,” replied Prasville. “This is the genuine list.”

He hesitated a few seconds and remained with his arms raised, while
reflecting what he would do. Then he folded up the paper again, replaced
it in its little crystal sheath and put the whole thing in his pocket.
M. Nicole, who was looking at him, asked:

“Are you convinced?”

“Absolutely.”

“Then we are agreed?”

“We are agreed.”

There was a pause, during which the two men watched each other without
appearing to. M. Nicole seemed to be waiting for the conversation to be
resumed. Prasville, sheltered behind the piles of books on the table,
sat with one hand grasping his revolver and the other touching the push
of the electric bell. He felt the whole strength of his position with a
keen zest. He held the list. He held Lupin:

“If he moves,” he thought, “I cover him with my revolver and I ring. If
he attacks me, I shoot.”

And the situation appeared to him so pleasant that he prolonged it, with
the exquisite relish of an epicure.

In the end, M. Nicole took up the threads:

“As we are agreed, monsieur le secretaire-general, I think there is
nothing left for you to do but to hurry. Is the execution to take place
to-morrow?”

“Yes, to-morrow.”

“In that case, I shall wait here.”

“Wait for what?”

“The answer from the Elysee.”

“Oh, is some one to bring you an answer?”

“Yes.”

“You, monsieur le secretaire-general.”

Prasville shook his head:

“You must not count on me, M. Nicole.”

“Really?” said M. Nicole, with an air of surprise. “May I ask the
reason?”

“I have changed my mind.”

“Is that all?”

“That’s all. I have come to the conclusion that, as things stand, after
this last scandal, it is impossible to try to do anything in Gilbert’s
favour. Besides, an attempt in this direction at the Elysee, under
present conditions, would constitute a regular case of blackmail, to
which I absolutely decline to lend myself.”

“You are free to do as you please, monsieur. Your scruples do you
honour, though they come rather late, for they did not trouble you
yesterday. But, in that case, monsieur le secretaire-general, as
the compact between us is destroyed, give me back the list of the
Twenty-seven.”

“What for?”

“So that I may apply to another spokesman.”

“What’s the good? Gilbert is lost.”

“Not at all, not at all. On the contrary, I consider that, now that his
accomplice is dead, it will be much easier to grant him a pardon which
everybody will look upon as fair and humane. Give me back the list.”

“Upon my word, monsieur, you have a short memory and none too nice a
conscience. Have you forgotten your promise of yesterday?”

“Yesterday, I made a promise to a M. Nicole.”

“Well?”

“You are not M. Nicole.”

“Indeed! Then, pray, who am I?”

“Need I tell you?”

M. Nicole made no reply, but began to laugh softly, as though pleased at
the curious turn which the conversation was taking; and Prasville felt
a vague misgiving at observing that fit of merriment. He grasped the
butt-end of his revolver and wondered whether he ought not to ring for
help.

M. Nicole drew his chair close to the desk, put his two elbows on the
table, looked Prasville straight in the face and jeered:

“So, M. Prasville, you know who I am and you have the assurance to play
this game with me?”

“I have that assurance,” said Prasville, accepting the sneer without
flinching.

“Which proves that you consider me, Arsene Lupin--we may as well use the
name: yes, Arsene Lupin--which proves that you consider me fool enough,
dolt enough to deliver myself like this, bound hand and foot into your
hands.”

“Upon my word,” said Prasville, airily, patting the waistcoat-pocket in
which he had secreted the crystal ball, “I don’t quite see what you can
do, M. Nicole, now that Daubrecq’s eye is here, with the list of the
Twenty-seven inside it.”

“What I can do?” echoed M. Nicole, ironically.

“Yes! The talisman no longer protects you; and you are now no better
off than any other man who might venture into the very heart of the
police-office, among some dozens of stalwart fellows posted behind each
of those doors and some hundreds of others who will hasten up at the
first signal.”

M. Nicole shrugged his shoulders and gave Prasville a look of great
commiseration:

“Shall I tell you what is happening, monsieur le secretaire-general?
Well, you too are having your head turned by all this business. Now that
you possess the list, your state of mind has suddenly sunk to that of
a Daubrecq or a d’Albufex. There is no longer even a question, in
your thoughts, of taking it to your superiors, so that this ferment
of disgrace and discord may be ended. No, no; a sodden temptation has
seized upon you and intoxicated you; and, losing your head, you say to
yourself, ‘It is here, in my pocket. With its aid, I am omnipotent. It
means wealth, absolute, unbounded power. Why not benefit by it? Why
not let Gilbert and Clarisse Mergy die? Why not lock up that idiot of
a Lupin? Why not seize this unparalleled piece of fortune by the
forelock?’”

He bent toward Prasville and, very softly, in a friendly and
confidential tone, said:

“Don’t do that, my dear sir, don’t do it.”

“And why not?”

“It is not to your interest, believe me.”

“Really!”

“No. Or, if you absolutely insist on doing it, have the kindness first
to consult the twenty-seven names on the list of which you have just
robbed me and reflect, for a moment, on the name of the third person on
it.”

“Oh? And what is the name of that third person?”

“It is the name of a friend of yours.”

“What friend?”

“Stanislas Vorenglade, the ex-deputy.”

“And then?” said Prasville, who seemed to be losing some of his
self-confidence.

“Then? Ask yourself if an inquiry, however summary, would not end by
discovering, behind that Stanislas Vorenglade, the name of one who
shared certain little profits with him.”

“And whose name is?”

“Louis Prasville.”

M. Nicole banged the table with his fist.

“Enough of this humbug, monsieur! For twenty minutes, you and I have
been beating about the bush. That will do. Let us understand each other.
And, to begin with, drop your pistols. You can’t imagine that I am
frightened of those playthings! Stand up, sir, stand up, as I am doing,
and finish the business: I am in a hurry.”

He put his hand on Prasville’s shoulder and, speaking with great
deliberation, said:

“If, within an hour from now, you are not back from the Elysee, bringing
with you a line to say that the decree of pardon has been signed; if,
within one hour and ten minutes, I, Arsene Lupin, do not walk out of
this building safe and sound and absolutely free, this evening
four Paris newspapers will receive four letters selected from the
correspondence exchanged between Stanislas Vorenglade and yourself, the
correspondence which Stanislas Vorenglade sold me this morning. Here’s
your hat, here’s your overcoat, here’s your stick. Be off. I will wait
for you.”

Then happened this extraordinary and yet easily understood thing, that
Prasville did not raise the slightest protest nor make the least show
of fight. He received the sudden, far-reaching, utter conviction of
what the personality known as Arsene Lupin meant, in all its breadth and
fulness. He did not so much as think of carping, of pretending--as
he had until then believed--that the letters had been destroyed by
Vorenglade the deputy or, at any rate, that Vorenglade would not dare
to hand them over, because, in so doing, Vorenglade was also working
his own destruction. No, Prasville did not speak a word. He felt
himself caught in a vise of which no human strength could force the jaws
asunder. There was nothing to do but yield. He yielded.

“Here, in an hour,” repeated M. Nicole.

“In an hour,” said Prasville, tamely. Nevertheless, in order to know
exactly where he stood, he added, “The letters, of course, will be
restored to me against Gilbert’s pardon?”

“No.”

“How do you mean, no? In that case, there is no object in...”

“They will be restored to you, intact, two months after the day when my
friends and I have brought about Gilbert’s escape... thanks to the
very slack watch which will be kept upon him, in accordance with your
orders.”

“Is that all?”

“No, there are two further conditions: first, the immediate payment of a
cheque for forty thousand francs.”

“Forty thousand francs?”

“The sum for which Stanislas Vorenglade sold me the letters. It is only
fair...”

“And next?”

“Secondly, your resignation, within six months, of your present
position.”

“My resignation? But why?”

M. Nicole made a very dignified gesture:

“Because it is against public morals that one of the highest positions
in the police-service should be occupied by a man whose hands are not
absolutely clean. Make them send you to parliament or appoint you a
minister, a councillor of State, an ambassador, in short, any post
which your success in the Daubrecq case entitles you to demand. But not
secretary-general of police; anything but that! The very thought of it
disgusts me.”

Prasville reflected for a moment. He would have rejoiced in the sudden
destruction of his adversary and he racked his brain for the means to
effect it. But he was helpless.

He went to the door and called:

“M. Lartigue.” And, sinking his voice, but not very low, for he wished
M. Nicole to hear, “M. Lartigue, dismiss your men. It’s a mistake. And
let no one come into my office while I am gone. This gentleman will wait
for me here.”

He came back, took the hat, stick and overcoat which M. Nicole handed
him and went out.

“Well done, sir,” said Lupin, between his teeth, when the door was
closed. “You have behaved like a sportsman and a gentleman... So did I,
for that matter... perhaps with too obvious a touch of contempt... and
a little too bluntly. But, tush, this sort of business has to be carried
through with a high hand! The enemy’s got to be staggered! Besides, when
one’s own conscience is clear, one can’t take up too bullying a tone
with that sort of individual. Lift your head, Lupin. You have been the
champion of outraged morality. Be proud of your work. And now take a
chair, stretch out your legs and have a rest. You’ve deserved it.”

When Prasville returned, he found Lupin sound asleep and had to tap him
on the shoulder to wake him.

“Is it done?” asked Lupin.

“It’s done. The pardon will be signed presently. Here is the written
promise.”

“The forty thousand francs?”

“Here’s your cheque.”

“Good. It but remains for me to thank you, monsieur.”

“So the correspondence...”

“The Stanislas Vorenglade correspondence will be handed to you on the
conditions stated. However, I am glad to be able to give you, here and
now, as a sign of my gratitude, the four letters which I meant to send
to the papers this evening.”

“Oh, so you had them on you?” said Prasville.

“I felt so certain, monsieur le secretaire-general, that we should end
by coming to an understanding.”

He took from his hat a fat envelope, sealed with five red seals, which
was pinned inside the lining, and handed it to Prasville, who thrust it
into his pocket. Then he said:

“Monsieur le secretaire-general, I don’t know when I shall have the
pleasure of seeing you again. If you have the least communication
to make to me, one line in the agony column of the Journal will be
sufficient. Just head it, ‘M. Nicole.’ Good-day to you.”

And he withdrew.

Prasville, when he was alone, felt as if he were waking from a nightmare
during which he had performed incoherent actions over which his
conscious mind had no control. He was almost thinking of ringing and
causing a stir in the passages; but, just then, there was a tap at the
door and one of the office-messengers came hurrying in.

“What’s the matter?” asked Prasville.

“Monsieur le secretaire-general, it’s Monsieur le Depute Daubrecq asking
to see you... on a matter of the highest importance.”

“Daubrecq!” exclaimed Prasville, in bewilderment. “Daubrecq here! Show
him in.”

Daubrecq had not waited for the order. He ran up to Prasville, out of
breath, with his clothes in disorder, a bandage over his left eye, no
tie, no collar, looking like an escaped lunatic; and the door was not
closed before he caught hold of Prasville with his two enormous hands:

“Have you the list?”

“Yes.”

“Have you bought it?”

“Yes.”

“At the price of Gilbert’s pardon?”

“Yes.”

“Is it signed?”

“Yes.”

Daubrecq made a furious gesture:

“You fool! You fool! You’ve been trapped! For hatred of me, I expect?
And now you’re going to take your revenge?”

“With a certain satisfaction, Daubrecq. Remember my little friend, the
opera-dancer, at Nice... It’s your turn now to dance.”

“So it means prison?”

“I should think so,” said Prasville. “Besides, it doesn’t matter. You’re
done for, anyhow. Deprived of the list, without defence of any kind,
you’re bound to fall to pieces of your own weight. And I shall be
present at the break-up. That’s my revenge.”

“And you believe that!” yelled Daubrecq, furiously. “You believe that
they will wring my neck like a chicken’s and that I shall not know how
to defend myself and that I have no claws left and no teeth to bite
with! Well, my boy, if I do come to grief, there’s always one who will
fall with me and that is Master Prasville, the partner of Stanislas
Vorenglade, who is going to hand me every proof in existence against
him, so that I may get him sent to gaol without delay. Aha, I’ve got you
fixed, old chap! With those letters, you’ll go as I please, hang it all,
and there will be fine days yet for Daubrecq the deputy! What! You’re
laughing, are you? Perhaps those letters don’t exist?”

Prasville shrugged his shoulders:

“Yes, they exist. But Vorenglade no longer has them in his possession.”

“Since when?”

“Since this morning. Vorenglade sold them, two hours ago, for the sum of
forty thousand francs; and I have bought them back at the same price.”

Daubrecq burst into a great roar of laughter:

“Lord, how funny! Forty thousand francs! You’ve paid forty thousand
francs! To M. Nicole, I suppose, who sold you the list of the
Twenty-seven? Well, would you like me to tell you the real name of M.
Nicole? It’s Arsene Lupin!”

“I know that.”

“Very likely. But what you don’t know, you silly ass, is that I have
come straight from Stanislas Vorenglade’s and that Stanislas Vorenglade
left Paris four days ago! Oh, what a joke! They’ve sold you waste paper!
And your forty thousand francs! What an ass! What an ass!”

He walked out of the room, screaming with laughter and leaving Prasville
absolutely dumbfounded.

So Arsene Lupin possessed no proof at all; and, when he was threatening
and commanding and treating Prasville with that airy insolence, it was
all a farce, all bluff!

“No, no, it’s impossible,” thought the secretary-general. “I have the
sealed envelope.... It’s here.... I have only to open it.”

He dared not open it. He handled it, weighed it, examined it... And
doubt made its way so swiftly into his mind that he was not in the least
surprised, when he did open it, to find that it contained four blank
sheets of note-paper.

“Well, well,” he said, “I am no match for those rascals. But all is not
over yet.”

And, in point of fact, all was not over. If Lupin had acted so daringly,
it showed that the letters existed and that he relied upon buying them
from Stanislas Vorenglade. But, as, on the other hand, Vorenglade was
not in Paris, Prasville’s business was simply to forestall Lupin’s steps
with regard to Vorenglade and obtain the restitution of those dangerous
letters from Vorenglade at all costs. The first to arrive would be the
victor.

Prasville once more took his hat, coat and stick, went downstairs,
stepped into a taxi and drove to Vorenglade’s flat.

Here he was told that the ex-deputy was expected home from London at six
o’clock that evening.

It was two o’clock in the afternoon. Prasville therefore had plenty of
time to prepare his plan.

He arrived at the Gare du Nord at five o’clock and posted all around,
in the waiting-rooms and in the railway-offices, the three or four dozen
detectives whom he had brought with him.

This made him feel easy. If M. Nicole tried to speak to Vorenglade,
they would arrest Lupin. And, to make assurance doubly sure, they would
arrest whosoever could be suspected of being either Lupin or one of
Lupin’s emissaries.

Moreover, Prasville made a close inspection of the whole station.
He discovered nothing suspicious. But, at ten minutes to six,
Chief-inspector Blanchon, who was with him, said:

“Look, there’s Daubrecq.”

Daubrecq it was; and the sight of his enemy exasperated the
secretary-general to such a pitch that he was on the verge of having him
arrested. But he reflected that he had no excuse, no right, no warrant
for the arrest.

Besides, Daubrecq’s presence proved, with still greater force, that
everything now depended on Stanislas Vorenglade. Vorenglade possessed
the letters: who would end by having them? Daubrecq? Lupin? Or he,
Prasville?

Lupin was not there and could not be there. Daubrecq was not in a
position to fight. There could be no doubt, therefore, about the result:
Prasville would reenter into possession of his letters and, through
this very fact, would escape Daubrecq’s threats and Lupin’s threats and
recover all his freedom of action against them.

The train arrived.

In accordance with orders, the stationmaster had issued instructions
that no one was to be admitted to the platform. Prasville, therefore,
walked on alone, in front of a number of his men, with Chief-inspector
Blanchon at their head.

The train drew up.

Prasville almost at once saw Stanislas Vorenglade at the window of a
first-class compartment, in the middle of the train.

The ex-deputy alighted and then held out his hand to assist an old
gentleman who was travelling with him.

Prasville ran up to him and said, eagerly:

“Vorenglade... I want to speak to you...”

At the same moment, Daubrecq, who had managed to pass the barrier,
appeared and exclaimed:

“M. Vorenglade, I have had your letter. I am at your disposal.”

Vorenglade looked at the two men, recognized Prasville, recognized
Daubrecq, and smiled:

“Oho, it seems that my return was awaited with some impatience! What’s
it all about? Certain letters, I expect?”

“Yes... yes...” replied the two men, fussing around him.

“You’re too late,” he declared.

“Eh? What? What do you mean?”

“I mean that the letters are sold.”

“Sold! To whom?”

“To this gentleman,” said Vorenglade, pointing to his
travelling-companion, “to this gentleman, who thought that the business
was worth going out of his way for and who came to Amiens to meet me.”

The old gentleman, a very old man wrapped in furs and leaning on his
stick, took off his hat and bowed.

“It’s Lupin,” thought Prasville, “it’s Lupin, beyond a doubt.”

And he glanced toward the detectives, was nearly calling them, but the
old gentleman explained:

“Yes, I thought the letters were good enough to warrant a few hours’
railway journey and the cost of two return tickets.”

“Two tickets?”

“One for me and the other for one of my friends.”

“One of your friends?”

“Yes, he left us a few minutes ago and reached the front part of the
train through the corridor. He was in a great hurry.”

Prasville understood: Lupin had taken the precaution to bring an
accomplice, and the accomplice was carrying off the letters. The game
was lost, to a certainty. Lupin had a firm grip on his victim. There was
nothing to do but submit and accept the conqueror’s conditions.

“Very well, sir,” said Prasville. “We shall see each other when the time
comes. Good-bye for the present, Daubrecq: you shall hear from me.” And,
drawing Vorenglade aside, “As for you, Vorenglade, you are playing a
dangerous game.”

“Dear me!” said the ex-deputy. “And why?”

The two men moved away.

Daubrecq had not uttered a word and stood motionless, as though rooted
to the ground.

The old gentleman went up to him and whispered:

“I say, Daubrecq, wake up, old chap... It’s the chloroform, I expect...”

Daubrecq clenched his fists and gave a muttered growl.

“Ah, I see you know me!” said the old gentleman. “Then you will remember
our interview, some months ago, when I came to see you in the Square
Lamartine and asked you to intercede in Gilbert’s favour. I said to
you that day, ‘Lay down your arms, save Gilbert and I will leave you in
peace. If not, I shall take the list of the Twenty-seven from you; and
then you’re done for.’ Well, I have a strong suspicion that done for is
what you are. That comes of not making terms with kind M. Lupin. Sooner
or later, you’re bound to lose your boots by it. However, let it be a
lesson to you.

“By the way, here’s your pocketbook which I forgot to give you. Excuse
me if you find it lightened of its contents. There were not only
a decent number of bank-notes in it, but also the receipt from the
warehouse where you stored the Enghien things which you took back from
me. I thought I might as well save you the trouble of taking them out
yourself. It ought to be done by now. No, don’t thank me: it’s not worth
mentioning. Good-bye, Daubrecq. And, if you should want a louis or
two, to buy yourself a new decanter-stopper, drop me a line. Good-bye,
Daubrecq.”

He walked away.

He had not gone fifty steps when he heard the sound of a shot.

He turned round.

Daubrecq had blown his brains out.

“De profundis,” murmured Lupin, taking off his hat.

Two months later, Gilbert, whose sentence had been commuted to one of
penal servitude for life, made his escape from the Ile de Re, on the day
before that on which he was to have been transported to New Caledonia.

It was a strange escape. Its least details remained difficult to
understand; and, like the two shots on the Boulevard Arago, it greatly
enhanced Arsene Lupin’s prestige.

“Taken all round,” said Lupin to me, one day, after telling me the
different episodes of the story, “taken all around, no enterprise
has ever given me more trouble or cost me greater exertions than that
confounded adventure which, if you don’t mind, we will call, The Crystal
Stopper; or, Never Say Die. In twelve hours, between six o’clock in the
morning and six o’clock in the evening, I made up for six months of bad
luck, blunders, gropings in the dark and reverses. I certainly count
those twelve hours among the finest and the most glorious of my life.”

“And Gilbert?” I asked. “What became of him?”

“He is farming his own land, way down in Algeria, under his real name,
his only name of Antoine Mergy. He is married to an Englishwoman, and
they have a son whom he insisted on calling Arsene. I often receive a
bright, chatty, warm-hearted letter from him.”

“And Mme. Mergy?”

“She and her little Jacques are living with them.”

“Did you see her again?”

“I did not.”

“Really!”

Lupin hesitated for a few moments and then said with a smile:

“My dear fellow, I will let you into a secret that will make me seem
ridiculous in your eyes. But you know that I have always been as
sentimental as a schoolboy and as silly as a goose. Well, on the
evening when I went back to Clarisse Mergy and told her the news of the
day--part of which, for that matter, she already knew--I felt two
things very thoroughly. One was that I entertained for her a much deeper
feeling than I thought; the other that she, on the contrary, entertained
for me a feeling which was not without contempt, not without a rankling
grudge nor even a certain aversion.”

“Nonsense! Why?”

“Why? Because Clarisse Mergy is an exceedingly honest woman and because
I am... just Arsene Lupin.”

“Oh!”

“Dear me, yes, an attractive bandit, a romantic and chivalrous
cracksman, anything you please. For all that, in the eyes of a really
honest woman, with an upright nature and a well-balanced mind, I am only
the merest riff-raff.”

I saw that the wound was sharper than he was willing to admit, and I
said:

“So you really loved her?”

“I even believe,” he said, in a jesting tone, “that I asked her to marry
me. After all, I had saved her son, had I not?... So... I thought. What
a rebuff!... It produced a coolness between us... Since then...”

“You have forgotten her?”

“Oh, certainly! But it required the consolations of one Italian, two
Americans, three Russians, a German grand-duchess and a Chinawoman to do
it!”

“And, after that...?”

“After that, so as to place an insuperable barrier between myself and
her, I got married.”

“Nonsense! You got married, you, Arsene Lupin?”

“Married, wedded, spliced, in the most lawful fashion. One of the
greatest names in France. An only daughter. A colossal fortune... What!
You don’t know the story? Well, it’s worth hearing.”

And, straightway, Lupin, who was in a confidential vein, began to tell
me the story of his marriage to Angelique de Sarzeau-Vendome, Princesse
de Bourbon-Conde, to-day Sister Marie-Auguste, a humble nun in the
Visitation Convent... [*]

     * See The Confessions of Arsene Lupin By Maurice Leblanc
     Translated by Alexander Teixeira de Mattos

But, after the first few words, he stopped, as though his narrative had
suddenly ceased to interest him, and he remained pensive.

“What’s the matter, Lupin?”

“The matter? Nothing.”

“Yes, yes... There... now you’re smiling... Is it Daubrecq’s secret
receptacle, his glass eye, that’s making you laugh?”

“Not at all.”

“What then?”

“Nothing, I tell you... only a memory.”

“A pleasant memory?”

“Yes!... Yes, a delightful memory even. It was at night, off the Ile
de Re, on the fishing-smack in which Clarisse and I were taking Gilbert
away.... We were alone, the two of us, in the stern of the boat... And
I remember ... I talked... I spoke words and more words... I said all
that I had on my heart... And then... then came silence, a perturbing
and disarming silence.”

“Well?”

“Well, I swear to you that the woman whom I took in my arms that night
and kissed on the lips--oh, not for long: a few seconds only, but
no matter!--I swear before heaven that she was something more than a
grateful mother, something more than a friend yielding to a moment
of susceptibility, that she was a woman also, a woman quivering with
emotion ...” And he continued, with a bitter laugh, “Who ran away next
day, never to see me again.”

He was silent once more. Then he whispered:

“Clarisse... Clarisse... On the day when I am tired and disappointed and
weary of life, I will come to you down there, in your little Arab house
... in that little white house, Clarisse, where you are waiting for
me...”





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Crystal Stopper, by Maurice LeBlanc

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CRYSTAL STOPPER ***

***** This file should be named 1563-0.txt or 1563-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/6/1563/

Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
