The Project Gutenberg EBook of How To Write Special Feature Articles
by Willard Grosvenor Bleyer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: How To Write Special Feature Articles
       A Handbook for Reporters, Correspondents and Free-Lance Writers Who
       Desire to Contribute to Popular Magazines and Magazine Sections of
       Newspapers
       

Author: Willard Grosvenor Bleyer

Release Date: April 26, 2005 [EBook #15718]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO WRITE SPECIAL FEATURE ***




Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Charlene Taylor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









HOW TO WRITE SPECIAL FEATURE ARTICLES

A HANDBOOK FOR REPORTERS, CORRESPONDENTS
AND FREE-LANCE WRITERS WHO DESIRE TO
CONTRIBUTE TO POPULAR MAGAZINES AND
MAGAZINE SECTIONS OF NEWSPAPERS

BY

WILLARD GROSVENOR BLEYER, PH.D.

_Author of "Newspaper Writing and Editing," and "Types of News Writing";
Director of the Course in Journalism in the University of Wisconsin_



BOSTON, NEW YORK, CHICAGO, SAN FRANCISCO

HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

The Riverside Press Cambridge

The Riverside Press
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.




PREFACE


This book is the result of twelve years' experience in teaching
university students to write special feature articles for newspapers and
popular magazines. By applying the methods outlined in the following
pages, young men and women have been able to prepare articles that have
been accepted by many newspaper and magazine editors. The success that
these students have achieved leads the author to believe that others who
desire to write special articles may be aided by the suggestions given
in this book.

Although innumerable books on short-story writing have been published,
no attempt has hitherto been made to discuss in detail the writing of
special feature articles. In the absence of any generally accepted
method of approach to the subject, it has been necessary to work out a
systematic classification of the various types of articles and of the
different kinds of titles, beginnings, and similar details, as well as
to supply names by which to identify them.

A careful analysis of current practice in the writing of special feature
stories and popular magazine articles is the basis of the methods
presented. In this analysis an effort has been made to show the
application of the principles of composition to the writing of articles.
Examples taken from representative newspapers and magazines are freely
used to illustrate the methods discussed. To encourage students to
analyze typical articles, the second part of the book is devoted to a
collection of newspaper and magazine articles of various types, with an
outline for the analysis of them.

Particular emphasis is placed on methods of popularizing such knowledge
as is not available to the general reader. This has been done in the
belief that it is important for the average person to know of the
progress that is being made in every field of human endeavor, in order
that he may, if possible, apply the results to his own affairs. The
problem, therefore, is to show aspiring writers how to present
discoveries, inventions, new methods, and every significant advance in
knowledge, in an accurate and attractive form.

To train students to write articles for newspapers and popular magazines
may, perhaps, be regarded by some college instructors in composition as
an undertaking scarcely worth their while. They would doubtless prefer
to encourage their students to write what is commonly called
"literature." The fact remains, nevertheless, that the average
undergraduate cannot write anything that approximates literature,
whereas experience has shown that many students can write acceptable
popular articles. Moreover, since the overwhelming majority of Americans
read only newspapers and magazines, it is by no means an unimportant
task for our universities to train writers to supply the steady demand
for well-written articles. The late Walter Hines Page, founder of the
_World's Work_ and former editor of the _Atlantic Monthly_, presented
the whole situation effectively in an article on "The Writer and the
University," when he wrote:

    The journeymen writers write almost all that almost all Americans
    read. This is a fact that we love to fool ourselves about. We talk
    about "literature" and we talk about "hack writers," implying that
    the reading that we do is of literature. The truth all the while is,
    we read little else than the writing of the hacks--living hacks,
    that is, men and women who write for pay. We may hug the notion that
    our life and thought are not really affected by current literature,
    that we read the living writers only for utilitarian reasons, and
    that our real intellectual life is fed by the great dead writers.
    But hugging this delusion does not change the fact that the
    intellectual life even of most educated persons, and certainly of
    the mass of the population, is fed chiefly by the writers of our own
    time....

    Every editor of a magazine, every editor of an earnest and worthy
    newspaper, every publisher of books, has dozens or hundreds of
    important tasks for which he cannot find capable men; tasks that
    require scholarship, knowledge of science, or of politics, or of
    industry, or of literature, along with experience in writing
    accurately in the language of the people.

Special feature stories and popular magazine articles constitute a type
of writing particularly adapted to the ability of the novice, who has
developed some facility in writing, but who may not have sufficient
maturity or talent to undertake successful short-story writing or other
distinctly literary work. Most special articles cannot be regarded as
literature. Nevertheless, they afford the young writer an opportunity to
develop whatever ability he possesses. Such writing teaches him four
things that are invaluable to any one who aspires to do literary work.
It trains him to observe what is going on about him, to select what will
interest the average reader, to organize material effectively, and to
present it attractively. If this book helps the inexperienced writer,
whether he is in or out of college, to acquire these four essential
qualifications for success, it will have accomplished its purpose.

For permission to reprint complete articles, the author is indebted to
the editors of the _Boston Herald_, the _Christian Science Monitor_, the
_Boston Evening Transcript_, the _New York Evening Post_, the _Detroit
News_, the _Milwaukee Journal_, the _Kansas City Star_, the _New York
Sun_, the _Providence Journal_, the _Ohio State Journal_, the _New York
World_, the _Saturday Evening Post_, the _Independent_, the _Country
Gentleman_, the _Outlook_, _McClure's Magazine_, _Everybody's Magazine_,
the _Delineator_, the _Pictorial Review_, _Munsey's Magazine_, the
_American Magazine_, _System_, _Farm and Fireside_, the _Woman's Home
Companion_, the _Designer_, and the Newspaper Enterprise Association.
The author is also under obligation to the many newspapers and magazines
from which excerpts, titles, and other material have been quoted.

At every stage in the preparation of this book the author has had the
advantage of the co√∂peration and assistance of his wife, Alice Haskell
Bleyer.

_University of Wisconsin
Madison, August, 1919_




CONTENTS


PART I

  I. THE FIELD FOR SPECIAL ARTICLES                            3

 II. PREPARATION FOR SPECIAL FEATURE WRITING                  14

III. FINDING SUBJECTS AND MATERIAL                            25

 IV. APPEAL AND PURPOSE                                       39

  V. TYPES OF ARTICLES                                        52

 VI. WRITING THE ARTICLE                                      99

VII. HOW TO BEGIN                                            131

VIII. STYLE                                                  160

 IX. TITLES AND HEADLINES                                    170

  X. PREPARING AND SELLING THE MANUSCRIPT                    182

 XI. PHOTOGRAPHS AND OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS                     193


PART II

AN OUTLINE FOR THE ANALYSIS OF SPECIAL FEATURE ARTICLES      201

TEACH CHILDREN LOVE OF ART THROUGH STORY-TELLING             204
  (_Boston Herald_)

WHERE GIRLS LEARN TO WIELD SPADE AND HOE                     206
 (_Christian Science Monitor_)

BOYS IN SEARCH OF JOBS (_Boston Transcript_)                 209

GIRLS AND A CAMP (_New York Evening Post_)                   213

YOUR PORTER (_Saturday Evening Post_)                        218

THE GENTLE ART OF BLOWING BOTTLES (_Independent_)            233

THE NEIGHBORHOOD PLAYHOUSE (_New York World_)                240

THE SINGULAR STORY OF THE MOSQUITO MAN                       242
  (_New York Evening Post_)

A COUNTY SERVICE STATION (_Country Gentleman_)               248

GUARDING A CITY'S WATER SUPPLY (_Detroit News_)              260

THE OCCUPATION AND EXERCISE CURE (_Outlook_)                 264

THE BRENNAN MONO-RAIL CAR (_McClure's Magazine_)             274

A NEW POLITICAL WEDGE (_Everybody's Magazine_)               281

THE JOB LADY (_Delineator_)                                  293

MARK TWAIN'S FIRST SWEETHEART (_Kansas City Star_)           299

FOUR MEN OF HUMBLE BIRTH HOLD WORLD DESTINY IN               305
  THEIR HANDS (_Milwaukee Journal_)

THE CONFESSIONS OF A COLLEGE PROFESSOR'S WIFE                307
  (_Saturday Evening Post_)

A PARADISE FOR A PENNY (_Boston Transcript_)                 326

WANTED: A HOME ASSISTANT (_Pictorial Review_)                331

SIX YEARS OF TEA ROOMS (_New York Sun_)                      336

BY PARCEL POST (_Country Gentleman_)                         341

SALES WITHOUT SALESMANSHIP (_Saturday Evening Post_)         349

THE ACCIDENT THAT GAVE US WOOD-PULP PAPER                    356
  (_Munsey's Magazine_)

CENTENNIAL OF THE FIRST STEAMSHIP TO CROSS THE ATLANTIC      360
  (_Providence Journal_)

SEARCHING FOR THE LOST ATLANTIS                              364
  (_Syndicate Sunday Magazine Section_)

INDEX                                                        369





HOW TO WRITE SPECIAL FEATURE ARTICLES

PART I





CHAPTER I

THE FIELD FOR SPECIAL ARTICLES


ORIGIN OF SPECIAL ARTICLES. The rise of popular magazines and of
magazine sections of daily newspapers during the last thirty years has
resulted in a type of writing known as the "special feature article."
Such articles, presenting interesting and timely subjects in popular
form, are designed to attract a class of readers that were not reached
by the older literary periodicals. Editors of newspapers and magazines a
generation ago began to realize that there was no lack of interest on
the part of the general public in scientific discoveries and inventions,
in significant political and social movements, in important persons and
events. Magazine articles on these themes, however, had usually been
written by specialists who, as a rule, did not attempt to appeal to the
"man in the street," but were satisfied to reach a limited circle of
well-educated readers.

To create a larger magazine-reading public, editors undertook to develop
a popular form and style that would furnish information as attractively
as possible. The perennial appeal of fiction gave them a suggestion for
the popularization of facts. The methods of the short story, of the
drama, and even of the melodrama, applied to the presentation of general
information, provided a means for catching the attention of the casual
reader.

Daily newspapers had already discovered the advantage of giving the
day's news in a form that could be read rapidly with the maximum degree
of interest by the average man and woman. Certain so-called sensational
papers had gone a step further in these attempts to give added
attractiveness to news and had emphasized its melodramatic aspects.
Other papers had seen the value of the "human interest" phases of the
day's happenings. It was not surprising, therefore, that Sunday editors
of newspapers should undertake to apply to special articles the same
methods that had proved successful in the treatment of news.

The product of these efforts at popularization was the special feature
article, with its story-like form, its touches of description, its
"human interest," its dramatic situations, its character portrayal--all
effectively used to furnish information and entertainment for that rapid
reader, the "average American."

DEFINITION OF A SPECIAL ARTICLE. A special feature article may be
defined as a detailed presentation of facts in an interesting form
adapted to rapid reading, for the purpose of entertaining or informing
the average person. It usually deals with (1) recent news that is of
sufficient importance to warrant elaboration; (2) timely or seasonal
topics not directly connected with news; or (3) subjects of general
interest that have no immediate connection with current events.

Although frequently concerned with news, the special feature article is
more than a mere news story. It aims to supplement the bare facts of the
news report by giving more detailed information regarding the persons,
places, and circumstances that appear in the news columns. News must be
published as fast as it develops, with only enough explanatory material
to make it intelligible. The special article, written with the
perspective afforded by an interval of a few days or weeks, fills in the
bare outlines of the hurried news sketch with the life and color that
make the picture complete.

The special feature article must not be confused with the type of news
story called the "feature," or "human interest," story. The latter
undertakes to present minor incidents of the day's news in an
entertaining form. Like the important news story, it is published
immediately after the incident occurs. Its purpose is to appeal to
newspaper readers by bringing out the humorous and pathetic phases of
events that have little real news value. It exemplifies, therefore,
merely one distinctive form of news report.

The special feature article differs from the older type of magazine
article, not so much in subject as in form and style. The most marked
difference lies in the fact that it supplements the recognized methods
of literary and scientific exposition with the more striking devices of
narrative, descriptive, and dramatic writing.

SCOPE OF FEATURE ARTICLES. The range of subjects for special
articles is as wide as human knowledge and experience. Any theme is
suitable that can be made interesting to a considerable number of
persons. A given topic may make either a local or a general appeal. If
interest in it is likely to be limited to persons in the immediate
vicinity of the place with which the subject is connected, the article
is best adapted to publication in a local newspaper. If the theme is one
that appeals to a larger public, the article is adapted to a periodical
of general circulation. Often local material has interest for persons in
many other communities, and hence is suitable either for newspapers or
for magazines.

Some subjects have a peculiar appeal to persons engaged in a particular
occupation or devoted to a particular avocation or amusement. Special
articles on these subjects of limited appeal are adapted to
agricultural, trade, or other class publications, particularly to such
of these periodicals as present their material in a popular rather than
a technical manner.

THE NEWSPAPER FIELD. Because of their number and their local
character, daily newspapers afford a ready medium for the publication of
special articles, or "special feature stories," as they are generally
called in newspaper offices. Some newspapers publish these articles from
day to day on the editorial page or in other parts of the paper. Many
more papers have magazine sections on Saturday or Sunday made up
largely of such "stories." Some of these special sections closely
resemble regular magazines in form, cover, and general make-up.

The articles published in newspapers come from three sources: (1)
syndicates that furnish a number of newspapers in different cities with
special articles, illustrations, and other matter, for simultaneous
publication; (2) members of the newspaper's staff; that is, reporters,
correspondents, editors, or special writers employed for the purpose;
(3) so-called "free-lance" writers, professional or amateur, who submit
their "stories" to the editor of the magazine section.

Reporters, correspondents, and other regular members of the staff may be
assigned to write special feature stories, or may prepare such stories
on their own initiative for submission to the editor of the magazine
section. In many offices regular members of the staff are paid for
special feature stories in addition to their salaries, especially when
the subjects are not assigned to them and when the stories are prepared
in the writer's own leisure time. Other papers expect their regular
staff members to furnish the paper with whatever articles they may
write, as a part of the work covered by their salary. If a paper has one
or more special feature writers on its staff, it may pay them a fixed
salary or may employ them "on space"; that is, pay them at a fixed
"space rate" for the number of columns that an article fills when
printed.

Newspaper correspondents, who are usually paid at space rates for news
stories, may add to their monthly "string," or amount of space, by
submitting special feature articles in addition to news. They may also
submit articles to other papers that do not compete with their own
paper. Ordinarily a newspaper expects a correspondent to give it the
opportunity of printing any special feature stories that he may write.

Free-lance writers, who are not regularly employed by newspapers or
magazines as staff members, submit articles for the editor's
consideration and are paid at space rates. Sometimes a free lance will
outline an article in a letter or in personal conference with an editor
in order to get his approval before writing it, but, unless the editor
knows the writer's work, he is not likely to promise to accept the
completed article. To the writer there is an obvious advantage in
knowing that the subject as he outlines it is or is not an acceptable
one. If an editor likes the work of a free lance, he may suggest
subjects for articles, or may even ask him to prepare an article on a
given subject. Freelance writers, by selling their work at space rates,
can often make more money than they would receive as regular members of
a newspaper staff.

For the amateur the newspaper offers an excellent field. First, in every
city of any size there is at least one daily newspaper, and almost all
these papers publish special feature stories. Second, feature articles
on local topics, the material for which is right at the amateur's hand,
are sought by most newspapers. Third, newspaper editors are generally
less critical of form and style than are magazine editors. With some
practice an inexperienced writer may acquire sufficient skill to prepare
an acceptable special feature story for publication in a local paper,
and even if he is paid little or nothing for it, he will gain experience
from seeing his work in print.

The space rate paid for feature articles is usually proportionate to the
size of the city in which the newspaper is published. In small cities
papers seldom pay more than $1 a column; in larger places the rate is
about $3 a column; in still larger ones, $5; and in the largest, from $8
to $10. In general the column rate for special feature stories is the
same as that paid for news stories.

WHAT NEWSPAPERS WANT. Since timeliness is the keynote of the newspaper,
current topics, either growing out of the news of the week or
anticipating coming events, furnish the subjects for most special
feature stories. The news columns from day to day provide room for only
concise announcements of such news as a scientific discovery, an
invention, the death of an interesting person, a report on social or
industrial conditions, proposed legislation, the razing of a landmark,
or the dedication of a new building. Such news often arouses the
reader's curiosity to know more of the persons, places, and
circumstances mentioned. In an effort to satisfy this curiosity, editors
of magazine sections print special feature stories based on news.

By anticipating approaching events, an editor is able to supply articles
that are timely for a particular issue of his paper. Two classes of
subjects that he usually looks forward to in this way are: first, those
concerned with local, state, and national anniversaries; and second,
those growing out of seasonal occasions, such as holidays, vacations,
the opening of schools and colleges, moving days, commencements, the
opening of hunting and fishing seasons.

The general policy of a newspaper with regard to special feature stories
is the same as its policy concerning news. Both are determined by the
character of its circulation. A paper that is read largely by business
and professional men provides news and special articles that satisfy
such readers. A paper that aims to reach the so-called masses naturally
selects news and features that will appeal to them. If a newspaper has a
considerable circulation outside the city where it is published, the
editors, in framing their policy, cannot afford to overlook their
suburban and rural readers. The character of its readers, in a word,
determines the character of a paper's special feature stories.

The newspaper is primarily local in character. A city, a state, or at
most a comparatively small section of the whole country, is its
particular field. Besides the news of its locality, it must, of course,
give significant news of the world at large. So, too, in addition to
local feature articles, it should furnish special feature stories of a
broader scope. This distinctively local character of newspapers
differentiates them from magazines of national circulation in the matter
of acceptable subjects for special articles.

The frequency of publication of newspapers, as well as their ephemeral
character, leads, in many instances, to the choice of comparatively
trivial topics for some articles. Merely to give readers entertaining
matter with which to occupy their leisure at the end of a day's work or
on Sunday, some papers print special feature stories on topics of little
or no importance, often written in a light vein. Articles with no more
serious purpose than that of helping readers to while away a few spare
moments are obviously better adapted to newspapers, which are read
rapidly and immediately cast aside, than to periodicals.

The sensationalism that characterizes the policy of some newspapers
affects alike their news columns and their magazine sections. Gossip,
scandal, and crime lend themselves to melodramatic treatment as readily
in special feature articles as in news stories. On the other hand, the
relatively few magazines that undertake to attract readers by
sensationalism, usually do so by means of short stories and serials
rather than by special articles.

All newspapers, in short, use special feature stories on local topics,
some papers print trivial ones, and others "play up" sensational
material; whereas practically no magazine publishes articles of these
types.

SUNDAY MAGAZINE SECTIONS. The character and scope of special articles
for the Sunday magazine section of newspapers have been well summarized
by two well-known editors of such sections. Mr. John O'Hara Cosgrove,
editor of the _New York Sunday World Magazine_, and formerly editor of
_Everybody's Magazine_, gives this as his conception of the ideal Sunday
magazine section:

    The real function of the Sunday Magazine, to my thinking, is to
    present the color and romance of the news, the most authoritative
    opinions on the issues and events of the day, and to chronicle
    promptly the developments of science as applied to daily life. In
    the grind of human intercourse all manner of curious, heroic,
    delightful things turn up, and for the most part, are dismissed in a
    passing note. Behind every such episode are human beings and a
    story, and these, if fairly and artfully explained, are the very
    stuff of romance. Into every great city men are drifting daily from
    the strange and remote places of the world where they have survived
    perilous hazards and seen rare spectacles. Such adventures are the
    treasure troves of the skilful reporter. The cross currents and
    reactions that lead up to any explosion of greed or passion that we
    call crime are often worth following, not only for their plots, but
    as proofs of the pain and terror of transgression. Brave deeds or
    heroic resistances are all too seldom presented in full length in
    the news, and generously portrayed prove the nobility inherent in
    every-day life.

    The broad domain of the Sunday magazine editor covers all that may
    be rare and curious or novel in the arts and sciences, in music and
    verse, in religion and the occult, on the stage and in sport.
    Achievements and controversies are ever culminating in these diverse
    fields, and the men and women actors therein make admirable subjects
    for his pages. Provided the editor has at his disposal skilled
    writers who have the fine arts of vivid and simple exposition and of
    the brief personal sketch, there is nothing of human interest that
    may not be presented.

The ideal Sunday magazine, as Mr. Frederick Boyd Stevenson, Sunday
editor of the _Brooklyn Eagle_, sees it, he describes thus:

    The new Sunday magazine of the newspaper bids fair to be a crisp,
    sensible review and critique of the live world. It has developed a
    special line of writers who have learned that a character sketch and
    interview of a man makes you "see" the man face to face and talk
    with him yourself. If he has done anything that gives him a place in
    the news of to-day, he is presented to you. You know the man.

    It seems to me that the leading feature of the Sunday magazine
    should be the biggest topic that will be before the public on the
    Sunday that the newspaper is printed. It should be written by one
    who thoroughly knows his subject, who is forceful in style and
    fluent in words, who can make a picture that his readers can see,
    and seeing, realize. So every other feature of the Sunday magazine
    should have points of human interest, either by contact with the
    news of the day or with men and women who are doing something
    besides getting divorces and creating scandals.

    I firmly believe that the coming Sunday magazine will contain
    articles of information without being dull or encyclop√¶dic, articles
    of adventure that are real and timely, articles of scientific
    discoveries that are authentic, interviews with men and women who
    have messages, and interpretations of news and analyses of every-day
    themes, together with sketches, poems, and essays that are not
    tedious, but have a reason for being printed.

THE MAGAZINE FIELD. The great majority of magazines differ from all
newspapers in one important respect--extent of circulation. Popular
magazines have a nation-wide distribution. It is only among agricultural
and trade journals that we find a distinctly sectional circulation. Some
of these publications serve subscribers in only one state or section,
and others issue separate state or sectional editions. The best basis of
differentiation among magazines, then, is not the extent of circulation
but the class of readers appealed to, regardless of the part of the
country in which the readers live. The popular general magazine, monthly
or weekly, aims to attract readers of all classes in all parts of the
United States.

HOW MAGAZINES GET MATERIAL. Magazine articles come from (1) regular
members of the magazine's staff, (2) professional or amateur free-lance
writers, (3) specialists who write as an avocation, and (4) readers of
the periodical who send in material based on their own experience.

The so-called "staff system" of magazine editing, in accordance with
which practically all the articles are prepared by writers regularly
employed by the publication, has been adopted by a few general magazines
and by a number of class periodicals. The staff is recruited from
writers and editors on newspapers and other magazines. Its members often
perform various editorial duties in addition to writing articles.
Publications edited in this way buy few if any articles from outsiders.

Magazines that do not follow the staff system depend largely or entirely
on contributors. Every editor daily receives many manuscripts submitted
by writers on their own initiative. From these he selects the material
best adapted to his publication. Experienced writers often submit an
outline of an article to a magazine editor for his approval before
preparing the material for publication. Free-lance writers of reputation
may be asked by magazine editors to prepare articles on given subjects.

In addition to material obtained in these ways, articles may be secured
from specialists who write as an avocation. An editor generally decides
on the subject that he thinks will interest his readers at a given time
and then selects the authority best fitted to treat it in a popular way.
To induce well-known men to prepare such articles, an editor generally
offers them more than he normally pays.

A periodical may encourage its readers to send in short articles giving
their own experiences and explaining how to do something in which they
have become skilled. These personal experience articles have a reality
and "human interest" that make them eminently readable. To obtain them
magazines sometimes offer prizes for the best, reserving the privilege
of publishing acceptable articles that do not win an award. Aspiring
writers should take advantage of these prize contests as a possible
means of getting both publication and money for their work.

OPPORTUNITIES FOR UNKNOWN WRITERS. The belief is common among novices
that because they are unknown their work is likely to receive little or
no consideration from editors. As a matter of fact, in the majority of
newspaper and magazine offices all unsolicited manuscripts are
considered strictly on their merits. The unknown writer has as good a
chance as anybody of having his manuscript accepted, provided that his
work has merit comparable with that of more experienced writers.

With the exception of certain newspapers that depend entirely on
syndicates for their special features, and of a few popular magazines
that have the staff system or that desire only the work of well-known
writers, every publication welcomes special articles and short stories
by novices. Moreover, editors take pride in the fact that from time to
time they "discover" writers whose work later proves popular. They not
infrequently tell how they accepted a short story, an article, or some
verse by an author of whom they had never before heard, because they
were impressed with the quality of it, and how the verdict of their
readers confirmed their own judgment.

The relatively small number of amateurs who undertake special articles,
compared with the hundreds of thousands who try their hand at short
stories, makes the opportunities for special feature writers all the
greater. Then, too, the number of professional writers of special
articles is comparatively small. This is particularly true of writers
who are able effectively to popularize scientific and technical
material, as well as of those who can present in popular form the
results of social and economic investigations.

It is not too much to say, therefore, that any writer who is willing (1)
to study the interests and the needs of newspaper and magazine readers,
(2) to gather carefully the material for his articles, and (3) to
present it accurately and attractively, may be sure that his work will
receive the fullest consideration in almost every newspaper and magazine
office in the country, and will be accepted whenever it is found to
merit publication.

WOMEN AS FEATURE WRITERS. Since the essential qualifications just
enumerated are not limited to men, women are quite as well fitted to
write special feature and magazine articles as are their brothers in the
craft. In fact, woman's quicker sympathies and readier emotional
response to many phases of life give her a distinct advantage. Her
insight into the lives of others, and her intuitive understanding of
them, especially fit her to write good "human interest" articles. Both
the delicacy of touch and the chatty, personal tone that characterize
the work of many young women, are well suited to numerous topics.

In some fields, such as cooking, sewing, teaching, the care of children,
and household management, woman's greater knowledge and understanding of
conditions furnish her with topics that are vital to other women and
often not uninteresting to men. The entry of women into occupations
hitherto open only to men is bringing new experiences to many women, and
is furnishing women writers with additional fields from which to draw
subjects and material. Ever since the beginning of popular magazines and
of special feature writing for newspapers, women writers have proved
their ability, but at no time have the opportunities for them been
greater than at present.




CHAPTER II

PREPARATION FOR SPECIAL FEATURE WRITING


QUALIFICATIONS FOR FEATURE WRITING. To attain success as a writer of
special feature articles a person must possess at least four
qualifications: (1) ability to find subjects that will interest the
average man and woman, and to see the picturesque, romantic, and
significant phases of these subjects; (2) a sympathetic understanding of
the lives and interests of the persons about whom and for whom he
writes; (3) thoroughness and accuracy in gathering material; (4) skill
to portray and to explain clearly, accurately, and attractively.

The much vaunted sense of news values commonly called a "nose for news,"
whether innate or acquired, is a prime requisite. Like the newspaper
reporter, the writer of special articles must be able to recognize what
at a given moment will interest the average reader. Like the reporter,
also, he must know how much it will interest him. An alert, responsive
attitude of mind toward everything that is going on in the world, and
especially in that part of the world immediately around him, will reveal
a host of subjects. By reading newspapers, magazines, and books, as well
as by intercourse with persons of various classes, a writer keeps in
contact with what people are thinking and talking about, in the world at
large and in his own community. In this way he finds subjects and also
learns how to connect his subjects with events and movements of interest
the country over.

Not only should he be quick to recognize a good subject; he must be able
to see the attractive and significant aspects of it. He must understand
which of its phases touch most closely the life and the interests of the
average person for whom he is writing. He must look at things from "the
other fellow's" point of view. A sympathetic insight into the lives of
his readers is necessary for every writer who hopes to quicken his
subject with vital interest.

The alert mental attitude that constantly focuses the writer's attention
on the men and women around him has been called "human curiosity," which
Arnold Bennett says "counts among the highest social virtues (as
indifference counts among the basest defects), because it leads to the
disclosure of the causes of character and temperament and thereby to a
better understanding of the springs of human conduct." The importance of
curiosity and of a keen sense of wonder has been emphasized as follows
by Mr. John M. Siddall, editor of the _American Magazine_, who directed
his advice to college students interested in the opportunities afforded
by writing as a profession:

    A journalist or writer must have consuming curiosity about other
    human beings--the most intense interest in their doings and motives
    and thoughts. It comes pretty near being the truth to say that a
    great journalist is a super-gossip--not about trivial things but
    about important things. Unless a man has a ceaseless desire to learn
    what is going on in the heads of others, he won't be much of a
    journalist--for how can you write about others unless you know about
    others?

    In journalism men are needed who have a natural sense of wonder....
    You must wonder at man's achievements, at man's stupidity, at his
    honesty, crookedness, courage, cowardice--at everything that is
    remarkable about him wherever and whenever it appears. If you
    haven't this sense of wonder, you will never write a novel or become
    a great reporter, because you simply won't see anything to write
    about. Men will be doing amazing things under your very eyes--and
    you won't even know it.

Ability to investigate a subject thoroughly, and to gather material
accurately, is absolutely necessary for any writer who aims to do
acceptable work. Careless, inaccurate writers are the bane of the
magazine editor's life. Whenever mistakes appear in an article, readers
are sure to write to the editor calling his attention to them. Moreover,
the discovery of incorrect statements impairs the confidence of readers
in the magazine. If there is reason to doubt the correctness of any data
in an article, the editor takes pains to check over the facts carefully
before publication. He is not inclined to accept work a second time from
a writer who has once proved unreliable.

To interpret correctly the essential significance of data is as
important as to record them accurately. Readers want to know the meaning
of facts and figures, and it is the writer's mission to bring out this
meaning. A sympathetic understanding of the persons who figure in his
article is essential, not only to portray them accurately, but to give
his story the necessary "human interest." To observe accurately, to feel
keenly, and to interpret sympathetically and correctly whatever he
undertakes to write about, should be a writer's constant aim.

Ability to write well enough to make the average person see as clearly,
feel as keenly, and understand as well as he does himself the persons
and things that he is portraying and explaining, is obviously the _sine
qua non_ of success. Ease, fluency, and originality of diction, either
natural or acquired, the writer must possess if his work is to have
distinction.

TRAINING FOR FEATURE WRITING. The ideal preparation for a writer of
special articles would include a four-year college course, at least a
year's work as a newspaper reporter, and practical experience in some
other occupation or profession in which the writer intends to specialize
in his writing. Although not all persons who desire to do special
feature work will be able to prepare themselves in this way, most of
them can obtain some part of this preliminary training.

A college course, although not absolutely essential for success, is
generally recognized to be of great value as a preparation for writing.
College training aims to develop the student's ability to observe
accurately, to think logically, and to express his ideas clearly and
effectively--all of which is vital to good special feature writing. In
addition, such a course gives a student a knowledge of many subjects
that he will find useful for his articles. A liberal education furnishes
a background that is invaluable for all kinds of literary work.
Universities also offer excellent opportunities for specialization.
Intensive study in some one field of knowledge, such as agriculture,
banking and finance, home economics, public health, social service,
government and politics, or one of the physical sciences, makes it
possible for a writer to specialize in his articles. In choosing a
department in which to do special work in college, a student may be
guided by his own tastes and interests, or he may select some field in
which there is considerable demand for well trained writers. The man or
woman with a specialty has a superior equipment for writing.

With the development of courses in journalism in many colleges and
universities has come the opportunity to obtain instruction and
practice, not only in the writing of special feature and magazine
articles, but also in newspaper reporting, editing, and short story
writing. To write constantly under guidance and criticism, such as it is
impossible to secure in newspaper and magazine offices, will develop
whatever ability a student possesses.

Experience as a newspaper reporter supplements college training in
journalism and is the best substitute for college work generally
available to persons who cannot go to college. For any one who aspires
to write, reporting has several distinct advantages and some dangers.

The requirement that news be printed at the earliest possible moment
teaches newspaper workers to collect facts and opinions quickly and to
write them up rapidly under pressure. Newspaper work also develops a
writer's appreciation of what constitutes news and what determines news
values; that is, it helps him to recognize at once, not only what
interests the average reader, but how much it interests him. Then, too,
in the course of his round of news gathering a reporter sees more of
human life under a variety of circumstances than do workers in any other
occupation. Such experience not only supplies him with an abundance of
material, but gives him a better understanding and a more sympathetic
appreciation of the life of all classes.

To get the most out of his reporting, a writer must guard against two
dangers. One is the temptation to be satisfied with superficial work
hastily done. The necessity of writing rapidly under pressure and of
constantly handling similar material, encourages neglect of the niceties
of structure and of style. In the rush of rapid writing, the importance
of care in the choice of words and in the arrangement of phrases and
clauses is easily forgotten. Even though well-edited newspapers insist
on the highest possible degree of accuracy in presenting news, the
exigencies of newspaper publishing often make it impossible to verify
facts or to attain absolute accuracy. Consequently a reporter may drop
into the habit of being satisfied with less thorough methods of
collecting and presenting his material than are demanded by the higher
standards of magazine writing.

The second danger is that he may unconsciously permit a more or less
cynical attitude to replace the healthy, optimistic outlook with which
he began his work. With the seamy side of life constantly before him, he
may find that his faith in human nature is being undermined. If,
however, he loses his idealism, he cannot hope to give his articles that
sincerity, hopefulness, and constructive spirit demanded by the average
reader, who, on the whole, retains his belief that truth and
righteousness prevail.

Of the relation of newspaper reporting to the writing of magazine
articles and to magazine editing, Mr. Howard Wheeler, editor of
Everybody's Magazine, has said:

    It is the trained newspaper men that the big periodical publishers
    are reaching out for. The man who has been through the newspaper
    mill seems to have a distinct edge on the man who enters the field
    without any newspaper training.

    The nose for news, the ability to select and play up leads, the feel
    of what is of immediate public interest is just as important in
    magazine work as in newspaper work.

    Fundamentally the purpose of a magazine article is the same as the
    purpose of a newspaper story--to tell a tale, to tell it directly,
    convincingly, and interestingly.

Practical experience in the field of his specialty is of advantage in
familiarizing a writer with the actual conditions about which he is
preparing himself to write. To engage for some time in farming,
railroading, household management, or any other occupation, equips a
person to write more intelligently about it. Such practical experience
either supplements college training in a special field, or serves as the
best substitute for such specialized education.

WHAT EDITORS WANT. All the requirements for success in special
feature writing may be reduced to the trite dictum that editors want
what they believe their readers want. Although a commonplace, it
expresses a point of view that aspiring writers are apt to forget. From
a purely commercial standpoint, editors are middlemen who buy from
producers what they believe they can sell to their customers. Unless an
editor satisfies his readers with his articles, they will cease to buy
his publication. If his literary wares are not what his readers want, he
finds on the newsstands unsold piles of his publication, just as a
grocer finds on his shelves faded packages of an unpopular breakfast
food. Both editor and grocer undertake to buy from the producers what
will have a ready sale and will satisfy their customers.

The writer, then, as the producer, must furnish wares that will attract
and satisfy the readers of the periodical to which he desires to sell
his product. It is the ultimate consumer, not merely the editor, that he
must keep in mind in selecting his material and in writing his article.
"Will the reader like this?" is the question that he must ask himself at
every stage of his work. Unless he can convince himself that the average
person who reads the periodical to which he proposes to submit his
article will like what he is writing, he cannot hope to sell it to the
editor.

UNDERSTANDING THE READER. Instead of thinking of readers as a more or
less indefinite mass, the writer will find it advantageous to picture to
himself real persons who may be taken as typical readers. It is very
easy for an author to think that what interests him and his immediate
circle will appeal equally to people in general. To write successfully,
however, for the Sunday magazine of a newspaper, it is necessary to keep
in mind the butcher, the baker, and--if not the candlestick-maker, at
least the stenographer and the department store clerk--as well as the
doctor, lawyer, merchant, and chief. What is true of the Sunday
newspaper is true of the popular magazine.

The most successful publisher in this country attributes the success of
his periodical to the fact that he kept before his mind's eye, as a
type, a family of his acquaintance in a Middle-Western town of fifteen
hundred inhabitants, and shaped the policy of his publication to meet
the needs and interests of all its members. An editor who desired to
reach such a family would be immeasurably helped in selecting his
material by trying constantly to judge from their point of view whatever
passed through his hands. It is equally true that a writer desiring to
gain admittance to that magazine, or to others making the same appeal,
would greatly profit by visualizing as vividly as possible a similar
family. Every successful writer, consciously or unconsciously, thus
pictures his readers to himself.

If, for example, an author is preparing an article for an agricultural
journal, he must have in his mind's eye an average farmer and this
farmer's family. Not only must he see them in their surroundings; he
must try to see life from their point of view. The attitude of the
typical city man toward the farm and country life is very different from
that of the countryman. Lack of sympathy and insight is a fatal defect
in many an article intended by the writer for farm readers.

Whatever the publication to which an author desires to contribute, he
should consider first, last, and all the time, its readers--their
surroundings, their education, their income, their ambitions, their
amusements, their prejudices--in short, he must see them as they really
are.

The necessity of understanding the reader and his point of view has been
well brought out by Mr. John M. Siddall, editor of the _American
Magazine_, in the following excerpt from an editorial in that
periodical:

    The man who refuses to use his imagination to enable him to look at
    things from the other fellow's point of view simply cannot exercise
    wide influence. He cannot reach people.

    Underneath it, somehow, lies a great law, the law of service. You
    can't expect to attract people unless you do something for them. The
    business man who has something to sell must have something useful to
    sell, and he must talk about it from the point of view of the people
    to whom he wants to sell his goods. In the same way, the journalist,
    the preacher, and the politician must look at things from the point
    of view of those they would reach. They must feel the needs of
    others and then reach out and meet those needs. They can never have
    a large following unless they give something. The same law runs into
    the human relation. How we abhor the man who talks only about
    himself--the man who never inquires about _our_ troubles, _our_
    problems; the man who never puts himself in _our_ place, but
    unimaginatively and unsympathetically goes on and on, egotistically
    hammering away on the only subject that interests him--namely
    _himself_.

STUDYING NEWSPAPERS AND MAGAZINES. Since every successful publication
may be assumed to be satisfying its readers to a considerable degree,
the best way to determine what kind of readers it has, and what they are
interested in, is to study the contents carefully. No writer should send
an article to a publication before he has examined critically several of
its latest issues. In fact, no writer should prepare an article before
deciding to just what periodical he wishes to submit it. The more
familiar he is with the periodical the better are his chances of having
his contribution accepted.

In analyzing a newspaper or magazine in order to determine the type of
reader to which it appeals, the writer should consider the character of
the subjects in its recent issues, and the point of view from which
these subjects are presented. Every successful periodical has a distinct
individuality, which may be regarded as an expression of the editor's
idea of what his readers expect of his publication. To become a
successful contributor to a periodical, a writer must catch the spirit
that pervades its fiction and its editorials, as well as its special
articles.

In his effort to determine the kind of topics preferred by a given
publication, a writer may at first glance decide that timeliness is the
one element that dominates their choice, but a closer examination of the
articles in one or more issues will reveal a more specific basis of
selection. Thus, one Sunday paper will be found to contain articles on
the latest political, sociological, and literary topics, while another
deals almost exclusively with society leaders, actors and actresses, and
other men and women whose recent experiences or adventures have brought
them into prominence.

It is of even greater value to find out by careful reading of the entire
contents of several numbers of a periodical, the exact point of view
from which the material is treated. Every editor aims to present the
contents of his publication in the way that will make the strongest
appeal to his readers. This point of view it is the writer's business to
discover and adopt.

ANALYSIS OF SPECIAL ARTICLES. An inexperienced writer who desires to
submit special feature stories to newspapers should begin by analyzing
thoroughly the stories of this type in the daily papers published in his
own section of the country. Usually in the Saturday or Sunday issues he
will find typical articles on topics connected with the city and with
the state or states in which the paper circulates. The advantage of
beginning his study of newspaper stories with those published in papers
near his home lies in the fact that he is familiar with the interests of
the readers of these papers and can readily understand their point of
view. By noting the subjects, the point of view, the form, the style,
the length, and the illustrations, he will soon discover what these
papers want, or rather, what the readers of these papers want. The
"Outline for the Analysis of Special Articles" in Part II will indicate
the points to keep in mind in studying these articles.

In order to get a broader knowledge of the scope and character of
special feature stories, a writer may well extend his studies to the
magazine sections of the leading papers of the country. From the work of
the most experienced and original of the feature writers, which is
generally to be found in these metropolitan papers, the novice will
derive no little inspiration as well as a valuable knowledge of
technique.

The methods suggested for analyzing special feature stories in
newspapers are applicable also to the study of magazine articles.
Magazines afford a better opportunity than do newspapers for an analysis
of the different types of articles discussed in Chapter V. Since
magazine articles are usually signed, it is possible to seek out and
study the work of various successful authors in order to determine
wherein lies the effectiveness of their writing. Beginning with the
popular weekly and monthly magazines, a writer may well extend his study
to those periodicals that appeal to particular classes, such as women's
magazines, agricultural journals, and trade publications.

IDEALS IN FEATURE WRITING. After thoughtful analysis of special articles
in all kinds of newspapers and magazines, the young writer with a
critical sense developed by reading English literature may come to feel
that much of the writing in periodicals falls far short of the standards
of excellence established by the best authors. Because he finds that the
average uncritical reader not only accepts commonplace work but is
apparently attracted by meretricious devices in writing, he may conclude
that high literary standards are not essential to popular success. The
temptation undoubtedly is great both for editors and writers to supply
articles that are no better than the average reader demands, especially
in such ephemeral publications as newspapers and popular magazines.
Nevertheless, the writer who yields to this temptation is sure to
produce only mediocre work. If he is satisfied to write articles that
will be characterized merely as "acceptable," he will never attain
distinction.

The special feature writer owes it both to himself and to his readers to
do the best work of which he is capable. It is his privilege not only to
inform and to entertain the public, but to create better taste and a
keener appreciation of good writing. That readers do not demand better
writing in their newspapers and magazines does not mean that they are
unappreciative of good work. Nor do originality and precision in style
necessarily "go over the heads" of the average person. Whenever writers
and editors give the public something no better than it is willing to
accept, they neglect a great opportunity to aid in the development of
better literary taste, particularly on the part of the public whose
reading is largely confined to newspapers and periodicals.

Because of the commercial value of satisfying his readers, an editor
occasionally assumes that he must give all of them whatever some of them
crave. "We are only giving the public what it wants," is his excuse for
printing fiction and articles that are obviously demoralizing in their
effect. A heterogeneous public inevitably includes a considerable number
of individuals who are attracted by a suggestive treatment of morbid
phases of life. To cater to the low desires of some readers, on the
ground of "giving the public what it wants," will always be regarded by
self-respecting editors and authors as indefensible.

The writer's opportunity to influence the mental, moral, and √¶sthetic
ideals of hundreds of thousands of readers is much greater than he often
realizes. When he considers the extent to which most men and women are
unconsciously guided in their ideas and aspirations by what they read in
newspapers and magazines, he cannot fail to appreciate his
responsibility. Grasping the full significance of his special feature
writing, he will no longer be content to write just well enough to sell
his product, but will determine to devote his effort to producing
articles that are the best of which he is capable.




CHAPTER III

FINDING SUBJECTS AND MATERIAL


SOURCES OF SUBJECTS. "What shall I write about?" is the first question
that inexperienced writers ask their literary advisers. "If you haven't
anything to write about, why write at all?" might be an easy answer.
Most persons, as a matter of fact, have plenty to write about but do not
realize it. Not lack of subjects, but inability to recognize the
possibilities of what lies at hand, is their real difficulty.

The best method of finding subjects is to look at every person, every
event, every experience--in short, at everything--with a view to seeing
whether or not it has possibilities for a special feature article. Even
in the apparently prosaic round of everyday life will be found a variety
of themes. A circular letter from a business firm announcing a new
policy, a classified advertisement in a newspaper, the complaint of a
scrub-woman, a new variety of fruit in the grocer's window, an increase
in the price of laundry work, a hurried luncheon at a cafeteria--any of
the hundred and one daily experiences may suggest a "live" topic for an
article.

"Every foot of ground is five feet deep with subjects; all you have to
do is to scratch the surface for one," declared the editor of a popular
magazine who is also a successful writer of special articles. This
statement may be taken as literally true. Within the narrow confines of
one's house and yard, for instance, are many topics. A year's experience
with the family budget, a home-made device, an attempt to solve the
servant problem, a method of making pin-money, a practical means of
economizing in household management, are forms of personal experience
that may be made interesting to newspaper and magazine readers. A garden
on a city lot, a poultry house in a back yard, a novel form of garage,
a new use for a gasoline engine, a labor-saving device on the farm, may
afford equally good topics. One's own experience, always a rich field,
may be supplemented by experiences of neighbors and friends.

A second source of subjects is the daily newspaper. Local news will give
the writer clues that he can follow up by visiting the places mentioned,
interviewing the persons concerned, and gathering other relevant
material. When news comes from a distance, he can write to the persons
most likely to have the desired information. In neither case can he be
sure, until he has investigated, that an item of news will prove to
contain sufficient available material for an article. Many pieces of
news, however, are worth running down carefully, for the day's events
are rich in possibilities.

Pieces of news as diverse as the following may suggest excellent
subjects for special articles: the death of an interesting person, the
sale of a building that has historic associations, the meeting of an
uncommon group or organization, the approach of the anniversary of an
event, the election or appointment of a person to a position, an unusual
occupation, an odd accident, an auction, a proposed municipal
improvement, the arrival of a well-known person, an official report, a
legal decision, an epidemic, the arrest of a noted criminal, the passing
of an old custom, the publication of the city directory, a railroad
accident, a marked change in fashion in dress.

A third source of both subjects and material is the report of special
studies in some field, the form of the report ranging from a paper read
at a meeting to a treatise in several volumes. These reports of
experiments, surveys, investigations, and other forms of research, are
to be found in printed bulletins, monographs, proceedings of
organizations, scientific periodicals, and new books. Government
publications--federal, state, and local--giving results of investigative
work done by bureaus, commissions, and committees, are public documents
that may usually be had free of charge. Technical and scientific
periodicals and printed proceedings of important organizations are
generally available at public libraries.

As Mr. Waldemar Kaempffert, editor of _Popular Science Monthly,_ has
said:

    There is hardly a paper read before the Royal Institution or the
    French Academy or our American engineering and chemical societies
    that cannot be made dramatically interesting from a human standpoint
    and that does not chronicle real news.

"If you want to publish something where it will never be read," a wit
has observed, "print it in an official document." Government reports are
filled with valuable information that remains quite unknown to the
average reader unless newspapers and magazines unearth it and present it
in popular form. The popularization of the contents of all kinds of
scientific and technical publications affords great opportunities for
the writer who can present such subjects effectively.

In addressing students of journalism on "Science and Journalism," Dr.
Edwin E. Slosson, literary editor of the _Independent_, who was formerly
a professor of chemistry, has said:

    The most radical ideas of our day are not apt to be found in the
    popular newspaper or in queer little insurrectionary, heretical and
    propaganda sheets that we occasionally see, but in the technical
    journals and proceedings of learned societies. The real revolutions
    are hatched in the laboratory and study. The papers read before the
    annual meetings of the scientific societies, and for the most part
    unnoticed by the press, contain more dynamite than was ever
    discovered in any anarchist's shop. Political revolutions merely
    change the form of government or the name of the party in power.
    Scientific revolutions really turn the world over, and it never
    settles back into its former position.

       *       *       *       *       *

    The beauty and meaning of scientific discoveries can be revealed to
    the general reader if there is an intermediary who can understand
    equally the language of the laboratory and of the street. The modern
    journalist knows that anything can be made interesting to anybody,
    if he takes pains enough with the writing of it. It is not
    necessary, either, to pervert scientific truths in the process of
    translation into the vernacular. The facts are sensational enough
    without any picturesque exaggeration.

       *       *       *       *       *

    The field is not an unprofitable one even in the mercenary sense. To
    higher motives the task of popularizing science makes a still
    stronger appeal. Ignorance is the source of most of our ills.
    Ignorant we must always be of much that we need to know, but there
    is no excuse for remaining ignorant of what somebody on earth knows
    or has known. Rich treasure lies hidden in what President Gilman
    called "the bibliothecal cairn" of scientific monographs which piles
    up about a university. The journalist might well exchange the
    muckrake for the pick and dig it out.

    Nothing could accelerate human progress more than to reduce the time
    between the discovery of a new truth and its application to the
    needs of mankind.... It is regarded as a great journalistic
    achievement when the time of transmission of a cablegram is
    shortened. But how much more important it is to gain a few years in
    learning what the men who are in advance of their age are doing than
    to gain a few seconds in learning what the people of Europe are
    doing? This lag in intellectual progress ... is something which it
    is the especial duty of the journalist to remove. He likes to score
    a beat of a few hours. Very well, if he will turn his attention to
    science, he can often score a beat of ten years.

The three main sources, therefore, of subjects and material for special
feature and magazine articles are (1) personal observation and
experience, (2) newspapers, (3) scientific and technical publications
and official reports.

PERSONAL OBSERVATION. How a writer may discover subjects for newspaper
feature articles in the course of his daily routine by being alive to
the possibilities around him can best be shown by concrete examples.

A "community sing" in a public park gave a woman writer a good subject
for a special article published in the _Philadelphia North American_.

In the publication of a city directory was found a timely subject for an
article on the task of getting out the annual directory in a large city;
the story was printed in a Sunday issue of the _Boston Herald_.

A glimpse of some children dressed like Arctic explorers in an outdoor
school in Kansas City was evidently the origin of a special feature
story on that institution, which was published in the _Kansas City
Star_.

A woman standing guard one evening over a partially completed school
building in Seattle suggested a special feature in the _Seattle Post
Intelligencer_ on the unusual occupation of night "watchman" for a
woman.

While making a purchase in a drug store, a writer overheard a clerk make
a request for a deposit from a woman who desired to have a prescription
filled, an incident which led him to write a special feature for the
_New York Times_ on this method of discouraging persons from adding to
the drug store's "morgue" of unclaimed prescriptions.

From a visit to the Children's Museum in Brooklyn was developed a
feature article for the _New York Herald_, and from a story-telling hour
at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts was evolved a feature story for the
_Boston Herald_ on the telling of stories as a means of interesting
children in pictures.

Magazine articles also may originate in the writer's observation of what
is going on about him. The specific instances given below, like those
already mentioned, will indicate to the inexperienced writer where to
look for inspiration.

A newspaper reporter who covered the criminal courts compiled the
various methods of burglars and sneak thieves in gaining entrance to
houses and apartments, as he heard them related in trials, and wrote a
helpful article for _Good Housekeeping_ on how to protect one's house
against robbery.

The exhibition of a novel type of rack for curing seed corn gave a
writer a subject for an article on this "corn tree," which was published
in the _Illustrated World_.

During a short stop at a farm while on an automobile trip, a woman
writer noticed a concrete storage cellar for vegetables, and from an
interview with the farmer obtained enough material for an article, which
she sold to a farm journal.

While a woman writer was making a purchase in a plumber's shop, the
plumber was called to the telephone. On returning to his customer, he
remarked that the call was from a woman on a farm five miles from town,
who could easily have made the slight repairs herself if she had known a
little about the water-supply system on her farm. From the material
which the writer obtained from the plumber, she wrote an article for an
agricultural paper on how plumber's bills can be avoided.

A display of canned goods in a grocer's window, with special prices for
dozen and case lots, suggested an article, afterwards published in the
_Merchants Trade Journal_, on this grocer's method of fighting
mail-order competition.

PERSONAL EXPERIENCE. What we actually do ourselves, as well as what we
see others do, may be turned to good use in writing articles. Personal
experiences not only afford good subjects and plenty of material but are
more easily handled than most other subjects, because, being very real
and vital to the writer, they can the more readily be made real and
vital to the reader. Many inexperienced writers overlook the
possibilities of what they themselves have done and are doing.

To gain experience and impressions for their articles, special writers
on newspapers even assume temporarily the roles of persons whose lives
and experiences they desire to portray. One Chicago paper featured every
Sunday for many weeks articles by a reporter who, in order to get
material, did a variety of things just for one day, from playing in a
strolling street band to impersonating a convict in the state
penitentiary. Thirty years ago, when women first entered the newspaper
field as special feature writers, they were sometimes sent out on
"freak" assignments for special features, such as feigning injury or
insanity in order to gain entrance to hospitals in the guise of
patients. Recently one woman writer posed as an applicant for a position
as moving-picture actress; another applied for a place as housemaid; a
third donned overalls and sorted scrap-iron all day in the yard of a
factory; and still another accompanied a store detective on his rounds
in order to discover the methods of shop-lifting with which department
stores have to contend.

It is not necessary, however, to go so far afield to obtain personal
experiences, as is shown by the following newspaper and magazine
articles based on what the writers found in the course of their everyday
pursuits.

The results obtained from cultivating a quarter-acre lot in the
residence district of a city of 100,000 population were told by a writer
in the _Country Gentleman_.

A woman's experience with bees was related in _Good Housekeeping_ under
the title, "What I Did with Bees."

Experience in screening a large porch on his house furnished a writer
with the necessary information for a practical story in _Popular
Mechanics_.

Some tests that he made on the power of automobiles gave a young
engineer the suggestion for an article on the term "horse power" as
applied to motor-cars; the article was published in the _Illustrated
World_.

"Building a Business on Confidence" was the title of a personal
experience article published in _System_.

The evils of tenant farming, as illustrated by the experiences of a
farmer's wife in moving during the very early spring, were vividly
depicted in an article in _Farm and Fireside_.

The diary of an automobile trip from Chicago to Buffalo was embodied in
an article by a woman writer, which she sold to the _Woman's Home
Companion_.

Both usual and unusual means employed to earn their college expenses
have served as subjects for many special articles written by
undergraduates and graduates.

Innumerable articles of the "how-to-do-something" type are accepted
every year from inexperienced writers by publications that print such
useful information. Results of experiments in solving various problems
of household management are so constantly in demand by women's magazines
and women's departments in newspapers, that housewives who like to
write find a ready market for articles based on their own experience.

CONFESSION ARTICLES. One particular type of personal experience article
that enjoys great popularity is the so-called "confession story." Told
in the first person, often anonymously, a well-written confession
article is one of the most effective forms in which to present facts and
experiences.

Personal experiences of others, as well as the writer's own, may be
given in confession form if the writer is able to secure sufficiently
detailed information from some one else to make the story probable.

A few examples will illustrate the kind of subjects that have been
presented successfully in the confession form.

Some criticisms of a typical college and of college life were given
anonymously in the _Outlook_ under the title, "The Confessions of an
Undergraduate."

"The Story of a Summer Hotel Waitress," published in the _Independent_,
and characterized by the editor as "a frank exposure of real life below
stairs in the average summer hotel," told how a student in a normal
school tried to earn her school expenses by serving as a waitress during
the summer vacation.

In _Farm and Fireside_ was published "The Confession of a Timber Buyer,"
an article exposing the methods employed by some unscrupulous lumber
companies in buying timber from farmers.

"How I Cured Myself of Being Too Sensitive," with the sub-title, "The
Autobiography of a Young Business Man Who Nearly Went to Smash through
Jealousy," was the subject of a confession article in the _American
Magazine_.

An exposure of the impositions practiced by an itinerant quack was made
in a series of three confession articles, in Sunday issues of the
_Kansas City Star_, written by a young man whom the doctor had employed
to drive him through the country districts.

To secure confession features from readers, magazines have offered
prizes for the best short articles on such topics as, "The Best Thing
Experience has Taught Me," "How I Overcame My Greatest Fault," "The Day
of My Great Temptation," "What Will Power Did for Me."

SUBJECTS FROM THE DAY'S NEWS. In his search for subjects a writer will
find numberless clues in newspapers. Since the first information
concerning all new things is usually given to the world through the
columns of the daily press, these columns are scanned carefully by
writers in search of suggestions. Any part of the paper, from the "want
ads" to the death notices or the real estate transfers, may be the
starting point of a special article. The diversity of topics suggested
by newspapers is shown by the following examples.

The death of a well-known clown in New York was followed by a special
feature story about him in the Sunday magazine section of a Chicago
paper.

A newspaper report of the discovery in Wisconsin of a method of
eliminating printing ink from pulp made from old newspapers, so that
white print paper might be produced from it, led a young writer to send
for information to the discoverer of the process, and with these
additional details he wrote an article that was published in the _Boston
Transcript._

A news story about a clever swindler in Boston, who obtained possession
of negotiable securities by means of a forged certified check, was made
the basis of a special feature story in the _Providence Journal_ on the
precautions to be taken against losses from forged checks.

News of the energetic manner in which a New Jersey sheriff handled a
strike suggested a personality sketch of him that appeared in the
_American Magazine_.

The publication, in a newspaper, of some results of a survey of rural
school conditions in a Middle Western state, led to two articles on why
the little red schoolhouse fails, one of which was published in the
_Country Gentleman_, and the other in the _Independent_.

From a brief news item about the success of a farmer's widow and her
daughter, in taking summer boarders in their old farmhouse, was
developed a practical article telling how to secure and provide for
these boarders on the ordinary farm. The article appeared in _Farm and
Fireside_.

OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS. Bulletins and reports of government officials are a
mine for both subjects and material. For new developments in agriculture
one may consult the bulletins of the United States Department of
Agriculture and those of state agricultural experiment stations. Reports
on new and better methods of preparing food, and other phases of home
economics, are also printed in these bulletins. State industrial
commissions publish reports that furnish valuable material on industrial
accidents, working-men's insurance, sanitary conditions in factories,
and the health of workers. Child welfare is treated in reports of
federal, state, and city child-welfare boards. The reports of the
Interstate Commerce Commission, like those of state railroad
commissions, contain interesting material on various phases of
transportation. State and federal census reports often furnish good
subjects and material. In short, nearly every official report of any
kind may be a fruitful source of ideas for special articles.

The few examples given below suggest various possibilities for the use
of these sources.

Investigations made by a commission of American medical experts
constituting the Committee on Resuscitation from Mine Gases, under the
direction of the U.S. Bureau of Mines, supplied a writer in the _Boston
Transcript_ with material for a special feature story on the dangers
involved in the use of the pulmotor.

A practical bulletin, prepared by the home economics department of a
state university, on the best arrangement of a kitchen to save needless
steps, was used for articles in a number of farm journals.

From a bulletin of the U.S. Department of Agriculture a writer prepared
an article on "the most successful farmer in the United States" and what
he did with twenty acres, for the department of "Interesting People" in
the _American Magazine_.

The results of a municipal survey of Springfield, Illinois, as set
forth in official reports, were the basis of an article in the _Outlook_
on "What is a Survey?" Reports of a similar survey at Lawrence, Kansas,
were used for a special feature story in the _Kansas City Star_.

"Are You a Good or a Poor Penman?" was the title of an article in
_Popular Science Monthly_ based on a chart prepared by the Russell Sage
Foundation in connection with some of its educational investigations.

The _New York Evening Post_ published an interesting special article on
the "life tables" that had been prepared by the division of vital
statistics of the Bureau of the Census, to show the expectation of life
at all ages in the six states from which vital statistics were obtained.

A special feature story on how Panama hats are woven, as printed in the
_Ohio State Journal_, was based entirely on a report of the United
States consul general at Guayaquil, Ecuador.

SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS. Almost every science and every
art has its own special periodicals, from which can be gleaned a large
number of subjects and much valuable material that needs only to be
popularized to be made attractive to the average reader. The printed
proceedings of scientific and technical societies, including the papers
read at their meetings, as well as monographs and books, are also
valuable. How such publications may be utilized is illustrated by the
articles given below.

The report of a special committee of an association of electrical
engineers, given at its convention in Philadelphia, furnished a writer
with material for an article on "Farming by Electricity," that was
published in the Sunday edition of the _Springfield Republican_.

Studies of the cause of hunger, made by Prof. A.J. Carlson of the
University of Chicago and published in a volume entitled "The Control of
Hunger in Health and Disease," furnished the subject for an article in
the _Illustrated World._ Earlier results of the same investigation were
given in the Sunday magazine of one of the Chicago papers.

From the _Journal of Heredity_ was gleaned material for an article
entitled "What Chance Has the Poor Child?" It was printed in _Every
Week_.

"Golfer's Foot, One of Our Newest Diseases," was the subject of a
special feature in the _New York Times_, that was based on an article in
the _Medical Record_.

That the canals on Mars may be only an optical illusion was demonstrated
in an article in the Sunday magazine of the _New York Times_, by means
of material obtained from a report of the section for the Observation of
Mars, a division of the British Astronomical Association.

ANTICIPATING TIMELY SUBJECTS. By looking forward for weeks or even
months, as editors of Sunday newspapers and of magazines are constantly
doing, a writer can select subjects and gather material for articles
that will be particularly appropriate at a given time. Holidays,
seasonal events, and anniversaries may thus be anticipated, and special
articles may be sent to editors some time in advance of the occasion
that makes them timely. Not infrequently it is desirable to begin
collecting material a year before the intended time of publication.

An article on fire prevention, for instance, is appropriate for the
month of October just before the day set aside for calling attention to
fires caused by carelessness. Months in advance, a writer might begin
collecting news stories of dangerous fires resulting from carelessness;
and from the annual report of the state fire marshal issued in July, he
could secure statistics on the causes of fires and the extent of the
losses.

To secure material for an article on the Christmas presents that
children might make at a cost of twenty-five cents or less, a woman
writer jotted down after one Christmas all the information that she
could get from her friends; and from these notes she wrote the article
early in the following summer. It was published in the November number
of a magazine, at a time when children were beginning to think about
making Christmas presents.

Articles on ways and means of earning college expenses are particularly
appropriate for publication in the summer or early fall, when young men
and women are preparing to go to college, but if in such an article a
student writer intends to describe experiences other than his own, he
may well begin gathering material from his fellow students some months
before.

Anniversaries of various events, such as important discoveries and
inventions, the death or birth of a personage, and significant
historical occasions, may also be anticipated. The fiftieth anniversary
of the arrival of the first railroad train in Kansas City was
commemorated in a special feature story in the _Kansas City Star_,
published the day before the anniversary. The day following the
fifty-sixth anniversary of the discovery of petroleum in Pennsylvania,
the _New York Times_ printed in its Sunday magazine section a special
article on the man who first found oil there. The centenary of the
launching of the first steam-propelled ship to cross the Atlantic, was
commemorated by an article in the Sunday edition of the _Providence
Journal_. _Munsey's Magazine_ printed an article on the semi-centennial
of the discovery of the process of making paper from wood pulp.

By looking over tables giving dates of significant events, writers will
find what anniversaries are approaching; or they may glean such
information from news stories describing preparations made for
celebrating these anniversaries.

KEEPING LISTS OF SUBJECTS. Every writer who is on the lookout for
subjects and sources of material should keep a notebook constantly at
hand. Subjects suggested by everyday experiences, by newspaper and
magazine reading, and by a careful study of special articles in all
kinds of publications, are likely to be forgotten unless they are
recorded at once. A small notebook that can be carried in the pocket or
in a woman's hand-bag is most convenient. Besides topics for articles,
the titles of books, reports, bulletins, and other publications
mentioned in conversation or in newspapers, should be jotted down as
possible sources of material. Facts and figures from publications may
be copied for future use. Good titles and interesting methods of
treatment that a writer observes in the work of others may prove helpful
in suggesting titles and methods for his own articles. Separate sections
of even a small notebook may conveniently be set aside for all of these
various points.

FILING MATERIAL. The writer who makes methodical preparation for his
work generally has some system of filing good material so that it will
be at hand when he wants it. One excellent filing device that is both
inexpensive and capable of indefinite expansion consists of a number of
stout manilla envelopes, large enough to hold newspaper clippings,
printed reports, magazine articles, and photographs. In each envelope is
kept the material pertaining to one subject in which the writer is
interested, the character of the subject-matter being indicated on one
side of the envelope, so that, as the envelopes stand on end, their
contents can readily be determined. If a writer has many of these
envelopes, a one-drawer filing case will serve to keep them in good
order. By constantly gathering material from newspapers, magazines, and
printed reports, he will soon find that he has collected a considerable
amount of information on which to base his articles.




CHAPTER IV

APPEAL AND PURPOSE


ANALYZING THE SUBJECT. When from many available subjects a writer is
about to choose one, he should pause to consider its possibilities
before beginning to write. It is not enough to say, "This is a good
subject; I believe that I can write an article on it." He needs to look
at the topic from every angle. He ought to ask himself, "How widespread
is the interest in my subject? How much will it appeal to the average
individual? What phases of it are likely to have the greatest interest
for the greatest number of persons?" To answer these questions he must
review the basic sources of pleasure and satisfaction.

WHAT INTERESTS READERS. To interest readers is obviously the prime
object in all popular writing. The basis of interest in the news story,
the special feature article, and the short story is essentially the
same. Whatever the average person likes to hear and see, whatever gives
him pleasure and satisfaction, is what he wants to read about. In order
to test all phases of a given subject from this point of view, a writer
needs to keep in mind the fundamental sources of satisfaction.

Subjects and phases of subjects that attract readers may, for
convenience, be divided into the following classes, which, however, are
not mutually exclusive: (1) timely topics, (2) unique, novel, and
extraordinary persons, things, and events, (3) mysteries, (4) romance,
(5) adventure, (6) contests for supremacy, (7) children, (8) animals,
(9) hobbies and amusements, (10) familiar persons, places, and objects,
(11) prominent persons, places, and objects, (12) matters involving the
life, property, and welfare of others, (13) matters that affect the
reader's own success and well-being.

Timeliness. Though not absolutely essential, timeliness is a valuable
attribute of any subject. Readers like to feel that they are getting the
latest facts and the newest ideas, in special feature articles as well
as in the news. A subject need not be discarded, however, because it
does not make a timely appeal. It may have interest in other respects
sufficiently great to compensate for its lack of timeliness.

Many topics that at first glance seem quite unrelated to current
activities are found on closer examination to have some aspects that may
be brought into connection with timely interests. To a writer keenly
alive to everything that is going on in the world, most subjects will be
found to have some bearing on what is uppermost in men's minds. Emphasis
on that point of contact with current ideas will give to the article the
desired timeliness.

NOVELTY. When a person, object, or circumstance is unique, it arouses an
unusual degree of interest. The first person to accomplish something out
of the ordinary, the first event of its kind, the first of anything,
arrests attention.

Closely associated with the unique is the extraordinary, the curious. If
not absolutely the only one of its kind, a thing may still be
sufficiently unusual to excite an uncommon degree of interest. Novelty
has a perennial charm. Careful study of a subject is often necessary to
reveal the novel and extraordinary phase of it that can best be
emphasized.

MYSTERIES. The fascination for the human mind of whatever baffles it is
so well known that it scarcely needs elaboration. Mysteries, whether
real or fictitious, pique curiosity. Even the scholar and the practical
man of affairs find relaxation in the mystery of the detective story.
Real life often furnishes events sufficiently mysterious to make a
special feature story that rivals fiction. Unexplained crimes and
accidents; strange psychical phenomena, such as ghosts, presentiments,
spiritism, and telepathy; baffling problems of the scientist and the
inventor--all have elements of mystery that fascinate the average
reader.

ROMANCE. The romance of real life is quite as interesting as that of
fiction. As all the world loves a lover, almost all the world loves a
love story. The course of true love may run smooth or it may not; in
either case there is the romantic appeal. To find the romantic element
in a topic is to discover a perennial source of attraction for all
classes of readers.

ADVENTURE. Few in number are the persons who will not gladly escape
from humdrum routine by losing themselves in an exciting tale of
adventure. The thrilling exploits in real life of the engineer, the
explorer, the soldier of fortune, the pioneer in any field, hold us
spellbound. Even more commonplace experiences are not without an element
of the adventurous, for life itself is a great adventure. Many special
feature stories in narrative form have much the same interest that is
created by the fictitious tale of adventure.

CONTESTS FOR SUPREMACY. Man has never lost his primitive love of a good
fight. Civilization may change the form of the contest, but fighting to
win, whether in love or politics, business or sport, still has a strong
hold on all of us. Strikes, attempted monopolies, political revolutions,
elections, championship games, diplomacy, poverty, are but a few of the
struggles that give zest to life. To portray dramatically in a special
article the clash and conflict in everyday affairs is to make a
well-nigh universal appeal.

CHILDREN. Because we live in and for our children, everything that
concerns them comes close to our hearts. A child in a photo-drama or in
a news story is sure to win sympathy and admiration. The special feature
writer cannot afford to neglect so vital a source of interest. Practical
articles on the care and the education of children also have especial
value for women readers.

ANIMALS. Wild or tame, at large or in captivity, animals attract us
either for their almost human intelligence or for their distinctively
animal traits. There are few persons who do not like horses, dogs, cats,
and other pets, and fewer still who can pass by the animal cages at the
circus or the "zoo." Hunting, trapping, and fishing are vocations for
some men, and sport for many more. The business of breeding horses and
cattle, and the care of live stock and poultry on the farm, must not be
overlooked in the search for subjects. The technical aspects of these
topics will interest readers of farm journals; the more popular phases
of them make a wide general appeal.

HOBBIES AND AMUSEMENTS. Pastimes and avocations may be counted good
subjects. Moving pictures, theaters, music, baseball, golf, automobiles,
amateur photography, and a host of hobbies and recreations have enough
enthusiastic devotees to insure wide reading for special feature stories
about them.

THE FAMILIAR. Persons whom we know, places that we constantly see,
experiences that we have had again and again, often seem commonplace
enough, even when familiarity has not bred contempt; but when they
appear unexpectedly on the stage or in print, we greet them with the
cordiality bestowed on the proverbial long-lost friend. Local news
interests readers because it concerns people and places immediately
around them. Every newspaper man understands the desirability of
increasing the attractiveness of a news event that happens elsewhere by
rinding "local ends," or by giving it "a local turn." For special
feature stories in newspapers, local phases are no less important. But
whether the article is to be published in a newspaper or a magazine,
familiar persons and things should be "played up" prominently.

THE PROMINENT. Many persons, places, and objects that we have never seen
are frequently as real to us as are those that we see daily. This is
because their names and their pictures have greeted us again and again
in print. It is thus that prominent men and women become familiar to us.
Because of their importance we like to read about them. If a special
feature article in any of its phases concerns what is prominent, greater
attractiveness can be given to it by "playing up" this point, be it the
President of the United States or a well-known circus clown, Fifth
Avenue or the Bowery, the Capitol at Washington or Coney Island, the
Twentieth Century Limited or a Ford.

LIFE AND WELFARE OF OTHERS. Sympathy with our fellow beings and an
instinctive recognition of our common humanity are inherent in most men
and women. Nowhere is this more strikingly shown than in the quick and
generous response that comes in answer to every call for aid for those
in distress. So, too, we like to know how others feel and think. We like
to get behind the veil with which every one attempts to conceal his
innermost thoughts and feelings. Our interest in the lives and the
welfare of others finds expression in various ways, ranging from social
service and self-sacrificing devotion to gossip and secret confidences.
These extremes and all that lies between them abound in that "human
interest" upon which all editors insist.

This widespread interest in others affords to the writer of special
articles one of his greatest opportunities, not only for preparing
interesting stories, but for arousing readers to support many a good
cause. To create sympathy for the unfortunate, to encourage active
social service, to point the way to political reform, to show the
advantages of better industrial conditions, to explain better business
methods--all these are but a few of the helpful, constructive appeals
that he may make effectively.

He may create this interest and stir his readers to action by either one
of two methods: by exposing existing evils, or by showing what has been
done to improve bad conditions. The exposure of evils in politics,
business, and society constituted the "muck-raking" to which several of
the popular monthly magazines owe their rise. This crusading,
"searchlight" type of journalism has been largely superseded by the
constructive, "sunlight" type. To explain how reforms have been
accomplished, or are being brought about, is construed by the best of
the present-day journals to be their special mission.

PERSONAL SUCCESS AND HAPPINESS. Every one is vitally concerned about his
own prosperity and happiness. To make a success of life, no matter by
what criterion we may measure that success, is our one all-powerful
motive. Happiness, as the goal that we hope to reach by our success, and
health, as a prime requisite for its attainment, are also of great
importance to every one of us. How to make or save more money, how to do
our work more easily, how to maintain our physical well-being, how to
improve ourselves mentally and morally, how to enjoy life more
fully--that is what we all want to know. To the writer who will show us
how to be "healthy, wealthy, and wise," we will give our undivided
attention.

Business and professional interests naturally occupy the larger part of
men's thoughts, while home-making is the chief work of most women.
Although women are entering many fields hitherto monopolized by men, the
home remains woman's peculiar sphere. The purchase and preparation of
food, the buying and making of clothing, the management of servants, the
care of children--these are the vital concerns of most women. They
realize, however, that conditions outside the home have a direct bearing
on home-making; and each year they are taking a more active part in
civic affairs. Matters of public health, pure food legislation, the milk
and the water supply, the garbage collection, the character of places of
amusement, the public schools, determine, in no small degree, the
success and happiness of the home-maker.

Since the dominant interests of men and women alike are their business
and their home, the special writer should undertake to connect his
subject as closely as possible with these interests. To show, for
example, how the tariff, taxes, public utility rates, price-fixing,
legislation, and similar matters affect the business and home affairs of
the average reader, is to give to these political and economic problems
an interest for both men and women far in excess of that resulting from
a more general treatment of them. The surest way to get the reader's
attention is to bring the subject home to him personally.

Of the importance of presenting a subject in such a manner that the
reader is led to see its application to himself and his own affairs, Mr.
John M. Siddall, editor of the _American Magazine_, has said:

    Every human being likes to see himself in reading matter--just as he
    likes to see himself in a mirror.

    The reason so much reading matter is unpopular and never attracts a
    wide reading public lies in the fact that the reader sees nothing in
    it for himself. Take an article, we'll say, entitled "The Financial
    System of Canada." It looks dull, doesn't it? It looks dull because
    you can't quite see where it affects you. Now take an article
    entitled "Why it is easier to get rich in Canada than in the United
    States." That's different! Your interest is aroused. You wonder
    wherein the Canadian has an advantage over you. You look into the
    article to find out whether you can't get an idea from it. Yet the
    two articles may be basically alike, differing only in treatment.
    One bores you and the other interests you. One bores you because it
    seems remote. The other interests you because the writer has had the
    skill to translate his facts and ideas into terms that are personal
    to you. The minute you become personal in this world you become
    interesting.

COMBINING APPEALS. When the analysis of a topic shows that it possesses
more than one of these appeals, the writer may heighten the
attractiveness of his story by developing several of the possibilities,
simultaneously or successively. The chance discovery by a prominent
physician of a simple preventive of infantile paralysis, for instance,
would combine at least four of the elements of interest enumerated
above. If such a combination of appeals can be made at the very
beginning of the article, it is sure to command attention.

DEFINITENESS OF PURPOSE. In view of the multiplicity of possible
appeals, a writer may be misled into undertaking to do too many diverse
things in a single article. A subject often has so many different
aspects of great interest that it is difficult to resist the temptation
to use all of them. If a writer yields to this temptation, the result
may be a diffuse, aimless article that, however interesting in many
details, fails to make a definite impression.

To avoid this danger, the writer must decide just what his purpose is
to be. He must ask himself, "What is my aim in writing this article?"
and, "What do I expect to accomplish?" Only in this way will he clarify
in his mind his reason for writing on the proposed topic and the object
to be attained.

With a definitely formulated aim before him, he can decide just what
material he needs. An objective point to be reached will give his
article direction and will help him to stick to his subject.
Furthermore, by getting his aim clearly in mind, he will have the means
of determining, when the story is completed, whether or not he has
accomplished what he set out to do.

In selecting material, in developing the article, and in testing the
completed product, therefore, it is important to have a definitely
formulated purpose.

THREE GENERAL AIMS. Every special article should accomplish one of three
general aims: it should (1) entertain, or (2) inform, or (3) give
practical guidance.

The same subject and the same material may sometimes be so treated as to
accomplish any one of these three purposes. If the writer's aim is
merely to help readers pass a leisure hour pleasantly, he will "play up"
those aspects of a topic that will afford entertainment and little or
nothing else. If he desires to supply information that will add to the
reader's stock of knowledge, he will present his facts in a manner
calculated to make his readers remember what he has told them. If he
proposes to give information that can be applied by readers to their own
activities, he must include those details that are necessary to any one
who desires to make practical use of the information.

When, for example, a writer is about to prepare an article, based on
experience, about keeping bees on a small suburban place, he will find
that he may write his story in any one of three ways. The difficulties
experienced by the amateur bee-keeper in trying to handle bees in a
small garden could be treated humorously with no other purpose than to
amuse. Or the keeping of bees under such circumstances might be
described as an interesting example of enterprise on the part of a city
man living in the suburbs. Or, in order to show other men and women
similarly situated just how to keep bees, the writer might explain
exactly what any person would need to know to attain success in such a
venture. Just as the purpose of these articles would vary, so the
material and the point of view would differ.

ENTERTAINING ARTICLES. To furnish wholesome entertainment is a perfectly
legitimate end in special feature writing. There is no reason why the
humor, the pathos, the romance, the adventure, and mystery in life
should not be presented in special feature stories for our entertainment
and amusement, just as they are presented for the same purpose in the
short story, the drama, and the photo-play. Many readers find special
feature stories with real persons, real places, and real circumstances,
more entertaining than fiction. A writer with the ability to see the
comedies and the tragedies in the events constantly happening about him,
or frequently reported in the press, will never lack for subjects and
material.

WHOLESOME ENTERTAINMENT. The effect of entertaining stories on the ideas
and ideals of readers ought not to be overlooked. According to the best
journalistic standards, nothing should be printed that will exert a
demoralizing or unwholesome influence. Constructive journalism goes a
step further when it insists that everything shall tend to be helpful
and constructive. This practice applies alike to news stories and to
special articles.

These standards do not necessarily exclude news and special feature
stories that deal with crime, scandal, and similar topics; but they do
demand that the treatment of such subjects shall not be suggestive or
offensive. To portray violators of the criminal or moral codes as heroes
worthy of emulation; to gratify some readers' taste for the morbid; to
satisfy other readers by exploiting sex--all are alike foreign to the
purpose of respectable journalism. No self-respecting writer will lend
the aid of his pen to such work, and no self-respecting editor will
publish it.

To deter persons from committing similar crimes and follies should be
the only purpose in writing on such topics. The thoughtful writer,
therefore, must guard against the temptation to surround wrong-doers
with the glamour of heroic or romantic adventure, and, by sentimental
treatment, to create sympathy for the undeserving culprit. Violations of
law and of the conventions of society ought to be shown to be wrong,
even when the wrong-doer is deserving of some sympathy. This need not be
done by moralizing and editorializing. A much better way is to
emphasize, as the results of wrong-doing, not only legal punishment and
social ostracism, but the pangs of a guilty conscience, and the disgrace
to the culprit and his family.

A cynical or flippant treatment of serious subjects gives many readers a
false and distorted view of life. Humor does not depend on ridicule or
satire. The fads and foibles of humanity can be good-naturedly exposed
in humorous articles that have no sting. Although many topics may very
properly be treated lightly, others demand a serious, dignified style.

The men and women whom a writer puts into his articles are not puppets,
but real persons, with feelings not unlike his own. To drag them and
their personal affairs from the privacy to which they are entitled, and
to give them undesired and needless publicity, for the sake of affording
entertainment to others, often subjects them to great humiliation and
suffering. The fact that a man, woman, or child has figured in the day's
news does not necessarily mean that a writer is entitled to exploit such
a person's private affairs. He must discriminate between what the public
is entitled to know and what an individual has a right to keep private.
Innocent wives, sweethearts, or children are not necessarily legitimate
material for his article because their husband, lover, or father has
appeared in the news. The golden rule is the best guide for a writer in
such cases. Lack of consideration for the rights of others is the mark
neither of a good writer nor of a true gentleman. Clean, wholesome
special feature stories that present interesting phases of life
accurately, and that show due consideration for the rights of the
persons portrayed, are quite as entertaining as are any others.

INFORMATIVE ARTICLES. Since many persons confine their reading largely
to newspapers and magazines, they derive most of their information and
ideas from these sources. Even persons who read new books rely to some
extent on special articles for the latest information about current
topics. Although most readers look to periodicals primarily for new,
timely facts, they are also interested to find there biographical and
historical material that is not directly connected with current events.
Every special feature writer has a great opportunity to furnish a large
circle of readers with interesting and significant information.

In analyzing subjects it is necessary to discriminate between
significant and trivial facts. Some topics when studied will be found to
contain little of real consequence, even though a readable article might
be developed from the material. Other themes will reveal aspects that
are both trivial and significant. When a writer undertakes to choose
between the two, he should ask himself, "Are the facts worth
remembering?" and, "Will they furnish food for thought?" In clarifying
his purpose by such tests, he will decide not only what kind of
information he desires to impart, but what material he must select, and
from what point of view he should present it.

ARTICLES OF PRACTICAL GUIDANCE. The third general purpose that a writer
may have is to give his readers sufficiently explicit information to
enable them to do for themselves what has been done by others. Because
all persons want to know how to be more successful, they read these
"how-to-do-something" articles with avidity. All of us welcome practical
suggestions, tactfully given, that can be applied to our own activities.
Whatever any one has done successfully may be so presented that others
can learn how to do it with equal success. Special feature articles
furnish the best means of giving this practical guidance.

In preparing a "how-to-do-something" article, a writer needs to consider
the class of readers for which it is intended. A special feature story,
for example, on how to reduce the cost of milk might be presented from
any one of three points of view: that of the producer, that of the
distributor, or that of the consumer. To be practical for dairy farmers,
as producers of milk, the article would have to point out possible
economies in keeping cows and handling milk on the farm. To be helpful
to milk-dealers, as distributors, it would concern itself with methods
of lowering the cost of selling and delivering milk in the city. To
assist housewives, as consumers, the article would have to show how to
economize in using milk in the home. An informative article for the
general reader might take up all these phases of the subject, but an
article intended to give practical guidance should consider the needs of
only one of these three classes of persons.

In many constructive articles of practical guidance, the writer's
purpose is so successfully concealed that it may at first escape the
notice of the average reader. By relating in detail, for example, how an
actual enterprise was carried out, a writer may be able to give his
readers, without their realizing it, all the information they need to
accomplish a similar undertaking. When he analyzes such articles, the
student should not be misled into thinking that the writer did not have
the definite purpose of imparting practical information. If the same
material can be developed into an article of interesting information or
into one of practical guidance, it is desirable to do the latter and, if
necessary, to disguise the purpose.

STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. In order to define his purpose clearly and to keep
it constantly before him, a writer will do well to put down on paper his
exact aim in a single sentence. If, for example, he desired to write a
constructive article about an Americanization pageant held in his home
city on the Fourth of July, he might write out the statement of his aim
thus: "I desire to show how the Americanization of aliens may be
encouraged in small industrial centers of from 3000 to 20,000
inhabitants, by describing how the last Fourth of July Americanization
pageant was organized and carried out in a typical Pennsylvania
industrial town of 5000."

Such a statement will assist a writer in selecting his material, in
sticking to his subject, and in keeping to one point of view. Without
this clearly formulated aim before him, it is easy for him to dwell too
long on some phase of the subject in which he is particularly interested
or on which he has the most material, to the neglect of other phases
that are essential to the accomplishment of his purpose. Or, failing to
get his aim clearly in mind, he may jump from one aspect of the subject
to another, without accomplishing anything in particular. Many a
newspaper and magazine article leaves a confused, hazy impression on the
minds of readers because the writer failed to have a definite objective.




CHAPTER V

TYPES OF ARTICLES


METHODS OF TREATMENT. After choosing a subject and formulating his
purpose, a writer is ready to consider methods of treatment. Again it is
desirable to survey all the possibilities in order to choose the one
method best adapted to his subject and his purpose. His chief
consideration should be the class of readers that he desires to reach.
Some topics, he will find, may be treated with about equal success in
any one of several ways, while others lend themselves to only one or two
forms of presentation. By thinking through the various possible ways of
working out his subject, he will be able to decide which meets his needs
most satisfactorily.

EXPOSITION BY NARRATION AND DESCRIPTION. The commonest method of
developing a special feature article is that which combines narration
and description with exposition. The reason for this combination is not
far to seek. The average person is not attracted by pure exposition. He
is attracted by fiction. Hence the narrative and descriptive devices of
fiction are employed advantageously to supplement expository methods.
Narratives and descriptions also have the advantage of being concrete
and vivid. The rapid reader can grasp a concrete story or a word
picture. He cannot so readily comprehend a more general explanation
unaccompanied by specific examples and graphic pictures of persons,
places, and objects.

Narration and description are used effectively for the concrete examples
and the specific instances by which we illustrate general ideas. The
best way, for example, to make clear the operation of a state system of
health insurance is to relate how it has operated in the case of one or
more persons affected. In explaining a new piece of machinery the writer
may well describe it in operation, to enable readers to visualize it
and follow its motions. Since the reader's interest will be roused the
more quickly if he is given tangible, concrete details that he can
grasp, the examples are usually put first, to be followed by the more
general explanation. Sometimes several examples are given before the
explanatory matter is offered. Whole articles are often made up of
specific examples and generalizations presented alternately.

To explain the effects of a new an√¶sthetic, for example, Mr. Burton J.
Hendrick in an article in _McClure's Magazine_, pictured the scene in
the operating-room of a hospital where it was being given to a patient,
showed just how it was administered, and presented the results as a
spectator saw them. The beginning of the article on stovaine, the new
an√¶sthetic, illustrating this method of exposition, follows:

    A few months ago, a small six-year-old boy was wheeled into the
    operating theater at the Hospital for Ruptured and Crippled
    Children, in New York City. He was one of the several thousand
    children of the tenements who annually find their way into this
    great philanthropic institution, suffering from what, to the lay
    mind, seems a hopelessly incurable injury or malformation. This
    particular patient had a crippled and paralyzed leg, and to restore
    its usefulness, it was necessary to cut deeply into the heel,
    stretch the "Achilles tendon," and make other changes which, without
    the usual anesthetic, would involve excruciating suffering.
    According to the attendant nurses, the child belonged to the "noisy"
    class; that is, he was extremely sensitive to pain, screamed at the
    approach of the surgeon, and could be examined only when forcibly
    held down.

    As the child came into the operating-room he presented an extremely
    pathetic figure--small, naked, thin, with a closely cropped head of
    black hair, and a face pinched and blanched with fear. Surrounded by
    a fair-sized army of big, muscular surgeons and white-clothed
    nurses, and a gallery filled with a hundred or more of the leading
    medical men of the metropolis, he certainly seemed a helpless speck
    of humanity with all the unknown forces of science and modern life
    arrayed against him. Under ordinary conditions he would have been
    etherized in an adjoining chamber and brought into the
    operating-room entirely unconscious. This cripple, however, had
    been selected as a favorable subject for an interesting experiment
    in modern surgery, for he was to undergo an extremely torturous
    operation in a state of full consciousness.

    Among the assembled surgeons was a large-framed, black moustached
    and black-haired, quick-moving, gypsy-like Rumanian--Professor
    Thomas Jonnesco, dean of the Medical Department of the University of
    Bucharest, and one of the leading men of his profession in Europe.
    Dr. Jonnesco, who had landed in New York only two days before, had
    come to the United States with a definite scientific purpose. This
    was to show American surgeons that the most difficult operations
    could be performed without pain, without loss of consciousness, and
    without the use of the familiar anesthetics, ether or chloroform.
    Dr. Jonnesco's reputation in itself assured him the fullest
    opportunity of demonstrating his method in New York, and this
    six-year-old boy had been selected as an excellent test subject.

    Under the gentle assurances of the nurses that "no one was going to
    hurt" him, the boy assumed a sitting posture on the operating-table,
    with his feet dangling over the edge. Then, at the request of Dr.
    Jonnesco, he bent his head forward until it almost touched his
    breast. This threw the child's back into the desired position--that
    of the typical bicycle "scorcher,"--making each particular vertebra
    stand out sharply under the tight drawn skin. Dr. Jonnesco quickly
    ran his finger along the protuberances, and finally selected the
    space between the twelfth dorsal and the first lumbar vertebr√¶--in
    other words, the space just above the small of the back. He then
    took an ordinary hypodermic needle, and slowly pushed it through the
    skin and tissues until it entered the small opening between the
    lower and upper vertebr√¶, not stopping until it reached the open
    space just this side of the spinal cord.

    As the needle pierced the flesh, the little patient gave a sharp
    cry--the only sign of discomfiture displayed during the entire
    operation. When the hollow needle reached its destination, a few
    drops of a colorless liquid spurted out--the famous cerebro-spinal
    fluid, the substance which, like a water-jacket, envelops the brain
    and the spinal cord. Into this same place Dr. Jonnesco now
    introduced an ordinary surgical syringe, which he had previously
    filled with a pale yellowish liquid--the much-famed stovaine,--and
    slowly emptied its contents into the region that immediately
    surrounds the spinal cord.

    For a few minutes the child retained his sitting posture as if
    nothing extraordinary had happened. Dr. Jonnesco patted him on the
    back and said a few pleasant words in French, while the nurses and
    assistants chatted amiably in English.

    "How do you feel now?" the attending surgeon asked, after the lapse
    of three or four minutes.

    "All right," replied the boy animatedly, "'cept that my legs feel
    like they was going to sleep."

    The nurses now laid the patient down upon his back, throwing a
    handkerchief over his eyes, so that he could not himself witness the
    subsequent proceedings. There was, naturally, much holding of breath
    as Dr. Virgil P. Gibney, the operating surgeon, raised his knife and
    quickly made a deep incision in the heel of this perfectly conscious
    patient. From the child, however, there was not the slightest
    evidence of sensation.

    "Didn't you feel anything, my boy?" asked Dr. Gibney, pausing.

    "No, I don't feel nothin'," came the response from under the
    handkerchief.

    An operation lasting nearly half an hour ensued. The deepest tissues
    were cut, the tendons were stretched, the incision was sewed up, all
    apparently without the patient's knowledge.

Some types of articles, although expository in purpose, are entirely
narrative and descriptive in form. By relating his own experiences in a
confession story, for example, a writer may be able to show very clearly
and interestingly the dangers of speculations in stocks with but small
capital. Personality sketches are almost always narrative and
descriptive.

Many of the devices of the short story will be found useful in articles.
Not only is truth stranger than fiction, but facts may be so presented
as to be even more interesting than fiction. Conversation,
character-drawing, suspense, and other methods familiar to the writer of
short stories may be used effectively in special articles. Their
application to particular types of articles is shown in the following
pages.

SPECIAL TYPES OF ARTICLES. Although there is no generally recognized
classification of special feature articles, several distinct types may
be noted, such as (1) the interview, (2) the personal experience story,
(3) the confession article, (4) the "how-to-do-something" article, (5)
the personality sketch, (6) the narrative in the third person. These
classes, it is evident, are not mutually exclusive, but may for
convenience be treated separately.

THE INTERVIEW. Since the material for many articles is obtained by means
of an interview, it is often convenient to put the major part, if not
the whole, of the story in interview form. Such an article may consist
entirely of direct quotation with a limited amount of explanatory
material concerning the person interviewed; or it may be made up partly
of direct quotation and partly of indirect quotation, combined with the
necessary explanation. For greater variety it is advisable to alternate
direct and indirect quotations. A description of the person interviewed
and of his surroundings, by way of introduction, gives the reader a
distinct impression of the individual under characteristic conditions.
Or some striking utterance of his may be "played up" at the beginning,
to be followed by a picture of him and his surroundings. Interviews on
the same topic with two or more persons may be combined in a single
article.

The interview has several obvious advantages. First, the spoken word,
quoted _verbatim_, gives life to the story. The person interviewed seems
to be talking to each reader individually. The description of him in his
surroundings helps the reader to see him as he talks. Second, events,
explanations, and opinions given in the words of one who speaks with
authority, have greater weight than do the assertions of an unknown
writer. Third, the interview is equally effective whether the writer's
purpose is to inform, to entertain, or to furnish practical guidance.
Romance and adventure, humor and pathos, may well be handled in
interview form. Discoveries, inventions, new processes, unusual methods,
new projects, and marked success of any kind may be explained to
advantage in the words of those responsible for these undertakings.

In obtaining material for an interview story, a writer should bear in
mind a number of points regarding interviewing in general. First, in
advance of meeting the person to be interviewed, he should plan the
series of questions by which he hopes to elicit the desired information.
"What would my readers ask this person if they had a chance to talk to
him about this subject?" he must ask himself. That is, his questions
should be those that readers would like to have answered. Since it is
the answers, however, and not the questions, that will interest readers,
the questions in the completed article should be subordinated as much as
possible. Sometimes they may be skillfully embodied in the replies;
again they may be implied merely, or entirely omitted. In studying an
interview article, one can generally infer what questions the
interviewer used. Second, he must cultivate his memory so that he can
recall a person's exact words without taking notes. Most men talk more
freely and easily when they are not reminded of the fact that what they
are saying is to be printed. In interviewing, therefore, it is desirable
to keep pencil and paper out of sight. Third, immediately after leaving
the person whom he has interviewed, the writer should jot down facts,
figures, striking statements, and anything else that he might forget.

EXAMPLES OF THE INTERVIEW ARTICLE. As a timely special feature story for
Arbor Day, a Washington correspondent used the following interview with
an expert as a means of giving readers practical advice on
tree-planting:

    ARBOR DAY ADVICE

    WASHINGTON, April 1.--Three spadefuls of rich, pulverized earth will
    do more to make a young tree grow than a 30-minute Arbor day address
    by the president of the school board and a patriotic anthem by the
    senior class, according to Dr. Furman L. Mulford, tree expert for
    the department of agriculture.

    Not that Dr. Mulford would abbreviate the ceremonies attendant upon
    Arbor day planting, but he thinks that they do not mean much unless
    the roots planted receive proper and constant care. For what the
    Fourth of July is to the war and navy departments, and what Labor
    day is to the department of labor, Arbor day is to the department of
    agriculture.

    While the forestry bureau has concerned itself primarily with trees
    from the standpoint of the timber supply, Dr. Mulford has been
    making a study of trees best adapted for streets and cities
    generally. And nobody is more interested than he in what Arbor day
    signifies or how trees should be chosen and reared.

    "We need trees most where our population is the thickest, and some
    trees, like some people, are not adapted to such a life," said Dr.
    Mulford. "For street or school yard planting one of the first
    considerations is a hardy tree, that can find nourishment under
    brick pavements or granite sidewalks. It must be one that branches
    high from the ground and ought to be native to the country and
    climate. America has the prettiest native trees and shrubs in the
    world and it is true patriotism to recognize them.

    "For Southern states one of the prettiest and best of shade trees is
    the laurel oak, and there will be thousands of them planted this
    spring. It is almost an evergreen and is a quick growing tree. The
    willow oak is another.

    "A little farther north the red oak is one of the most desirable,
    and in many places the swamp maple grows well, though this latter
    tree does not thrive well in crowded cities.

    "Nothing, however, is prettier than the American elm when it reaches
    the majesty of its maturity and I do not believe it will ever cease
    to be a favorite. One thing against it, though, is the 'elm beetle,'
    a pest which is spreading and which will kill some of our most
    beautiful trees unless spraying is consistently practised. China
    berry trees, abundant in the South, and box elders, native to a
    score of states, are quick growing, but they reach maturity too soon
    and begin to go to pieces."

    "What is the reason that so many Arbor day trees die?" Dr. Mulford
    was asked.

    "Usually lack of protection, and often lack of care in planting,"
    was the answer. "When the new tree begins to put out tender rootlets
    a child brushing against it or 'inspecting' it too closely will
    break them off and it dies. Or stock will nip off the new leaves and
    shoots and the result is the same. A frame around the tree would
    prevent this.

    "Then, often wild trees are too big when transplanted. Such trees
    have usually only a few long roots and so much of these are lost in
    transplanting that the large trunk cannot be nourished by the
    remainder. With nursery trees the larger they are the better it is,
    for they have a lot of small roots that do not have to be cut off.

    "Fruit trees are seldom so successful as shade trees, either along
    a street or road or in a yard. In the first place their branches are
    too low and unless carefully pruned their shape is irregular. Then
    they are subject to so many pests that unless constant care is given
    them they will not bear a hatful of fruit a season.

    "On the other hand, nut trees are usually hardy and add much to the
    landscape. Pecan, chestnut, walnut and shaggy bark hickory are some
    of the more popular varieties."

    The first Arbor day was observed in Nebraska, which has fewer
    natural trees than any other state. This was in 1872, and Kansas was
    the second to observe the day, falling into line in 1875.
    Incidentally Kansas ranks next to Nebraska in dearth of trees.

    The Arbor day idea originated with J. Sterling Morton, a Nebraskan
    who was appointed secretary of agriculture by Cleveland. Now every
    state in the Union recognizes the day and New York, Pennsylvania,
    New Jersey, Minnesota, Iowa, Illinois, Wisconsin and others have
    gotten out extensive Arbor day booklets giving information
    concerning trees and birds; most of them even contain appropriate
    songs and poems for Arbor day programs.

How an interview combined with a description of a person may serve to
create sympathy for her and for the cause that she represents is shown
in the following article, which was published anonymously in the Sunday
magazine section of the _Ohio State Journal_. It was illustrated with
two half-tone portraits, one of the young woman in Indian costume, the
other showing her in street dress.

    JUST LIKE POCAHONTAS OF 300 YEARS AGO

    "_Oh, East is East and West is West,
    And never the two shall meet_."


    BUT they may send messengers. Hark to the words of
    "One-who-does-things-well."

    "I carry a message from my people to the Government at Washington,"
    says Princess Galilolie, youngest daughter of John Ross, hereditary
    King of the "Forest Indians," the Cherokees of Oklahoma. "We have
    been a nation without hope. The land that was promised us by solemn
    treaty, 'so long as the grass should grow and the waters run,' has
    been taken from us. It was barren and wild when we received it
    seventy years ago. Now it is rich with oil and cultivation, and the
    whites coveted our possessions. Since it was thrown open to settlers
    no Cherokee holds sovereign rights as before, when it was his
    nation. We are outnumbered. I have come as a voice from my people to
    speak to the people of the Eastern States and to those at
    Washington--most of all, if I am permitted to do so, to lay our
    wrongs before the President's wife, in whose veins glows the blood
    of the Indian."

    Only nineteen is this Indian princess--this twentieth century
    Pocahontas--who travels far to the seats of the mighty for her race.

    She is a tall, slim, stately girl from the foothills of the Ozarks,
    from Tahlequah, former capital of the Cherokee Nation. She says she
    is proud of every drop of Indian blood that flows in her veins. But
    her skin is fair as old ivory and she is a college girl--a girl of
    the times to her finger-tips.

    "When an Indian goes through college and returns to his or her
    people," she says with a smile, "they say, 'Back to the blanket!' We
    have few blankets among the Cherokees in Tahlequah. I am the
    youngest of nine children, and we are all of us college graduates,
    as my father was before us."

    He is John Ross 3d, Chief of the Cherokee Nation, of mingled Scotch
    and Indian blood, in descent from "Cooweeskowee," John Ross I., the
    rugged old Indian King who held out against Andrew Jackson back in
    1838 for the ancient rights of the Five Nations to their lands along
    the Southern Atlantic States.

    She sat back on the broad window seat in the sunlight. Beyond the
    window lay a bird's-eye view of New York housetops, the white man's
    permanent tepee. Some spring birds alighted on a nearby telephone
    wire, sending out twittering mating cries to each other.

    "They make me want to go home," she said with a swift, expressive
    gesture. "But I will stay until the answer comes to us. Do you know
    what they have called me, the old men and women who are wise--the
    full-bloods? Galilolie--'One-who-does-things-well.' With us, when a
    name is given it is one with a meaning, something the child must
    grow to in fulfillment. So I feel I must not fail them now."

    "You see," she went on, lifting her chin, "it is we young
    half-bloods who must carry the strength and honor of our people to
    the world so it may understand us. All our lives we have been told
    tales by the old men--how our people were driven from their homes by
    the Government, how Gen. Winfield Scott's soldiers came down into
    our quiet villages and ordered the Indians to go forth leaving
    everything behind them. My great-grandfather, the old King
    Cooweeskowee, with his wife and children, paused at the first
    hilltop to look back at his home, and already the whites were moving
    into it. The house is still standing at Rossville, Ga. Do you know
    what the old people tell us children when we wish we could go back
    there?" Her eyes are half closed, her lips compressed as she says
    slowly, thrillingly: "They tell us it is easy to find the way over
    that 'Trail of Tears,' that through the wilderness it is blazed with
    the gravestones of those who were too weak to march.

    "That was seventy years ago, in 1838. The Government promised to pay
    amply for all it took from us, our homes and lands, cattle--even
    furniture. A treaty was made solemnly between the Indians and the
    United States that Oklahoma should be theirs 'as long as the grass
    should grow and the waters run.'

    "That meant perpetuity to us, don't you see?" She makes her points
    with a directness and simplicity that should disarm even the
    diplomatic suavity of Uncle Sam when he meets her in Washington.
    "Year after year the Cherokees waited for the Government to pay. And
    at last, three years ago, it came to us--$133.19 to each Indian,
    seventy-eight years after the removal from Georgia had taken place.

    "Oil was discovered after the Indians had taken the wilderness lands
    in Oklahoma and reclaimed them. It was as if God, in reparation for
    the wrongs inflicted by whites, had given us the riches of the
    earth. My people grew rich from their wells, but a way was found to
    bind their wealth so they could not use it. It was said the Indians
    were not fit to handle their own money."

    She lifts eyebrows and shoulders, her hands clasped before her
    tightly, as if in silent resentment of their impotence to help.

    "These are the things I want to tell; first our wrongs and then our
    colonization plan, for which we hope so much if the Government will
    grant it. We are outnumbered since the land was opened up and a mass
    of 'sooners,' as we call them--squatters, claimers,
    settlers--swarmed in over our borders. The Government again offered
    to pay us for the land they took back--the land that was to be ours
    in perpetuity 'while the grass grew and the waters ran.' We were
    told to file our claims with the whites. Some of us did, but eight
    hundred of the full-bloods went back forty miles into the foothills
    under the leadership of Red Bird Smith. They refuse to sell or to
    accept the Government money for their valuable oil lands. To appease
    justice, the Government allotted them lands anyway, in their
    absence, and paid the money for their old property into the banks,
    where it lies untouched. Red Bird and his 'Night Hawks' refuse to
    barter over a broken treaty.

    "Ah, but I have gone up alone to the old men there." Her voice
    softens. "They will talk to me because I am my father's daughter. My
    Indian name means 'One-who-does-things-well.' So if I go to them
    they tell me their heart longings, what they ask for the Cherokee.

    "And I shall put the message, if I can, before our President's wife.
    Perhaps she will help."

THE PERSONAL EXPERIENCE ARTICLE. A writer's own experiences, given under
his name, under a pseudonym, or in anonymous form, can easily be made
interesting to others. Told in the first person, such stories are
realistic and convincing. The pronoun "I" liberally sprinkled through
the story, as it must be, gives to it a personal, intimate character
that most readers like. Conversation and description of persons, places,
and objects may be included to advantage in these personal narratives.

The possibilities of the personal experience story are as great as are
those of the interview. Besides serving as a vehicle for the writer's
own experiences, it may be employed to give experiences of others. If,
for example, a person interviewed objects to having his name used, it is
possible to present the material obtained by the interview in the form
of a personal experience story. In that case the article would have to
be published without the writer's name, since the personal experiences
that it records are not his own. Permission to present material in a
personal experience story should always be obtained from the individual
whose experiences the writer intends to use.

Articles designed to give practical guidance, to show readers how to do
something, are particularly effective when written in the first person.
If these "how-to-do-something" articles are to be most useful to
readers, the conditions under which the personal experience was
obtained must be fairly typical. Personal experience articles of this
type are very popular in women's magazines, agricultural journals, and
publications that appeal to business men.


EXAMPLES OF THE PERSONAL EXPERIENCE STORY. The opportunities for
service offered to women by small daily newspapers are set forth in the
story below, by means of the personal experiences of one woman. The
article was published in the _Woman's Home Companion_, and was
illustrated by a half-tone reproduction of a wash drawing of a young
woman seated at her desk in a newspaper office.

    "THEY CALL ME THE 'HEN EDITOR'"

    THE STORY OF A SMALL-TOWN NEWSPAPER WOMAN

    By SADIE L. MOSSLER

    "What do you stay buried in this burg for? Why, look how you drudge!
    and what do you get out of it? New York or some other big city is
    the place for you. There's where you can become famous instead of
    being a newspaper woman in a one-horse town."

    A big city newspaper man was talking. He was in our town on an
    assignment, and he was idling away spare time in our office. Before
    I could answer, the door opened and a small girl came to my desk.

    "Say," she said, "Mama told me to come in here and thank you for
    that piece you put in the paper about us. You ought to see the
    eatin's folks has brought us! Heaps an' heaps! And Ma's got a job
    scrubbin' three stores."

    The story to which she referred was one that I had written about a
    family left fatherless, a mother and three small children in real
    poverty. I had written a plain appeal to the home people, with the
    usual results.

    "That," I said, "is one reason that I am staying here. Maybe it
    isn't fame in big letters signed to an article, but it's another
    kind."

    His face wore a queer expression; but before he could retort another
    caller appeared, a well-dressed woman.

    "What do you mean," she declared, "by putting it in the paper that I
    served light refreshments at my party?"

    "Wasn't it so?" I meekly inquired.

    "No!" she thundered. "I served ice cream, cake and coffee, and that
    makes two courses. See that it is right next time, or we'll stop the
    paper."

    Here my visitor laughed. "I suppose that's another reason for your
    staying here. When we write anything about a person we don't have to
    see them again and hear about it."

    "But," I replied, "that's the very reason I cling to the small town.
    I want to see the people about whom I am writing, and live with
    them. That's what brings the rewards in our business. It's the
    personal side that makes it worth while, the real living of a
    newspaper instead of merely writing to fill its columns."

    In many small towns women have not heretofore been overly welcome on
    the staff of the local paper, for the small town is essentially
    conservative and suspicious of change. This war, however, is
    changing all that, and many a woman with newspaper ambitions will
    now have her chance at home.

    For ten years I have been what may be classified as a small town
    newspaper woman, serving in every capacity from society reporter to
    city and managing editor. During this time I have been tempted many
    times to go to fields where national fame and a larger salary
    awaited those who won. But it was that latter part that held me
    back, that and one other factor: "Those who won," and "What do they
    get out of it more than I?"

    It is generally conceded that for one woman who succeeds in the
    metropolitan newspaper field about ten fail before the vicissitudes
    of city life, the orders of managing editors, and the merciless
    grind of the big city's working world. And with those who succeed,
    what have they more than I? They sign their names to articles; they
    receive big salaries; they are famous--as such fame goes. Why is a
    signed name to an article necessary, when everyone knows when the
    paper comes out that I wrote the article? What does national fame
    mean compared with the fact that the local laws of the "Society for
    the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" were not being enforced and
    that I wrote stories that remedied this condition?

    I began newspaper life as society reporter of a daily paper in a
    Middle-Western town of ten thousand inhabitants. That is, I supposed
    I was going to be society reporter, but before very long I found
    myself doing police assignments, sport, editing telegraph, and
    whatever the occasion demanded.

    I suppose that the beginnings of everyone's business life always
    remain vivid memories. The first morning I reported for work at
    seven o'clock. Naturally, no one was in the front office, as the
    news department of a small-town newspaper office is sometimes
    called. I was embarrassed and nervous, and sat anxiously awaiting
    the arrival of the city editor. In five minutes he gave me
    sufficient instructions to last a year, but the only one I remember
    was, "Ask all the questions you can think of, and don't let anyone
    bluff you out of a story."

    My first duty, and one that I performed every morning for several
    years, was to "make" an early morning train connecting with a large
    city, forty miles away. It was no easy task to approach strangers
    and ask their names and destination; but it was all good experience,
    and it taught me how to approach people and to ask personal
    questions without being rude.

    During my service as society reporter I learned much, so much that I
    am convinced there is no work in the smaller towns better suited to
    women. Any girl who is bright and quick, who knows the ethics of
    being a lady, can hold this position and make better money at it
    than by teaching or clerking.

    Each trade, they say, has its tricks, and being a society reporter
    is no exception. In towns of from one thousand to two thousand
    inhabitants, the news that Mrs. X. is going to give a party spreads
    rapidly by that system of wireless telegraphy that excels the
    Marconi--neighborhood gossip. But in the larger towns it is not so
    easy. In "our town," whenever there is a party the ice cream is
    ordered from a certain confectioner. Daily he permitted us to see
    his order book. If Mrs. Jones ordered a quart of ice cream we knew
    that she was only having a treat for the family. If it were two
    quarts or more, it was a party, and if it was ice cream in molds, we
    knew a big formal function was on foot.

    Society reporting is a fertile field, and for a long time I had been
    thinking that society columns were too dull. My ideal of a newspaper
    is that every department should be edited so that everyone would
    read all the paper. I knew that men rarely read the social column.
    One day a man said to me that he always called his wife his better
    judgment instead of his better half. That appealed to me as
    printable, but where to put it in the paper? Why not in my own
    department? I did so. That night when the paper came out everyone
    clamored to know who the man was, for I had merely written, "A man
    in town calls his wife his better judgment instead of his better
    half."

    Then I decided to make the society department a reflection of our
    daily life and sayings. In order to get these in I used the initials
    of my title, "S.R." I never used names, but I always managed to
    identify my persons.

    As one might expect, I brought down a storm about my head. Many
    persons took the hints for themselves when they were not so
    intended, and there were some amusing results. For instance, when I
    said in the paper that "a certain man in a down-town store has
    perfect manners," the next day twelve men thanked me, and I received
    four boxes of candy as expressions of gratitude.

    There were no complaints about the society column being dull after
    this; everyone read it and laughed at it, and it was quoted in many
    exchanges. Of course, I was careful to hurt no one's feelings, but I
    did occasionally have a little good-natured fun at the expense of
    people who wouldn't mind it. Little personal paragraphs of this
    sort must never be malicious or mean--if the paper is to keep its
    friends.

    Of all my newspaper experience I like best to dwell on the society
    reporting; but if I were to advance I knew that I must take on more
    responsibility, so I became city editor of another paper. I was
    virtually managing editor, for the editor and owner was a politician
    and was away much of the time. It was then that I began to realize
    the responsibility of my position, to grapple with the problem of
    dealing fairly both with my employer and the public. The daily life
    with its varying incidents, the big civic issues, the stories to be
    handled, the rights of the advertisers to be considered, the
    adjusting of the news to the business department--all these were
    brought before me with a powerful clarity.

    When a woman starts on a city paper she knows that there are
    linotypes, presses and other machinery. Often she has seen them
    work; but her knowledge of "how" they work is generally vague. It
    was on my third day as city editor that I realized my woeful
    ignorance of the newspaper business from the mechanical viewpoint. I
    had just arrived at the office when the foreman came to my desk.

    "Say," he said, "we didn't get any stuff set last night. Power was
    off. Better come out and pick out the plate you want to fill with."

    What he meant by the power being off I could understand, and
    perforce I went out to select the plate. He handed me long slabs of
    plate matter to read. Later I learned that printed copies of the
    plate are sent for selection, but in my ignorance I took up the
    slabs and tried to read the type. To my astonishment it was all
    backward, and I found myself wondering if it were a Chinese feature
    story. Finally I threw myself on his mercy and told him to select
    what he chose. As I left the composing-room I heard him say to one
    of the printers: "That's what comes of the boss hiring a hen
    editor."

    Shortly after noon a linotype operator came to me with his hands
    full of copy.

    "If you want any of this dope in the paper," he said, "you'll have
    to grab off a paragraph here and there. My machine's got a bad
    squirt, and it'll take an hour or more to fix it."

    Greek, all Greek! A squirt! I was too busy "grabbing off" paragraphs
    to investigate; but then and there I resolved to penetrate all these
    mysteries. I found the linotype operator eager to show me how his
    machine works, and the foreman was glad to take me around and
    instruct me in his department and also in the pressroom. I have had
    trouble with printers since; but in the end they had to admit that
    the "hen editor" knew what she was talking about.

    There is a great cry now for woman's advancement. If the women are
    hunting equality as their goal let them not seek out the crowded,
    hostile cities, but remain in the smaller places where their work
    can stand out distinctly. A trite phrase expresses it that a
    newspaper is the "voice of the people." What better than that a
    woman should set the tune for that voice?

    Equality with men! I sit at my desk looking out over the familiar
    home scene. A smell of fresh ink comes to me, and a paper just off
    the press is slapped down on my desk.

    "Look!" says the foreman. "We got out some paper today, didn't we?"

    "_We_!" How's that for equality? He has been twenty years at his
    trade and I only ten, yet he includes me.

    When I am tempted to feel that my field is limited, my tools crude,
    and my work unhonored and unsung, I recall a quotation I read many
    years ago, and I will place it here at the end of the "hen editor's"
    uneventful story.

    Back before my mind floats that phrase, "Buried in this burg." If a
    person has ability, will not the world learn it?

    "If a man can write a better book, preach a better sermon, or sing a
    more glorious song than his neighbor, though he build his house in
    the woods, the world will make a beaten path to his door."

That a personal experience story may be utilized to show readers how to
do something is demonstrated in the following article taken from _The
Designer_. It was illustrated by a half-tone made from a wash drawing of
one corner of the burlap room.

    A BEDROOM IN BURLAP

    THE MOST SATISFACTORY ROOM IN OUR BUNGALOW

    BY KATHERINE VAN DORN

    Our burlap room is the show room of our bungalow. Visitors are
    guided through the living-room, the bedroom, the sleeping-porch and
    kitchen, and allowed to express their delight and satisfaction while
    we wait with bated breath for the grand surprise to be given them.
    Then, when they have concluded, we say:

      "But you should see our burlap room!" Then we lead the way up the
      stairs to the attic and again stand and wait. We know what is
      coming, and, as we revel in the expressions of admiration evoked, we
      again declaim with enormous pride: "We made it all ourselves!"

    There is a solid satisfaction in making a room, especially for an
    amateur who hardly expects to undertake room-making as a profession.
    We regard our room as an original creation produced by our own
    genius, not likely to be duplicated in our personal experience. It
    grew in this wise:

      When we came to the bungalow last spring the family numbered three
      instead of the two of the year before. Now number three, a healthy
      and bouncing young woman, necessitated a "sleeping-in" maid if her
      parents were ever to be able to detach themselves from her person.
      We had never had a sleeping-in maid at the bungalow before and the
      problem of where to put her was a serious one. We well knew that no
      self-respecting servant would condescend to sleep in an attic,
      although the attic was cool, airy and comfortable. We rather
      thought, too, that the maid might despise us if we gave her the
      bedroom and took up our quarters under the rafters. It would be an
      easy enough matter for carpenters and plasterers to put a room in
      the attic, but we lacked the money necessary for such a venture. And
      so we puzzled. At first we thought of curtains, but the high winds
      which visit us made curtains impracticable. Then we thought of
      tacking the curtains top and bottom, and from this the idea
      evolved. The carpenter whom we consulted proved to be amenable to
      suggestion and agreed to put us up a framework in a day. We helped.
      We outlined the room on the floor. This took two strips of wood
      about one and a half by two inches. The other two sides of the room
      were formed by the wall of the attic and by the meeting place of the
      roof and floor--that is, there was in reality no fourth wall; the
      room simply ended where floor and roof met. Two strips were nailed
      to the rafters in positions similar to those on the floor, and then
      an upright strip was inserted and nailed fast at intervals of every
      three feet. This distance was decided by the fact that curtain
      materials usually come a yard wide. For a door we used a discarded
      screen-door, which, having been denuded of the bits of wire clinging
      to it, answered the purpose very well. The door completed the
      skeleton.

      We used a beautiful soft blue burlap. Tacking on proved a more
      difficult matter than we had anticipated, owing to the fact that our
      carpenter had used cypress for the framework. We stretched the
      material taut and then tacked it fast with sharp-pointed,
      large-headed brass tacks, and while inserting these we measured
      carefully the distances between the tacks in order to keep this
      trimming uniform. The two walls supplied by the framework were
      quickly covered, but the rough wall of the attic necessitated some
      cutting, as we had to tack the burlap to the uprights and these had
      not been placed with yard-wide material in view. Above the
      screen-door frame was a hiatus of space running up into the peak.
      The carpenter had thoughtfully run two strips up to the roof and
      this enabled us to fill in by cutting and turning in the cloth. A
      corresponding space above the window received similar treatment.
      Then we covered the inner surface of the screen door and we had a
      room.

      But we were far from satisfied. The room looked bare and crude. We
      bought a can of dark-oak stain and gave the floor a coat and this
      improved matters so much that we stained the wood visible on the
      door frame and about the window. Having finished this, we saw the
      need of doing something for the ceiling. The ceiling was merely the
      inner surface of the roof. The builders had made it of boards of
      varying sizes, the rafters were rough and splintery and there were
      myriads of nails sticking through everywhere. It looked a hopeless
      task. But we bought more stain and went to work. Before beginning we
      covered our precious blue walls with newspapers, donned our oldest
      clothes and spread papers well over the floor. It was well that we
      did. The staining was not difficult work but the nails made it
      splashy and we were pretty well spotted when we finished.

      But when we did finish we felt compensated. The nails had become
      invisible. The dull blue walls with their bright brass trimming, the
      soft brown floor and the stained, raftered roof made the room the
      most attractive in the house. We could not rest, although the hour
      was late and we were both tired, until we had furnished it. We put
      in a couple of small rugs, a brass bed, and a white bureau. We hung
      two pictures securely upon the uprights of the skeleton. We added a
      couple of chairs and a rack for clothing, put up a white madras
      curtain at the window, and regarded the effect with the utmost
      satisfaction. The room answered the purpose exactly. The burlap was
      thick enough to act as a screen. It was possible to see movement
      through it, but not form. It insured privacy and still permitted the
      air to pass through for ventilation. As a finishing touch we screwed
      a knob on the outside of the door, put a brass hook on the inside
      and went downstairs to count the cost.

      As a quick and inexpensive method of adding to the number of rooms
      in one's house, the making of a burlap room is without an equal. The
      idea is not patented, and we who deem ourselves its creators, are
      only too happy to send it on, in the hope that it may be of service
      to some other puzzled householder who is wondering where to put an
      added family member.

THE CONFESSION STORY. Closely akin to the personal experience article is
the so-called "confession story." Usually published anonymously,
confession stories may reveal more personal and intimate experiences
than a writer would ordinarily care to give in a signed article.
Needless to say, most readers are keenly interested in such revelations,
even though they are made anonymously. Like personal experience stories,
they are told in the first person with a liberal use of the pronoun "I."

A writer need not confine himself to his own experiences for confession
stories; he may obtain valuable material for them from others. Not
infrequently his name is attached to these articles accompanied by the
statement that the confession was "transcribed," "taken down," or
"recorded" by the writer.

Conditions of life in classes of society with which the reader is not
familiar may be brought home to him through the medium of the confession
story. It may be made the means of arousing interest in questions about
which the average reader cares little. The average man or woman, for
example, is probably little concerned with the problem of the poorly
paid college professor, but hundreds of thousands doubtless read with
interest the leading article in an issue of the _Saturday Evening Post_
entitled, "The Pressure on the Professor." This was a confession story,
which did not give the author's own experiences but appeared as
"Transcribed by Walter E. Weyl." This article was obviously written with
the purpose, skillfully concealed, of calling attention to the hard lot
of the underpaid professor.

Constructive criticism of existing conditions may be successfully
embodied in the form of a confession article that describes the evils as
they have been experienced by one individual. If the article is to be
entirely effective and just, the experience of the one person described
must be fairly typical of that of others in the same situation. In order
to show that these experiences are characteristic, the writer may find
it advantageous to introduce facts and figures tending to prove that his
own case is not an isolated example. In the confession article mentioned
above, "The Pressure on the Professor," the assistant professor who
makes the confession, in order to demonstrate that his own case is
typical, cites statistics collected by a colleague at Stanford
University giving the financial status of 112 assistant professors in
various American universities.

Confessions that show how faults and personal difficulties have been
overcome prove helpful to readers laboring under similar troubles. Here
again, what is related should be typical rather than exceptional.

EXAMPLES OF THE CONFESSION STORY. That an intimate account of the
financial difficulties of a young couple as told by the wife, may not
only make an interesting story but may serve as a warning to others, is
shown in the confession story below. Signed "F.B.," and illustrated with
a pen and ink sketch of the couple at work over their accounts, it was
printed in _Every Week_, a popular illustrated periodical formerly
published by the Crowell Publishing Company, New York.

    THE THINGS WE LEARNED TO DO WITHOUT

    We were married within a month of our commencement, after three
    years of courtship at a big Middle West university. Looking back, it
    seems to me that rich, tumultuous college life of ours was wholly
    pagan. All about us was the free-handed atmosphere of "easy money,"
    and in our "crowd" a tacit implication that a good time was one of
    the primary necessities of life. Such were our ideas when we married
    on a salary of one hundred dollars a month. We took letters of
    introduction to some of the "smart" people in a suburb near Chicago,
    and they proved so delightfully cordial that we settled down among
    them without stopping to consider the discrepancies between their
    ways and our income. We were put up at a small country club--a
    simple affair enough, comparatively speaking--that demanded six
    weeks' salary in initial dues and much more in actual subsequent
    expense. "Everybody" went out for Saturday golf and stayed for
    dinner and dancing.

    By fall there was in working operation a dinner club of the "younger
    married set," as our local column in the city papers called us; an
    afternoon bridge club; and a small theater club that went into town
    every fortnight for dinner and a show. Costly little amusements, but
    hardly more than were due charming young people of our opportunities
    and tastes. I think that was our attitude, although we did not admit
    it. In September we rented a "smart" little apartment. We had
    planned to furnish it by means of several generous checks which were
    family contributions to our array of wedding gifts. What we did was
    to buy the furniture on the instalment plan, agreeing to pay twenty
    dollars a month till the bill was settled, and we put the furniture
    money into running expenses.

    It was the beginning of a custom. They gave most generously, that
    older generation. Visiting us, Max's mother would slip a bill into
    my always empty purse when we went shopping; or mine would drop a
    gold piece into my top bureau drawer for me to find after she had
    gone. And there were always checks for birthdays.

    Everything went into running expenses; yet, in spite of it, our
    expenses ran quite away. Max said I was "too valuable a woman to put
    into the kitchen," so we hired a maid, good-humoredly giving her
    _carte blanche_ on the grocery and meat market. Our bills, for all
    our dining out, were enormous. There were clothes, too. Max
    delighted in silk socks and tailored shirts, and he ordered his
    monogramed cigarettes by the thousand. My own taste ran to expensive
    little hats.

    It is hardly necessary to recount the details. We had our first
    tremendous quarrel at the end of six months, when, in spite of our
    furniture money and our birthday checks, we found ourselves two
    hundred and fifty dollars in debt. But as we cooled we decided that
    there was nothing we could do without; we could only be "more
    careful."

    Every month we reached that same conclusion. There was nothing we
    could do without. At the end of the year on a $1200 salary we were
    $700 behind; eight months later, after our first baby came, we were
    over a thousand--and by that time, it seemed, permanently estranged.
    I actually was carrying out a threat of separation and stripping the
    apartment, one morning, when Max came back from town and sat down to
    discuss matters with me.

    A curious labyrinthine discussion it was, winding from
    recriminations and flat admissions that our marriage was a failure
    and our love was dead, to the most poignant memories of our
    engagement days. But its central point was Max's detached insistence
    that we make marriage over into a purely utilitarian affair.

    "Man needs the decencies of a home," he said over and over. "It
    doesn't do a fellow any good with a firm like mine to have them know
    he can't manage his affairs. And my firm is the kind of firm I want
    to work for. This next year is important; and if I spend it dragging
    through a nasty divorce business, knowing that everybody knows, I'll
    be about thirty per cent efficient. I'm willing to admit that
    marriage--even a frost like ours--is useful. Will you?"

    I had to. My choice rested between going home, where there were two
    younger sisters, or leaving the baby somewhere and striking out for
    myself.

    "It seems to me," said Max, taking out his pencil, "that if two
    reasonably clever people can put their best brain power and eight
    hours a day into a home, it might amount to something sometime. The
    thing resolves itself into a choice between the things we can do
    without and the things we can't. We'll list them. We can't do
    without three meals and a roof; but there must be something."

    "You can certainly give up silk socks and cigarettes," I said; and,
    surprisingly, on this old sore point between us Max agreed.

    "You can give up silk stockings, then," he said, and put them down.
    Silk socks and silk stockings! Out of all possible economies, they
    were the only things that we could think of. Finally--

    "We could make baby an excuse," I said, "and never get out to the
    club till very late--after dinner--and stay just for the dancing.
    And we could get out of the dinner club and the theater bunch. Only,
    we ought to have some fun."

    "You can go to matin√©es, and tell me about them, so we can talk
    intelligently. We'll say we can't leave the kid nights--"

    "We can buy magazines and read up on plays. We'll talk well enough
    if we do that, and people won't know we haven't been. Put down:
    'Magazines for plays.'"

    He did it quite seriously. Do we seem very amusing to you? So
    anxious lest we should betray our economies--so impressed with our
    social "position" and what people might think! It is funny enough to
    me, looking back; but it was bitter business then.

    I set myself to playing the devoted and absorbed young mother. But
    it was a long, long time before it became the sweetest of realities.
    I cried the first time I refused a bridge game to "stay with baby";
    and I carried a sore heart those long spring afternoons when I
    pushed his carriage conspicuously up and down the avenue while the
    other women motored past me out for tea at the club. Yet those long
    walks were the best thing that ever happened to me. I had time to
    think, for one thing; and I gained splendid health, losing the
    superfluous flesh I was beginning to carry, and the headaches that
    usually came after days of lunching and bridge and dining.

    I fell into the habit, too, of going around by the market, merely to
    have an objective, and buying the day's supplies. The first month of
    that habit my bills showed a decrease of $16.47. I shall always
    remember that sum, because it is certainly the biggest I have ever
    seen. I began to ask the prices of things; and I made my first faint
    effort at applying our game of substitution to the food problem, a
    thing which to me is still one of the most fascinating factors in
    housekeeping.

    One afternoon in late summer, I found a delightful little bungalow
    in process of building, on a side street not so _very_ far from the
    proper avenue. I investigated idly, and found that the rent was
    thirty dollars less than we were paying. Yet even then I hesitated.

    It was Max who had the courage to decide.

    "The only thing we are doing without is the address," he said, "And
    that isn't a loss that looks like $360 to me."

    All that fall and winter we kept doggedly at our game of
    substitution. Max bought a ready-made Tuxedo, and I ripped out the
    label and sewed in one from a good tailor. I carried half a dozen
    dresses from the dyer's to a woman who evolved three very decent
    gowns; and then I toted them home in a box with a marking calculated
    to impress any chance acquaintance. We were so ashamed of our
    attempts at thrift that they came hard.

    Often enough we quarreled after we had been caught in some sudden
    temptation that set us back a pretty penny, and we were inevitably
    bored and cross when we refused some gayety for economy's sake. We
    resolutely decided to read aloud the evenings the others went to the
    theater club; and as resolutely we substituted a stiff game of chess
    for the bridge that we could not afford. But we had to learn to like
    them both.

    Occasionally we entertained at very small, very informal dinners,
    "on account of the baby"; and definitely discarded the wines that
    added the "smartness" demanded at formal affairs. People came to
    those dinners in their second or third best: but they stayed late,
    and laughed hilariously to the last second of their stay.

    In the spring we celebrated Max's second respectable rise in salary
    by dropping out of the country club. We could do without it by that
    time. At first we thought it necessary to substitute a determined
    tramp for the Sunday morning golf game; but we presently gave that
    up. We were becoming garden enthusiasts. And as a substitution for
    most of the pleasure cravings of life, gardening is to be highly
    recommended. Discontent has a curious little trick of flowing out of
    the earthy end of a hoe.

    Later that summer I found that a maid was one of the things I could
    do without, making the discovery in an interregnum not of my
    original choosing. A charwoman came in for the heavier work, and I
    took over the cooking. Almost immediately, in spite of my
    inexperience, the bills dropped. I could not cook rich pastries and
    fancy desserts, and fell back on simple salads and fruit instead. I
    dipped into the household magazines, followed on into technical
    articles on efficiency, substituted labor-savers wherever I could,
    and started my first muddled set of accounts.

    At the beginning of the new year I tried my prentice hand on a
    budget; and that was the year that we emerged from debt and began to
    save.

    That was six very short years ago. When, with three babies, the
    bungalow became a trifle small, we built a little country house and
    moved farther out. Several people whom we liked best among that
    first "exclusive younger set" have moved out too, and formed the
    nucleus of a neighborhood group that has wonderful times on incomes
    no one of which touches $4000 a year.

    Ours is not as much as that yet; but it is enough to leave a wide
    and comfortable margin all around our wants. Max has given up his
    pipe for cigarettes (unmonogramed), and patronizes a good tailor for
    business reasons. But in everything else our substitutions stand:
    gardening for golf; picnics for roadhouse dinners; simple food,
    simple clothing, simple hospitality, books, a fire, and a game of
    chess on winter nights.

    We don't even talk about economies any more. We like them.
    But--every Christmas there comes to me via the Christmas tree a box
    of stockings, and for Max a box of socks--heavy silk. There never is
    any card in either box; but I think we'll probably get them till we
    die.

The following short confession, signed "Mrs. M.F.E.," was awarded the
first prize by the _American Magazine_ in a contest for articles on "The
Best Thing Experience Has Taught Me":

    Forty Years Bartered for What?

    A tiny bit of wisdom, but as vital as protoplasm. I know, for I
    bartered forty precious years of wifehood and motherhood to learn
    it.

    During the years of my childhood and girlhood, our family passed
    from wealth to poverty. My father and only brother were killed in
    battle during the Civil War; our slaves were freed; our plantations
    melted from my mother's white hands during the Reconstruction days;
    our big town house was sold for taxes.

    When I married, my only dowry was a fierce pride and an overwhelming
    ambition to get back our material prosperity. My husband was making
    a "good living." He was kind, easy-going, with a rare capacity for
    enjoying life and he loved his wife with that chivalrous,
    unquestioning, "the queen-can-do-no-wrong" type of love.

    But even in our days of courting I answered his ardent love-making
    with, "And we will work and save and buy back the big house; then we
    will--" etc., etc.

    And he? Ah, alone at sixty, I can still hear echoing down the years
    his big tender laugh, as he'd say, "Oh, what a de-ah, ambitious
    little sweetheart I have!"

    He owned a home, a little cottage with a rose garden at one side of
    it--surely, with love, enough for any bride. But I--I saw only the
    ancestral mansion up the street, the big old house that had passed
    out of the hands of our family.

    I would have no honeymoon trip; I wanted the money instead. John
    kissed each of my palms before he put the money into them. My
    fingers closed greedily over the bills; it was the nest egg, the
    beginning.

    Next I had him dismiss his bookkeeper and give me the place. I
    didn't go to his store--Southern ladies didn't do that in those
    days--but I kept the books at home, and I wrote all the business
    letters. So it happened when John came home at night, tired from his
    day's work at the store, I had no time for diversions, for
    love-making, no hours to walk in the rose garden by his side--no, we
    must talk business.

    I can see John now on many a hot night--and summer _is_ hot in the
    Gulf States--dripping with perspiration as he dictated his letters
    to me, while I, my aching head near the big hot lamp, wrote on and
    on with hurried, nervous fingers. Outside there would be the evening
    breeze from the Gulf, the moonlight, the breath of the roses, all
    the romance of the southern night--but not for us!

    The children came--four, in quick succession. But so fixed were my
    eyes on the goal of Success, I scarcely realized the mystery of
    motherhood. Oh, I loved them! I loved John, too. I would willingly
    have laid down my life for him or for any one of the children. And I
    intended _sometime_ to stop and enjoy John and the children. Oh,
    yes, I was going really to _live_ after we had bought back the big
    house, and had done so and so! In the meanwhile, I held my breath
    and worked.

    "I'll be so glad," I remember saying one day to a friend, "when all
    my children are old enough to be off at school all day!" Think of
    that! Glad when the best years of our lives together were passed!
    The day came when the last little fellow trudged off to school and I
    no longer had a baby to hamper me. We were living now in the big
    old home. We had bought it back and paid for it. I no longer did
    John's bookkeeping for him--he paid a man a hundred dollars a month
    to do that--but I still kept my hand on the business.

    Then suddenly one day--John died. _Died_ in what should have been
    the prime and vigor of his life.

    I worked harder than ever then, not from necessity, but because in
    the first few years after John left I was _afraid_ to stop and
    think. So the years hurried by! One by one the children grew up and
    entered more or less successful careers of their own.... I don't
    feel that I know them so very well.

    And now that the time of life has come when I must stop and think, I
    ask myself: "What did you do with the wonderful gifts Life laid in
    your lap--the love of a good man, domestic happiness, the chance to
    know intimately four little souls?"

    And being honest I have to answer: "I bartered Life's great gifts
    for Life's pitiful extras--for pride, for show!"

    If my experience were unique it would not be worth publishing, but
    it is only too common. Think of the wives who exchange the best
    years of their lives, their husband's comfort, his peace of mind, if
    not to buy back the family mansion, then for a higher social
    position; sometimes it is merely for--clothes!

    It is to you women who still have the opportunity to "walk with John
    in the garden" that I give my dearly bought bit of experience. Stop
    holding your breath until you get this or that; stop reaching out
    blindly for to-morrow's prize; _live_ to-day!

THE "HOW-TO-DO-SOMETHING" ARTICLE. Articles the primary purpose of which
is to give directions for doing something in a particular way, are
always in demand. The simplest type is the recipe or formula containing
a few directions for combining ingredients. More elaborate processes
naturally demand more complex directions and require longer articles. In
the simpler types the directions are given in the imperative form; that
is, the reader is told to "take" this thing and that, and to "mix" it
with something else. Although such recipe directions are clear, they are
not particularly interesting. Many readers, especially those of
agricultural journals, are tired of being told to do this and that in
order to get better results. They are inclined to suspect the writer of
giving directions on the basis of untried theory rather than on that of
successful practice. There is an advantage, therefore, in getting away
from formal advice and directions and in describing actual processes as
they have been carried on successfully.

Articles intended to give practical guidance are most interesting when
cast in the form of an interview, a personal experience, or a narrative.
In an interview article, a person may indirectly give directions to
others by describing in his own words the methods that he has used to
accomplish the desired results. Or the writer, by telling his own
experiences in doing something, may give readers directions in an
interesting form.

Whatever method he adopts, the writer must keep in mind the questions
that his readers would be likely to ask if he were explaining the method
or process to them in person. To one who is thoroughly familiar with a
method the whole process is so clear that he forgets how necessary it is
to describe every step to readers unfamiliar with it. The omission of a
single point may make it impossible for the reader to understand or to
follow the directions. Although a writer need not insult the
intelligence of his readers by telling them what they already know, he
may well assume that they need to be reminded tactfully of many things
that they may have known but have possibly forgotten.

TWO PRACTICAL GUIDANCE ARTICLES. A method of filing office records, as
explained apparently by the man who devised it, is well set forth in the
following combination of the personal experience and the
"how-to-do-something" types of articles. It appeared in _System_ with a
half-tone reproduction of a photograph showing a man looking over
records in a drawer of the desk at which he is seated.

    WHO'LL DO JOHN'S WORK?

    BY M. C. HOBART

    "It's a quarter after 8 and Schuyler hasn't showed up," telephoned
    Beggs, one of our foremen, last Tuesday morning. "I've put Fanning
    on his machine, but that won't help much unless I can get somebody
    to work at Fanning's bench. Got anybody you can let me have for
    to-day?"

    I didn't know offhand. But I told Beggs I'd call him back.

    Ten minutes later a young lathe operator reported to Beggs. He was
    able to run Fanning's machine while the latter temporarily filled
    the shoes of the absent Schuyler.

    Scarcely a week passes that does not bring a similar call to our
    employment office. While our plant, as plants go, is not large, we
    always have a number of men working with us who are fitted by
    experience and adaptability to do other work than that which they
    are hired to do. Such men are invaluable to know about, especially
    when an operator stays away for a day or perhaps a week and the shop
    is full of orders. Once it was a problem to find the right man
    immediately. A few additions to our employment records made it
    possible to keep track of each man's complete qualifications.

    The employment records I keep in my desk in the deep drawer. They
    are filed alphabetically by name. When we hire a man we write his
    name and the job he is to fill on the outside of a 9 by 12 manila
    envelope. Into this envelope we put his application, his references,
    and other papers. His application tells us what kinds of work he can
    do and has done in other shops.

    There are 29 different kinds of work to be done in our shops, from
    gear cutting to running errands. I have listed these operations,
    alphabetically, on a cardboard the exact length of the employment
    record envelope, 12 inches. When a man tells me in his application
    that he not only can operate a drill press, for which he is hired,
    but has also worked at grinding, I fit my cardboard list to the top
    of the employment record envelope and punch two notches along the
    top directly opposite the words "drill press" and "grinding" on my
    list. Then I file away the envelope.

    I rest secure now in my knowledge that I have not buried a potential
    grinder in a drill press operator, or that I do not have to carry
    his double qualifications in my mind. I know that if Beggs should
    suddenly telephone me some morning that his grinder is absent--sick,
    or fishing, perhaps--I need only take my cardboard list and,
    starting at A, run it down my file until I come to the envelope of
    the drill press operator. I am stopped there automatically by the
    second notch on the envelope which corresponds in position to the
    word "grinder" on my list.

    And there is every likelihood that, with the necessary explanation
    to the man's own foreman, Beggs will get his grinder for the day.

From the following article, printed in _Farm and Fireside_ city and
country readers alike may glean much practical information concerning
ways and means of making a comfortable living from a small farm. It was
illustrated by four half-tone reproductions of photographs showing (1)
the house, (2) the woman at her desk with a typewriter before her, (3)
the woman in her dining-room about to serve a meal from a labor-saving
service wagon, and (4) the woman in the poultry yard with a basket of
eggs.

    TEN ACRES AND A LIVING

    SHE WAS YOUNG, POPULAR, AND HAD BEEN REARED IN THE CITY. EVERYBODY
    LAUGHED WHEN SHE DECIDED TO FARM--BUT THAT WAS FOUR YEARS AGO

    BY ALICE MARY KIMBALL

    When she decided to be a farmer everybody laughed. She was young,
    popular, unusually fond of frocks and fun. She had been reared in
    the city. She didn't know a Jersey from a Hereford, or a Wyandotte
    from a Plymouth Rock.

    "You'll be back in six months," her friends said.

    Four years have passed. Mrs. Charles S. Tupper still is "buried" in
    the country. Moreover, she is supplying eggs, chickens, honey, and
    home-canned goods to those of her former associates who are willing
    to pay for quality.

    "Farming," said Mrs. Tupper, "is the ideal vocation for the woman
    who feels the modern desire for a job and the need of marriage and a
    home.

    "I never wanted a job so keenly as when I found myself in a small
    city apartment without enough to do to keep me busy. After I'd swept
    and dusted and prepared meals for two, I had hours of time on my
    hands. The corner bakeshop, the laundry, and modern conveniences had
    thrust upon me more leisure than I could use. Mr. Tupper is a young
    engineer whose work takes him to various parts of the Southwest. In
    his absence I felt strongly the need of filling up my idle hours in
    some interesting, useful way.

    "I didn't quite like the idea of spending all my spare time on
    cards, calling, women's clubs, and social pleasures. I longed to be
    a real partner to my husband and to share in making the family
    income as well as spending it.

    "We had a few thousand saved for a home, and were trying to decide
    where to build. One day it flashed upon me: 'Why invest in city
    property? Why not a little farm? Then we'll have a home; I'll have a
    job, and can make our living.'"

    The idea materialized into a modern bungalow on a 10-acre farm in
    Westdale, Missouri, an hour's drive from Kansas City. Mr. Tupper's
    salary furnished working capital for the enterprise and Mrs. Tupper
    has found congenial work as farmer-in-chief.

    Poultry, bees, and a vegetable garden are Mrs. Tupper's
    specialities. Her side lines are a pig and a registered Jersey cow.
    She looks after the poultry, works in garden and apiary, and milks
    the cow herself. She employs very little help.

    "It wasn't difficult to get a start in learning to farm," Mrs.
    Tupper explained. "I visited farms and studied the methods of
    farmers and their wives. I asked lots of questions.

    "I didn't have any old fogyisms to unlearn, and I didn't acquire
    any. I went straight to the agricultural college and the state
    poultry experiment station for instructions. While I was living in
    the country supervising the building of the bungalow, I read and
    digested every bulletin I could get. I'm still studying bulletins. I
    subscribe for several farm papers and a bee journal.

    "Of course, I learned a great deal from the practical experience of
    the people about me, but I checked up everything to the rules and
    directions of government and state agricultural experts, which may
    be had for the price of a postage stamp. I tried to take orders
    intelligently. I ignored old rules for poultry and bee-keeping."

    Mrs. Tupper's chickens are hatched in incubators, hovered in a
    coal-heated brooder house, fed according to experiment-station
    directions, and reared in poultry houses built from
    experiment-station designs. From the first they have been
    practically free from lice and disease. She gets winter eggs. Even
    in zero weather and at times when feed is most costly, her spring
    pullets more than pay their way.

    "Bees responded as readily to proper treatment," she said. "My
    second season I harvested $265 worth of comb honey from twenty
    working swarms. And I was stung not a half-dozen times at that."

    Some of Mrs. Tupper's neighbors were inclined to joke at first at
    her appetite for bulletins, her belief in experts, and her rigid
    insistence on pure-bred stock and poultry. They admit now that her
    faith has been justified.

    If Mrs. Tupper had trod in the well-worn neighborhood ruts, she
    would have marketed her produce by the
    country-store-commission-man-retailer-consumer route; but again she
    did not. From the first she planned to plug the leakage of farm
    profits in middlemen's commissions. When she had anything to sell,
    she put on a good-looking tailored suit, a becoming hat, smart shoes
    and gloves, and went to the city to talk to ultimate consumers.

    The consciousness of being dressed appropriately--not expensively or
    ornately--is a valuable aid to the farm saleswoman, Mrs. Tupper
    thinks.

    "If a salesman comes to me shabbily dressed or flashily dressed, I
    can't give him a fair hearing," she said. "I may let him talk on,
    but I decide against him the instant I look at him. So I reasoned
    that a trim, pleasing appearance would be as valuable an asset to me
    as to the men who sell pickles, insurance, or gilt-edged bonds. It
    would mean a favorable first impression and open the way to show
    samples and make a sales talk.

    "If I tried to interview a prospective customer handicapped by the
    consciousness that my skirt hung badly or that my shoes were shabby,
    not only would I be timid and ill at ease, but my appearance would
    suggest to the city buyer the very slipshodness and lack of
    reliability he fears in buying direct from the farm.

    "I go strong on attractive samples. It would be useless to try for
    fancy prices if I brought honey to town in mean-looking cases or
    rusty cans. A slight drip down the side of a package might not be
    proof positive of poor quality, but it would frighten away a careful
    buyer. Likewise, I do not illustrate my egg sales talks with a
    sample dozen of odd sizes and shapes. It is needless to add that
    goods delivered to customers must be of the same quality and
    appearance as the samples, and that one must keep one's promises to
    the dot. A little well-directed enterprise will land a customer, but
    only good service can hold him."

    When the current wholesale price of honey was $3 a case, Mrs.
    Tupper's comb honey has been in demand at from 20 to 30 cents a
    pound. She disposes of every pound to private customers and to one
    grocery store which caters to "fancy" trade. She sells eggs from her
    400 Anconas at from 4 to 6 cents more a dozen than the country
    store is paying its patrons who bring in eggs and "take them out in
    trade."

    Mrs. Tupper figured that if a trademark has advertising pull for a
    manufacturing concern, it would help the farm business. She
    christened her 10 acres "Graceland Farm," and this name is stamped
    on everything that leaves her place. She had cards printed bearing
    the name of the farm, its telephone number, and its products.
    Graceland Farm is also emphasized on letter heads.

    "Prompt attention to correspondence is an easy method of advertising
    a farm business," she suggested. "A typewritten letter on letterhead
    stationery, mailed promptly, creates a pleasant impression on the
    man who has written to inquire the price of a setting of eggs or a
    trio of chickens.

    "Suppose I delayed a week and wrote the reply with pen and ink, or,
    worse, with a pencil on ruled tablet paper. I'd stand a good chance
    of losing a customer, wouldn't I? If I didn't miss an order
    outright, I should certainly leave a suggestion of inefficiency and
    carelessness which could only be charged to the debit side of the
    business."

    She has found that a $50 typewriter and a letter file have helped
    greatly to create the good-will which is as essential to the farmer
    business woman as to the woman who runs a millinery shop or an
    insurance office.

    Mrs. Tupper has encouraged automobile trade. Her apiary is within
    sight of the road, and a "Honey for Sale" sign brings many a
    customer. Many of her city patrons have the habit of driving to the
    farm and returning with a hamper laden with eggs, honey, butter, or
    canned stuff from the vegetable garden. The garden last summer
    supplied material for more than 900 cans of vegetables.

    The neighbors smile at her zeal for fairs and poultry shows.

    "It isn't fun altogether; it's business," she tells them.

    It was cold, disagreeable work, for instance, to prepare an exhibit
    for the Heart of America Poultry Show at Kansas City last fall; but
    Mrs. Tupper felt repaid. She won first prize on hen, first and
    second on pullet, and fourth on cockerel. Then she exhibited at the
    St. Joseph, Missouri, Poultry Show with even better success.

    "These prizes will add to the value of every chicken I have, and to
    all my poultry products. They give me another advertising point,"
    she said.

    "The shows gave me a fine opportunity to meet possible customers
    and to make friends for my business. I was on the job for days. I
    met scores of people and distributed hundreds of cards. I learned a
    lot, too, in talks with judges and experienced breeders."

    The Tupper bungalow is neat and attractive. In spite of her duties
    in the poultry house and apiary, Mrs. Tupper serves appetizing
    meals. She finds time for church work and neighborhood calls, and
    gives every Thursday to the Red Cross.

    The housework is speeded up with such conveniences as hot and cold
    water in kitchen and bathroom, and steam heat. The kitchen is an
    efficient little workshop lined by cupboards and shelves. Mrs.
    Tupper can sit before her kitchen cabinet and prepare a meal without
    moving about for ingredients and utensils. A service wagon saves
    steps between kitchen and dining-room.

    The floors of the bungalow are of hard wood. They are waxed a few
    times each year, and a little work each morning with dust mop and
    carpet sweeper keeps them in good order. The washing is sent out.

    "I couldn't earn an income from the farm if I had a farmhouse
    without modern improvements," Mrs. Tupper declared. "Reducing
    drudgery to a minimum is only plain business sense. Laundry work,
    scrubbing, and dishwashing have a low economic value. Such unskilled
    labor eats up the time and strength one needs for the more
    profitable and interesting tasks of farm management, accounting and
    correspondence, advertising and marketing."

THE PERSONALITY SKETCH. We all like to read about prominent and
successful people. We want to know more about the men and women who
figure in the day's news, and even about interesting persons whose
success has not been great enough to be heralded in the press. What
appeals to us most about these individuals is, not mere biographical
facts such as appear in _Who's Who_, but the more intimate details of
character and personality that give us the key to their success. We want
to see them as living men and women. It is the writer's problem to
present them so vividly that we shall feel as if we had actually met
them face to face.

The purpose of the personality sketch may be (1) to give interesting
information concerning either prominent or little known persons, (2) to
furnish readers inspiration that may bear fruit in their own lives, (3)
to give practical guidance by showing how one individual has
accomplished a certain thing. Whether the aim is to afford food for
thought, inspiration to action, or guidance in practical matters, the
treatment is essentially the same.

The recognized methods of describing characters in fiction may be used
to advantage in portraying real persons. These are (1) using general
descriptive terms, (2) describing personal appearance, (3) telling of
characteristic actions, (4) quoting their words, (5) giving biographical
facts, (6) citing opinions of others about them, (7) showing how others
react to them. By a judicious combination of several of these methods, a
writer can make his readers visualize the person, hear him speak, watch
him in characteristic actions, and understand his past life, as well as
realize what others think of him and how they act toward him.

Material for a personality sketch may be obtained in one of three ways:
(1) from a more or less intimate acquaintance with the person to be
described; (2) from an interview with the person, supplemented by
conversation with others about him; (3) from printed sketches of him
combined with information secured from others. It is easier to write
personality sketches about men and women whom we know well than it is
about those whom we have never met, or with whom we have had only a
short interview. Inexperienced writers should not attempt to prepare
sketches of persons whom they know but slightly. In a single interview a
writer who is observant, and who is a keen judge of human nature, may be
able to get an impression sufficiently strong to serve as the basis of a
satisfactory article, especially if the material obtained in the
interview is supplemented by printed sketches and by conversations with
others. Personality sketches sometimes include long interviews giving
the person's opinions on the subject on which he is an authority. In
such articles the sketch usually precedes the interview.

EXAMPLES OF THE PERSONALITY SKETCH. The first of the following sketches
appeared, with a half-tone portrait, in the department of "Interesting
People" in the _American Magazine_; the second was sent out by the
Newspaper Enterprise Association, Cleveland, Ohio, which supplies
several hundred daily newspapers with special features.

    (1)

    "TOMMY"--WHO ENJOYS STRAIGHTENING OUT THINGS

    BY SAMPSON RAPHAELSON

    Six years ago a young Bulgarian immigrant, dreamy-eyed and shabby,
    came to the University of Illinois seeking an education. He inquired
    his way of a group of underclassmen and they pointed out to him a
    large red building on the campus.

    "Go there," they said gayly, "and ask for Tommy."

    He did, and when he was admitted to the presence of Thomas Arkle
    Clark, Dean of Men, and addressed him in his broken English as
    "Mis-terr Tommy," the dean did not smile. Although Mr. Clark had
    just finished persuading an irascible father to allow his reprobate
    sophomore son to stay at college, and although he was facing the
    problem of advising an impetuous senior how to break an engagement
    with a girl he no longer loved, he adapted himself to the needs and
    the temperament of the foreigner instantly, sympathetically, and
    efficiently.

    In five minutes the Bulgarian had a job, knew what courses in
    English he ought to take, and was filled with a glow of hope,
    inspiration, and security which only a genius in the art of
    graciousness and understanding like "Tommy Arkle," as he is amiably
    called by every student and alumnus of Illinois, can bestow.

    This is a typical incident in the extremely busy, richly human daily
    routine of the man who created the office of Dean of Men in American
    universities. Slender, short, well-dressed, his gray hair smartly
    parted, with kindly, clever, humorous blue eyes and a smile that is
    an ecstasy of friendliness, "Tommy" sits behind his big desk in the
    Administration Building from eight to five every day and handles all
    of the very real troubles and problems of the four thousand-odd men
    students at the University of Illinois.

    He averages one hundred callers a day, in addition to answering a
    heavy mail and attendance upon various committee, board, and
    council meetings. He is known all over the country as an authority
    on fraternities and their influence, and a power for making that
    influence constantly better and finer. In business, farmer, and
    school circles in the Middle West Mr. Clark is famous for his
    whimsical, inspiring speeches. His quick, shaft-like humor, his
    keen, devastating sarcasm, and his rare, resilient sympathy have
    made him a personality beloved particularly by young persons.

    They still tell the story on the campus of an ingenuous youngster
    who walked into the dean's office one fall, set his suitcase on the
    floor, and drawing two one-dollar bills and a fifty-cent piece from
    his pocket, laid the money on the big desk, saying:

    "That's all the money I have. I've come to work my way through. Will
    you help me to get a job?"

    In a flash "Tommy" noted the boy's eager, imaginative brown eyes,
    his wide, compact lips and strong jaw. Reaching over, he took the
    two bills and pocketed them, leaving the half-dollar.

    "The traditional great men," said the dean, "started their
    university careers with only fifty cents. I don't want you to be
    handicapped, so I'll keep this two dollars. You can get work at ----
    Green Street waiting on table for your meals, and the landlady at
    ---- Chalmers Street wants a student to fire her furnace in exchange
    for room rent."

    The boy earned his way successfully for several months. Then
    suddenly he was taken sick. An operation was necessary. Mr. Clark
    wired for a Chicago specialist and paid all expenses out of his own
    pocket. The student recovered, and two years after he was graduated
    sent "Tommy" a letter enclosing a check for five hundred dollars.
    "To redeem my two dollars which you have in trust," the letter said,
    "and please use the money as a medical fund for sick students who
    need, but cannot afford, Chicago specialists."

    The dean has an abnormal memory for names and faces. Every year he
    makes a "rogues' gallery"--the photographs of all incoming freshmen
    are taken and filed away. And many an humble, unknown freshman has
    been exalted by the "Hello, Darby," or "Good morning,
    Boschenstein"--or whatever his name happened to be--with which the
    dean greeted him.

    Mr. Clark once revealed to me the secret of his life. Fifteen years
    ago he was professor of English and had strong literary ambitions,
    with no little promise. There came the offer of the office of Dean
    of Men. He had to choose between writing about peoples lives or
    living those lives with people. And he chose, with the result that
    at all times of the day and night it's "Tommy this, and Tommy that";
    an accident case may need him at two A.M. in the hospital, or a
    crowd of roystering students may necessitate his missing a night's
    sleep in order to argue an irate sheriff into the conviction that
    they are not robbers and murderers. He has been known to spend many
    evenings in the rooms of lonesome students who "need a friend."

    "Tommy Arkle" is one of the Middle West's finest contributions to
    the modern ideal of human service.


    (2)

    TWO NEW MACHINE GUNS ARE INVENTED FOR THE U.S. ARMY BY THE "EDISON
    OF FIREARMS"

    BY HARRY B. HUNT

    HARTFORD, CONN., NOV. 12.--"Well, Old J.M. has done it again."

    That is the chief topic of conversation these days in the big shops
    of Hartford, New Haven and Bridgeport, where the bulk of the rifles,
    pistols and machine guns for Uncle Sam's army is being turned out.

    For in these towns to say that "Old J.M. has done it again" is the
    simplest and most direct way of stating that John M. Browning has
    invented a new kind of firearm.

    This time, however, "Old J.M." has done it twice. He has invented
    not one, but two new guns. Both have been accepted by the United
    States government, contracts for immense numbers of each have been
    signed, and work of production is being pushed night and day. The
    new weapons will be put into the field against Germany at the
    earliest possible day.

    Who is John Browning? You never heard of him?

    Well, Browning is the father of rapid-fire and automatic firearms.
    His is the brain behind practically every basic small firearm
    invention in the past 40 years. He has been to the development of
    firearms what Edison has been to electricity.

    "Unquestionably the greatest inventor of firearms in the world," is
    the unanimous verdict of the gun experts of the Colt, Remington and
    Winchester plants, whose business it is to study and criticise every
    development in firearms.

    But if Browning is our greatest gun inventor, he is the most
    "gun-shy" genius in the country when it comes to publicity. He
    would rather face a machine gun than a reporter.

    A few years ago a paper in his home state--Utah--published a little
    story about his success as an inventor, and the story was copied by
    the Hartford Courant.

    "I'd rather have paid $1,000 cash than have had that stuff printed,"
    Browning says.

    Friends, however, who believe that the world should know something
    about this firearms wizard, furnish the following sidelights on his
    career:

    Browning comes from an old-stock Mormon family of Ogden, Utah. As a
    young man he was a great hunter, going off into the woods for a
    month or six weeks at a time, with only his gun for company. He was
    only 24 when he worked out his ideas for a gun carrying a magazine
    full of cartridges, which could be fired rapidly in succession. He
    pounded out the parts for his first rapid-fire gun with hammer and
    cold chisel.

    Since that time, pump and "trombone" shotguns, automatic pistols,
    rapid-fire rifles produced by the biggest firearms manufacturers in
    the country have been Browning's products.

    The United States army pistol is a Browning invention.

    A Browning pistol manufactured by the Fabrique Nationale of Belgium
    was made the standard equipment for the armies of Belgium, Russia,
    Spain, Italy and Serbia.

    On completion of the one-millionth pistol by the Fabrique Nationale,
    King Albert of Belgium knighted the modest inventor, so he is now,
    officially, "Sir" John Browning.

    Browning is tall, slender, slightly stooped, 62, bald except for a
    rim of gray hair, and wears a closely clipped gray moustache. His
    face is marked by a network of fine lines.

    Although Browning will not talk of himself or of his career as an
    inventor, he can't help talking when the conversation is turned on
    guns.

    "I always think of a gun as something that is made primarily to
    shoot," he says. "The best gun is the simplest gun. When you begin
    loading a gun up with a lot of fancy contraptions and 'safety
    devices,' you are only inviting trouble. You complicate the
    mechanism and make that many more places for dirt and grit to clog
    the action.

    "You can make a gun so 'safe' that it won't shoot."

    Of Browning's new guns it is not, of course, permissible to give any
    details. One, however, is a light rapid-fire gun, weighing only 15
    pounds, which can be fired from the shoulder like the ordinary
    rifle. Each magazine carries 20 rounds and the empty magazine can be
    detached and another substituted by pressing a button.

    The heavier gun is a belt-fed machine, capable of firing 600 shots a
    minute. Although it is water-cooled, it weighs, water jacket and
    all, only 28 pounds. For airplane work, where the firing is in
    bursts and the speed of the machine helps cool the gun, the jacket
    is discarded and the gun weighs only 20 pounds.

    Both guns are counted upon as valuable additions to the equipment of
    our overseas forces.

THE NARRATIVE IN THE THIRD PERSON. Although the interview, the personal
experience article, and the confession story are largely narrative, they
are always told in the first person, whereas the term "narrative
article" as used in this classification is applied only to a narrative
in the third person. In this respect it is more like the short story. As
in the short story so in the narrative article, description of persons,
places, and objects involved serves to heighten the effect.

Narrative methods may be employed to present any
group of facts that can be arranged in chronological order.
A process, for example, may be explained by showing a man
or a number of men engaged in the work involved, and by
giving each step in the process as though it were an incident
in a story. The story of an invention or a discovery may
be told from the inception of the idea to its realization. A
political situation may be explained by relating the events
that led up to it. The workings of some institution, such
as an employment office or a juvenile court, may be made
clear by telling just what takes place in it on a typical
occasion. Historical and biographical material can best be
presented in narrative form.

Suspense, rapid action, exciting adventure, vivid description,
conversation, and all the other devices of the short story may be
introduced into narrative articles to increase the interest and
strengthen the impression. Whenever, therefore, material can be
given a narrative form it is very desirable to do so. A writer,
however, must guard against exaggeration and the use of fictitious
details.

EXAMPLES OF THE NARRATIVE ARTICLE. How narration with
descriptive touches and conversation may be effectively
used to explain a new institution like the community
kitchen, or the methods of recruiting employed in the
army, is shown in the two articles below. The first was
taken from the _New York World_, and the second from the
_Outlook_.

    (1)

    NOW THE PUBLIC KITCHEN

    BY MARIE COOLIDGE RASK

    The Community Kitchen Menu

    +--------------------------------------------------+
    | Vegetable soup                          pint, 3¬¢ |
    | Beef stew                          half pint, 4¬¢ |
    | Baked beans                        half pint, 3¬¢ |
    | Two frankfurters, one potato and cup full of     |
    | boiled cabbage                        all for 7¬¢ |
    | Rice pudding, 3¬¢. Stewed peaches              3¬¢ |
    | Coffee or cocoa with milk           half pint,3¬¢ |
    +--------------------------------------------------+


    "My mother wants three cents' worth of vegetable soup."

    "And mine wants enough beef stew for three of us."

    Two battered tin pails were handed up by small, grimy fingers. Two
    eager little faces were upturned toward the top of the bright green
    counter which loomed before them. Two pairs of roguish eyes smiled
    back at the woman who reached over the counter and took the pails.

    "The beef stew will be twelve cents," she said. "It is four cents
    for each half pint, you know."

    "I know," answered the youth. "My mother says when she has to buy
    the meat and all and cook it and put a quarter in the gas meter,
    it's cheaper to get it here. My father got his breakfast here, too,
    and it only cost him five cents."

    "And was he pleased?" asked the woman, carefully lowering the filled
    pail to the outstretched little hand.

    "You bet," chuckled the lad, as he turned and followed the little
    procession down the length of the room and out through the door on
    the opposite side.

    The woman was Mrs. William K. Vanderbilt, jr.

    The boy was the son of a 'longshoreman living on "Death Avenue," in
    close proximity to the newly established People's Kitchen, situated
    on the southeast corner of Tenth Avenue and West Twenty-seventh
    Street, New York.

    So it is here at last--the much talked of, long hoped for, community
    kitchen.

    Within three days after its doors had been opened to the public more
    than 1,100 persons had availed themselves of its benefits. Within
    three years, it is promised, the community kitchen will have become
    national in character. Its possibilities for development are
    limitless.

    Way was blazed for the pioneer kitchen by Edward F. Brown, executive
    secretary of the New York school lunch committee.

    The active power behind the cauldrons of soup, cabbage and
    frankfurters, beans and rice pudding is vested in Mrs. James A.
    Burden, jr., and Mrs. William K. Vanderbilt, jr.

    The evolution of the community kitchen is going to be of interest to
    every housewife and to every wage earner in all classes of society.

    First of all, let it be distinctly understood that the kitchen as
    inaugurated is not a charity. It is social and philanthropic in
    character, and it will ultimately reduce the cost of living by
    almost 50 per cent. This much has been demonstrated already to the
    extent that the Tenth Avenue kitchen has not only paid expenses, but
    has so overrun its confines that plans are in preparation for the
    establishment of other and larger kitchens in rapid succession.

    The object is to give to the purchaser the maximum quantity of
    highest grade food, properly cooked, at minimum cost. This cost
    includes rent, light, heat, power, interest on investment,
    depreciation, cost of food materials, labor and supervision. The
    principle is that of barter and sale on an equitable business basis.

    The project as now formulated is to establish for immediate use a
    small group of public kitchens having one central depot. This depot
    will be in constant operation throughout the twenty-four hours. Here
    the food will be prepared and distributed to the smaller kitchens
    where, by means of steam tables, it can be kept hot and dispensed.
    The character of the food to be supplied each district will be
    chosen with regard to what the population is accustomed to, that
    which is simple and wholesome, which contains bulk, can be prepared
    at minimum cost, can be conveniently dispensed and easily carried
    away.

    Opposite a large school building, in a small room that had been at
    one time a saloon, the kitchen of the century was fitted up and
    formally opened to the public.

    Three long green tables with green painted benches beside them
    encircle the room on two sides. Their use was manifest the second
    day after the kitchen was opened.

    At 4 o'clock in the morning, from various tenement homes near by,
    sturdy 'longshoremen and laborers might have been seen plodding
    silently from their respective homes, careful not to disturb their
    wives and families, and heading straight for the new kitchen on the
    corner. From trains running along "Death Avenue" came blackened
    trainmen after their night's work. They, too, stopped at the corner
    kitchen. By the time the attendant arrived to unlock the doors forty
    men were in line waiting for breakfast.

    Ten minutes later the three tables were fully occupied.

    "Bread, cereal and coffee for five cents!" exclaimed one of the men,
    pushing the empty tray from him, after draining the last drop of
    coffee in his mug. "This kitchen's all right."

    Noon came. The children from the school building trooped in.

    "My mamma works in a factory," said one. "I used to get some cakes
    at a bakery at noontime. Gee! There's raisins in this rice puddin',
    ain't there?" He carried the saucerful of pudding over to the table.
    "Only three cents," he whispered to the little girl beside him. "You
    better get some, too. That'll leave you two cents for a cup of
    cocoa."

    "Ain't it a cinch!" exclaimed the little girl.

    Behind the counter the women who had made these things possible
    smiled happily and dished out pudding, beans and soup with generous
    impartiality. The daughter of Mrs. Vanderbilt appeared.

    "I'm hungry, mother," she cried. "I'll pay for my lunch."

    "You'll have to serve yourself," was the rejoinder of the busy woman
    with the tin pail in her hand. "There's a tray at the end of the
    counter--but don't get in the way."

    So rich and poor lunched together.

    "Oh, but I'm tired!" exclaimed a woman, who, satchel in hand,
    entered, late in the afternoon, "It's hard to go home and cook
    after canvassing all day. Will you mind if I eat supper here?"

    Then the women and children poured in with pails and dishes and
    pans.

    "We're getting used to it now," said one. "It's just like a store,
    you know, and it saves us a lot of work--"

    "And expense! My land!" cried another. "Why, my man has only been
    working half time, and the pennies count when you've got children to
    feed and clothe. When I go to work by the day it's little that's
    cooked at home. Now--" She presented a dish as the line moved along.
    "Beef stew for four," she ordered, "and coffee in this pitcher,
    here."


    (2)

    GATHERING IN THE RAW RECRUIT

    BY KINGSLEY MOSES

    MEN WANTED FOR THE UNITED STATES ARMY

    A tall, gaunt farmer boy with a very dirty face and huge gnarled
    hands stood open-mouthed before the brilliant poster displayed
    before the small-town recruiting office. In his rather dull mind he
    pictured himself as he would look, straight and dignified, in the
    khaki uniform, perhaps even with the three stripes of the sergeant
    on his arm.

    "Fifteen dollars a month," he thought to himself, "and board and
    clothes and lodgings and doctor's bills. Why, that's more than I'm
    gettin' now on the farm! I'd see the world; I might even get to
    learn a regular trade." He scratched his chin thoughtfully. "Well, I
    ain't gettin' nowhere now, that's sure," he concluded, and slowly
    climbed the stairs.

    This boy had not come to his decision in a moment. His untrained but
    thoroughly honest mind worked slowly. He had been pondering the
    opportunities of army life for many weeks. The idea had come to him
    by chance, he thought.

    Over a month ago he had been plowing the lower forty of Old Man
    Huggins's farm. The road to the mountains lay along one side of the
    field, and as the boy turned and started to plow his furrow toward
    the road he noticed that a motor cycle had stopped just beyond the
    fence. "Broke down," the boy commented to himself, as he saw the
    tan-clad rider dismounting. Over the mule's huge back he watched as
    he drew nearer. "Why, the rider was in uniform; he must be a
    soldier!"

    Sure enough, when the fence was reached the boy saw that the
    stranger was dressed in the regulation khaki of Uncle Sam, with the
    U.S. in block letters at the vent of the collar and two stripes on
    the left sleeve.

    "Broke down?" the boy queried, dropping his plow-handles.

    The corporal grunted and continued to potter with the machine.

    "You in the army?" the boy continued, leaning on the fence.

    "You bet!" assented the soldier. Then, looking up and taking in the
    big, raw-boned physique of the youngster, "Ever think of joinin'?"

    "Can't say's I did."

    "Got any friends in the army?"

    "Nope."

    "Fine life." The motor cycle was attracting little of the recruiting
    officer's attention now, for he was a recruiting officer, and
    engaged in one of the most practical phases of his work.

    "Them soldiers have a pretty easy life, don't they?" Evidently the
    boy was becoming interested.

    The recruiting officer laid down his tools, pulled out a pipe, and
    sat down comfortably under a small sycamore tree at the roadside.

    "Not so very easy," he replied, "but interesting and exciting." He
    paused for a minute to scrutinize the prospective recruit more
    closely. To his experienced eye the boy appeared desirable. Slouchy,
    dirty, and lazy-looking, perhaps; but there were nevertheless good
    muscles and a strong body under those ragged overalls. The corporal
    launched into his story.

    For twenty minutes the boy listened open-mouthed to the stories of
    post life, where baseball, football, and boxing divided the time
    with drilling; of mess-halls where a fellow could eat all he wanted
    to, free; of good-fellowship and fraternal pride in the
    organization; of the pleasant evenings in the amusement rooms in
    quarters. And then of the life of the big world, of which the boy
    had only dreamed; of the Western plains, of Texas, the snowy ridges
    of the great Rockies, New York, Chicago, San Francisco, the
    Philippines, Hawaii, the strange glamour of the tropics, the great
    wildernesses of the frozen North.

    "It seems 'most like as I'd like to join," was the timid venture.

    "What's your name?"

    "Steve Bishop."

    "All right, Steve, come in and see me the next time you're in town,"
    said the corporal, rising. "We'll talk it over."

    And, mounting his motor cycle, he was gone down the road in a whirl
    of red dust. Nor did the farmer boy think to wonder at the sudden
    recovery of the apparently stalled machine.

    "Missionary work," explains the corporal. "We never beg 'em to join;
    but we do sort of give 'em the idea. Like joinin' the Masons, you
    know," he winked, giving me the grip.

    So it happened that Steve Bishop mounted the stairs that day,
    resolved to join the army if they would take him.

    In the small, bare, but immaculately clean room at the head of the
    stairs he found his friend the corporal banging away at a
    typewriter. "How are you, Steve? Glad to see you," was the welcome.
    "Sit down a minute, and we'll talk."

    The soldier finished his page, lit his pipe again, and leisurely
    swung round in his chair.

    "Think you'll like to soldier with us?" he said.

    Unconsciously the boy appreciated the compliment; it was flattering
    to be considered on a basis of equality with this clean-cut, rugged
    man of the wide world.

    "I reckon so," he replied, almost timidly.

    "Well, how old are you, Steve?"

    "Twenty-one." The corporal nodded approval. That was all right,
    then; no tedious formality of securing signed permission from parent
    or guardian was necessary.

    Then began a string of personal questions as to previous employment,
    education, details of physical condition, moral record (for the army
    will have no ex-jailbirds), etc., and finally the question, "Why do
    you want to join?"

    "They don't know why I ask that," says the corporal, "but I have a
    mighty good reason. From the way a boy answers I can decide which
    branch of the service he ought to be connected with. If he wants to
    be a soldier just for travel and adventure, I advise the infantry or
    the cavalry; but if he seriously wants to learn and study, I
    recommend him to the coast artillery or the engineers."

    Then comes the physical examination, a vigorous but not exacting
    course of sprouts designed to find out if the applicant is capable
    of violent exertion and to discover any minor weaknesses; an
    examination of eyes, ears, teeth, and nose; and, finally, a cursory
    scrutiny for functional disorders.

    "I'll take you, Steve," the corporal finally says. "In about a week
    we'll send you to the barracks."

    "But what am I goin' to do till then? I ain't got a cent."

    "Don't worry about that. You'll eat and sleep at Mrs.
    Barrows's,"--naming a good, clean boarding-house in the town, the
    owner of which has a yearly contract with the Government to take
    care of just such embryo recruits; "in the daytime you can hang
    around town, and the police won't bother you if you behave yourself.
    If they call you for loafin' tell them you're waitin' to get into
    the army."

    In a week the district recruiting officer, a young lieutenant, drops
    in on his regular circuit. The men who have been accepted by the
    non-commissioned officer are put through their paces again, and so
    expert is the corporal in judging good material that none of Steve's
    group of eight are rejected.

    "All right," says the corporal when the lieutenant has gone; "here's
    your tickets to the training station at Columbus, Ohio, and
    twenty-eight cents apiece for coffee on the way. In these boxes
    you'll find four big, healthy lunches for each one of you. That'll
    keep you until you get to Columbus."

    One of the new recruits is given charge of the form ticket issued by
    the railway expressly for the Government; is told that when
    meal-time comes he can get off the train with the others and for
    fifty cents buy a big pail of hot coffee for the bunch at the
    station lunch-room. Then the corporal takes them all down to the
    train, tells them briefly but plainly what is expected in the way of
    conduct from a soldier, and winds up with the admonition: "And,
    boys, remember this first of all; the first duty of a soldier is
    this: do what you're told to do, do it without question, and _do it
    quick_. Good-bye."

    In twenty-four hours Steve and his companions are at the training
    station, have taken the oath of allegiance, and are safely and well
    on their way to full membership in the family of Uncle Sam.




CHAPTER VI

WRITING THE ARTICLE


VALUE OF A PLAN. Just as a builder would hesitate to erect a house
without a carefully worked-out plan, so a writer should be loath to
begin an article before he has outlined it fully. In planning a
building, an architect considers how large a house his client desires,
how many rooms he must provide, how the space available may best be
apportioned among the rooms, and what relation the rooms are to bear to
one another. In outlining an article, likewise, a writer needs to
determine how long it must be, what material it should include, how much
space should be devoted to each part, and how the parts should be
arranged. Time spent in thus planning an article is time well spent.

Outlining the subject fully involves thinking out the article from
beginning to end. The value of each item of the material gathered must
be carefully weighed; its relation to the whole subject and to every
part must be considered. The arrangement of the parts is of even greater
importance, because much of the effectiveness of the presentation will
depend upon a logical development of the thought. In the last analysis,
good writing means clear thinking, and at no stage in the preparation of
an article is clear thinking more necessary than in the planning of it.

Amateurs sometimes insist that it is easier to write without an outline
than with one. It undoubtedly does take less time to dash off a special
feature story than it does to think out all of the details and then
write it. In nine cases out of ten, however, when a writer attempts to
work out an article as he goes along, trusting that his ideas will
arrange themselves, the result is far from a clear, logical,
well-organized presentation of his subject. The common disinclination to
make an outline is usually based on the difficulty that most persons
experience in deliberately thinking about a subject in all its various
aspects, and in getting down in logical order the results of such
thought. Unwillingness to outline a subject generally means
unwillingness to think.

THE LENGTH OF AN ARTICLE. The length of an article is determined by two
considerations: the scope of the subject, and the policy of the
publication for which it is intended. A large subject cannot be
adequately treated in a brief space, nor can an important theme be
disposed of satisfactorily in a few hundred words. The length of an
article, in general, should be proportionate to the size and the
importance of the subject.

The deciding factor, however, in fixing the length of an article is the
policy of the periodical for which it is designed. One popular
publication may print articles from 4000 to 6000 words, while another
fixes the limit at 1000 words. It would be quite as bad judgment to
prepare a 1000-word article for the former, as it would be to send one
of 5000 words to the latter. Periodicals also fix certain limits for
articles to be printed in particular departments. One monthly magazine,
for instance, has a department of personality sketches which range from
800 to 1200 words in length, while the other articles in this periodical
contain from 2000 to 4000 words.

The practice of printing a column or two of reading matter on most of
the advertising pages influences the length of articles in many
magazines. To obtain an attractive make-up, the editors allow only a
page or two of each special article, short story, or serial to appear in
the first part of the magazine, relegating the remainder to the
advertising pages. Articles must, therefore, be long enough to fill a
page or two in the first part of the periodical and several columns on
the pages of advertising. Some magazines use short articles, or
"fillers," to furnish the necessary reading matter on these advertising
pages.

Newspapers of the usual size, with from 1000 to 1200 words in a column,
have greater flexibility than magazines in the matter of make-up, and
can, therefore, use special feature stories of various lengths. The
arrangement of advertisements, even in the magazine sections, does not
affect the length of articles. The only way to determine exactly the
requirements of different newspapers and magazines is to count the words
in typical articles in various departments.

SELECTION AND PROPORTION. After deciding on the length of his article,
the writer should consider what main points he will be able to develop
in the allotted space. His choice will be guided by his purpose in
writing the article. "Is this point essential to the accomplishment of
my aim?" is the test he should apply. Whatever is non-essential must be
abandoned, no matter how attractive it may be. Having determined upon
the essential topics, he next proceeds to estimate their relative value
for the development of his theme, so that he may give to each one the
space and the prominence that are proportionate to its importance.

ARRANGEMENT OF MATERIAL. The order in which to present the main topics
requires thoughtful study. A logical development of a subject by which
the reader is led, step by step, from the first sentence to the last in
the easiest and most natural way, is the ideal arrangement. An article
should march right along from beginning to end, without digressing or
marking time. The straight line, in writing as in drawing, is the
shortest distance between two points.

In narration the natural order is chronological. To arouse immediate
interest, however, a writer may at times deviate from this order by
beginning with a striking incident and then going back to relate the
events that led up to it. This method of beginning _in medias res_ is a
device well recognized in fiction. In exposition the normal order is to
proceed from the known to the unknown, to dovetail the new facts into
those already familiar to the reader.

When a writer desires by his article to create certain convictions in
the minds of his readers, he should consider the arrangement best
calculated to lead them to form such conclusions. The most telling
effects are produced, not by stating his own conclusions as strongly as
possible, but rather by skillfully inducing his readers to reach those
conclusions by what they regard as their own mental processes. That is,
if readers think that the convictions which they have reached are their
own, and were not forced upon them, their interest in these ideas is
likely to be much deeper and more lasting. It is best, therefore, to
understate conclusions or to omit them entirely. In all such cases the
writer's aim in arranging his material should be to direct his readers'
train of thought so that, after they have finished the last sentence,
they will inevitably form the desired conclusion.

With the main topics arranged in the best possible order, the writer
selects from his available material such details as he needs to amplify
each point. Examples, incidents, statistics, and other particulars he
jots down under each of the chief heads. The arrangement of these
details, in relation both to the central purpose and to each other,
requires some consideration, for each detail must have its logical place
in the series. Having thus ordered his material according to a
systematic plan, he has before him a good working outline to guide him
in writing.

PLANNING A TYPICAL ARTICLE. The process of gathering, evaluating, and
organizing material may best be shown by a concrete example. The
publication in a New York paper of a news story to the effect that the
first commencement exercises were about to be held in the only factory
school ever conducted in the city, suggested to a special feature writer
the possibility of preparing an article on the work of the school. To
obtain the necessary material, he decided to attend the exercises and to
interview both the principal of the school and the head of the factory.
In thinking over the subject beforehand, he jotted down these points
upon which to secure data: (1) the origin and the purpose of the school;
(2) its relation to the work of the factory; (3) the methods of
instruction; (4) the kind of pupils and the results accomplished for
them; (5) the cost of the school; (6) its relation to the public school
system. At the close of the graduation exercises, he secured the
desired interviews with the teacher in charge and with the head of the
firm, copied typical examples from the exhibition of the pupils' written
work, and jotted down notes on the decoration and furnishing of the
schoolroom. Since the commencement exercises had been reported in the
newspapers, he decided to refer to them only incidentally in his story.

After considering the significance of the work of the school and what
there was about it that would appeal to different classes of readers, he
decided to write his story for the magazine section of the New York
newspaper that he believed was most generally read by business men who
operated factories similar to the one described. His purpose he
formulated thus: "I intend to show how illiterate immigrant girls can be
transformed quickly into intelligent, efficient American citizens by
means of instruction in a factory school; this I wish to do by
explaining what has been accomplished in this direction by one New York
factory." He hoped that his article would lead readers to encourage the
establishment of similar schools as a means of Americanizing alien
girls. The expository type of article containing concrete examples,
description, and interviews he concluded to adopt as the form best
suited to his subject.

The average length of the special feature stories, in the magazine
section of the paper to which he intended to submit the article, proved
to be about 2000 words. In order to accomplish his purpose in an article
of this length, he selected five main topics to develop: (1) the reasons
that led the firm to establish the school; (2) the results obtained; (3)
the methods of instruction; (4) the cost of the school; (5) the
schoolroom and its equipment.

"What part of my material will make the strongest appeal to the readers
of this newspaper?" was the question he asked himself, in order to
select the best point with which to begin his article. The feature that
would attract the most attention, he believed, was the striking results
obtained by the school in a comparatively short time.

In reviewing the several types of beginnings to determine which would
best suit the presentation of these remarkable results, he found two
possibilities: first, the summary lead with a striking statement for the
first sentence; and second, a concrete example of the results as shown
by one of the pupils. He found, however, that he did not have sufficient
data concerning any one girl to enable him to tell the story of her
transformation as an effective concrete case. He determined, therefore,
to use a striking statement as the feature of a summary lead.

From his interview with the head of the firm, and from a formal
statement of the purpose of the school printed on the commencement
program, he obtained the reasons why the school had been established.
These he decided to give _verbatim_ in direct quotation form.

To show most interestingly the results of the teaching, he picked out
four of the six written exercises that he had copied from those
exhibited on the walls of the schoolroom. The first of these dealt with
American history, the second with thrift and business methods, and the
third with personal hygiene. For the fourth he selected the work of a
woman of forty whose struggles to get into the school and to learn to
write the teacher had described to him.

Figures on the cost of the school he had secured from the head of the
firm according to his preliminary plan. These covered the expense both
to the employers and to the city.

His description of the schoolroom he could base on his own observation,
supplemented by the teacher's explanations.

For his conclusion he determined to summarize the results of this
experiment in education as the firm stated them on the commencement
program, and to give his own impression of the success of the school.
Thus he sought to give final reinforcement to the favorable impression
of the school that he wished his article to create, with the aim of
leading readers to reach the conclusion that such schools should be
encouraged as invaluable aids to the Americanization of alien girls.

OUTLINING THE ARTICLE. Having selected the main topics and having
decided in a general way how he intended to develop each one, he then
fixed upon the best order in which to present them.

After his introduction giving the striking results of the school in a
summary lead, it seemed logical to explain the firm's purpose in
undertaking this unusual enterprise. He accordingly jotted down for his
second topic, "Purpose in establishing the school," with the two
sub-topics, "Firm's statement on program" and "Head of firm's statement
in interview."

The methods of-instruction by which the remarkable success was attained,
impressed him as the next important point. His readers, having learned
the results and the purpose of the school, would naturally want to know
by what methods these girls had been transformed in so short a time. As
his third topic, therefore, he put down, "Methods of instruction."

For his fourth division he had to choose between (1) the results as
shown by the pupils' written work, (2) the cost of the school, and (3)
the schoolroom and its equipment. From the point of view of logical
order either the results or the schoolroom might have been taken up
next, but, as all the explanations of the methods of instruction were
quoted directly in the words of the teacher, and as the pupils'
exercises were to be given _verbatim_, he thought it best to place his
own description of the schoolroom between these two quoted parts.
Greater variety, he foresaw, would result from such an arrangement. "The
schoolroom," then, became the fourth topic.

Since the pupils' work which he planned to reproduce had been exhibited
on the walls of the schoolroom, the transition from the description of
the room to the exhibits on the walls was an easy and logical one.

By this process of elimination, the cost of the school became the sixth
division, to be followed by the summary conclusion.

He then proceeded to fill in the details needed to develop each of
these main topics, always keeping his general purpose in mind. The
result of this organization of material was the following outline:

     I. Summary lead
         1. Striking results--time required
         2. Commencement--when and where held
         3. Graduates--number, nationality, certificates
         4. School--when and where established
         5. Example to other firms

     II. Purpose of school
         1. Firm's statement on commencement program
         2. Head of firm's statement in interview

     III. Methods of instruction
         1. Practical education
         2. Letter writing--geography, postal regulations, correspondence
         3. Arithmetic--money, expense accounts, reports of work
         4. Civics--history, biography, holidays, citizenship, patriotism
         5. Personal hygiene--cleanliness, physical culture, first aid,
            food
         6. Cotton goods--growing cotton, spinning, shipping
         7. Means of communication--telephone, directory, map of city,
            routes of travel, telephone book
         8. Study outside of classroom

     IV. The schoolroom
         1. Location--floor space, windows
         2. Decorations--flowers, motto, photograph of Miss Jessie Wilson
         3. Furnishings--piano, phonograph
         4. Library--reading to the girls, _The Promised Land_, Mary Antin,
            library cards

     V. Results shown by pupils' work
         1. Italian's theme and her remarkable progress
         2. Russian's essay on saving
         3. Polish girl's exercise about picture
         4. Woman of forty and her work

     VI. Cost of school
         1. Expense to firm
         2. Cost to Board of Education--salaries and supplies
         3. Entire cost per pupil
         4. Returns to firm outweigh cost, says employer

     VII. Summary conclusion
         1. Results quoted from program
         2. Impression made by girls receiving diplomas

THE COMPLETED ARTICLE. Since the establishment of a school in a factory
was the novel feature of the enterprise, he worked out a title based on
this idea, with a sub-title presenting the striking results accomplished
by the school. The completed article follows, with a brief analysis of
the methods used in developing the outline.


TAKING THE SCHOOL TO THE FACTORY

HOW ALIEN GIRLS ARE BEING CHANGED INTO INTELLIGENT AMERICAN WORKERS BY
INSTRUCTION DURING WORKING HOURS

In from twenty to thirty-five weeks             I. SUMMARY LEAD
an illiterate immigrant girl can be             1. Striking results
transformed into an intelligent, efficient         Striking statement
American citizen, in this city,                    in two sentence to
without interfering with the daily work            avoid unwieldy sentence.
by which she earns her living. Only
forty-five minutes a day in a factory
schoolroom is required to accomplish
such striking results.

This has just been demonstrated at              2. Commencement
the first commencement of the only                 Timeliness brought
school conducted in a New York factory.            out immediately after
The classes have been held on                      striking statement
one of the upper floors of the white
goods factory of D. E. Sicher & Co.,
49 West 21st Street, where the graduation          Address has local
exercises were held last Thursday                  interest
evening.

Forty girls--Italians, Poles, Russians,         3. Graduates
Hungarians, Austrians among                        Note concrete details
the number--received the first "certificates
of literacy" ever issued by the
Board of Education. Twenty weeks                   Striking results
ago many of these young women could                emphasized by device
not speak English; many of them had                of contrast
never been to school a day in their
lives. Every one present on Thursday               Impression on audience
night felt that this was indeed a commencement     of remarkable
for these girls.                                   results

It is due to the instruction of Miss               Teacher's name has
Florence Meyers, formerly a public                 local interest
school teacher, that the girls can now
speak English, write good letters, make
out money-orders, cash checks, and
send telegrams. They have also been                Additional concrete
taught the principles of our government,           details of striking
the importance of personal hygiene,                results
and the processes by which cotton
goods used in their work are manufactured.

The school was organized this year              4. School
at the suggestion of Dudley E. Sicher,
head of the firm, in co√∂peration with
the Board of Education, and has been
under the supervision of Miss Lizzie E.            Principal and school
Rector, Public School No. 4, Manhattan.            have local interest.

What has been accomplished in this              5. Example to other
factory, which is the largest white                firms
goods muslin underwear plant in the                Veiled suggestion to
world, will doubtless serve as an example          readers
to be followed by other firms.

Its purpose the firm expresses in           II. PURPOSE OF SCHOOL
these words: "To hasten assimilation            1. Firm's statement
necessary to national unity, to promote
industrial betterment, by reducing                 Statement in general
the friction caused by failure to comprehend       terms
directions, and to decrease the
waste and loss of wage incidental to the
illiterate worker."

"When a girl understands English                2. Head of firm's statement
and has been taught American business
and factory methods," says Mr.
Sicher, "she doesn't hesitate and                  Statement in concrete
blunder; she understands what she is               terms
told and she does it.

"Intelligent employees do much better
work than illiterate ones, and since
we can afford to pay them better wages,
they are much more contented. From
a business point of view, the school is a
good investment."

The instruction that has accomplished      III. METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
such remarkable results has
been eminently practical. "There                1. Practical education
was no time to spend in teaching the
girls anything but the most necessary              Teacher's statement
things," explains Miss Meyers, "for I              of her problem
could have each one of them for only
forty-five minutes a day, and there was
much to be done in that time.

"Here was a girl, for example, who                 Problem concretely
could hardly say 'good morning.'                   shown
Here was another who had never written
a word in her life, either in English
or in any other language. The problem
was how to give each of them what
she most needed in the short time allotted         Statement of general
every day. This essentially                        plan
practical training I organized under
several subjects, each of which was
broadly inclusive.

"When I undertook to teach letter               2. Letter writing
writing, it meant teaching the English
language, as well as writing and spelling.
It meant teaching the geography
of the country, the postal regulations,
and the forms of business and personal
correspondence.

"In teaching arithmetic, I use money            3. Arithmetic
and show them how to make change by
means of addition, subtraction, and
division. I also ask them to keep personal
expense accounts and to make
out reports of the work that they do.

"Civics included American history,              4. Civics
the lives of our statesmen--for these
girls are so eager to be true Americans
that they want to know about our great
men--the origin of legal holidays, the
merits of our system of government,
the meaning of citizenship, and the essence
of patriotism.

"Hygiene is another important                   5. Personal hygiene
subject. American standards of living,
personal cleanliness, and sanitary regulations
have to be emphasized. To
aid in counteracting the effects of long
hours at the sewing machines, we have
physical culture exercises. Instruction
in first aid measures is also given so
that they will know what to do in case
of an accident. The nutritive value of
different foods in relation to their cost
is discussed to enable them to maintain
their health by a proper diet.

"As these young women are engaged               6. Cotton goods
in making muslin underwear, it seemed
desirable for them to know where cotton
grows, how it is spun, where the
mills are and how it is shipped to New
York. After they understand the various
processes through which the material
goes before it reaches them, they
take much more interest in their work,
as a part of the manufacture of cotton
goods into clothing."

The use of the telephone, the telegraph,        7. Means of communication
the subway, surface lines, and
railways is another subject of instruction.
A dummy 'phone, telegraph                          Method of presentation
blanks, the city directory, maps with              in this paragraph
routes of rapid transit lines, and the             changed for
telephone book, are some of the practical          variety
laboratory apparatus and textbooks
that are employed.

"We encourage them to learn for                 8. Study outside of
themselves outside of school hours                 classroom
many of the necessary things that we
have not time for in the classroom,"
says the teacher.

To reach the schoolroom in which            IV. THE SCHOOLROOM
this work has been carried on, you take         1. Location
the elevator to the last floor but one of          Note effect of using
the factory building. There you find               "you"
only a portion of the floor space cleared
for tables and chairs. It is a clean,
airy room with big windows opening
on the street, made gay with boxes of
flowers.

Flags of many nations about the                 2. Decorations
room appropriately represent the many
nationalities among the pupils. On                 Note character of
one wall hangs a card with the legend:             decorations selected

    Four things come not back:
      The spoken word
      The sped arrow
      The past life
      The neglected opportunity.

A photograph of Miss Jessie Wilson,
now Mrs. Francis B. Sayre, occupies
the space between the two windows.
The picture was presented to the girls
by Miss Wilson herself, just before she            This shows enterprising
was married, when a party of them with             spirit on the
Miss Meyers went to Washington to                  part of teacher, girls,
give her a white petticoat they had                and firm
made themselves, as a wedding present.
After Miss Wilson had shown them
through the White House and they had
seen her wedding presents, she gave
them this signed photograph.

A piano and a phonograph at one                 3. Furnishings
end of the room make it possible for
the girls to enjoy dancing during the
noon hours on three days of the week,
and to have musicals on other occasions.

Shelves filled with books line the              4. Library
walls of a smaller office room opening
off the schoolroom. On two days of
the week during the noon hour, the
teacher read aloud to the girls until
they were able to read for themselves.
Then they were permitted to take
books home with them. Besides this,
they have been encouraged to use the
public libraries, after being shown how
to make out applications for library
cards.

"One girl is reading 'The Promised                 Concrete example
Land,' by Mary Antin," Miss Meyers                 has "human interest,"
tells you, "and thinks it is a wonderful           as related in
book. She was so much interested in                the teacher's own
it that I asked her to tell the others             words
about it. Although a little shy at
first, she soon forgot herself in her eagerness
to relate Miss Antin's experiences.
She told the story with such
dramatic effect that she quite carried
away her classmates. If we had done
no more than to teach this girl to read a
book that meant so much to her, I believe
our school would have justified
its existence."

Mary Antin herself accepted the                    Is this paragraph
girls' invitation to attend the graduation         out of logical order?
exercises, and made a short address.

The pupils' written work was exhibited       V. RESULTS SHOWN BY
on the walls of the room on the occasion        PUPILS' WORK
of the exercises, and showed conclusively
the proficiency that they have
attained.

The greatest progress made by any               1. Italian's theme and
of the pupils was probably that of an              progress
Italian girl. Before coming to this
country, she had attended school and               Example of greatest
besides this she had been teaching her             progress is put
father at night whatever she had                   first
learned during the day. Her short
essay on her adopted country read:

  This country is the United States                Note use of narrow
  of America. It is the land of freedom            measure without
  and liberty, because the people                  quotation marks for
  govern themselves. All citizens love             examples quoted
  their country, because they know
  that this freedom was earned by men
  who gave their lives for it. The
  United States is in North America.
  North America is one of the greatest
  divisions of the earth. North America
  was discovered on October 12,
  1492, by Christopher Columbus.

The fact that Columbus, one of her                 Is this comment by
countrymen, had discovered the country             the writer effective?
in which she and her father had
found a new life, doubtless appealed to
her keen imagination.

That a Russian girl appreciated the             2. Russian's essay on
lessons she had received in the value of           saving
opening a dime-savings account, is indicated
by this composition:

I must save money out of my earnings
to put in the bank. I know that
money is safe in the bank.

To deposit means to put money in
the bank.

Cashing a cheque means changing
a cheque for money.

How practical lessons in personal hygiene       3. Polish girl's essay
may be emphasized in connection
with the teaching of composition was
illustrated in an essay of a Polish girl
written under a picture of a woman
combing her hair:

  She wished to comb her hair.
  She takes the comb in her hand.
  She combs her hair.
  She wishes to brush her hair.
  She takes the brush in her hand.
  She brushes her hair.
  She combs and brushes her hair
    every morning.
  She washes her hair often with
    soap and water.

The pathetic eagerness of one woman             4. Woman of forty
of forty to learn to read and write was            and her work
told by Miss Meyers in connection with
one of the pieces of work exhibited.

"She was an old woman; at least she                "Human interest"
seems to me to be over fifty, although             appeal heightened
she gave her age as only forty," explained         by quoting teacher
the teacher. "She couldn't                         _verbatim_
read or even write her name. Despite
her age, she begged for a long time to
be permitted to enter the school, but
there were so many young girls who desired
to learn that they were given the
preference. She pleaded so hard that
finally I asked to have her admitted on
trial."

"It was hard work to teach her,"                   Progress in penmanship
continued Miss Meyers as she pointed               could not be
to some of the woman's writing. The                shown by quoting
first attempts were large, irregular               exercise
letters that sprawled over the sheet
like the work of a child when it begins
to write. After twenty weeks of struggle,
her work took on a form that, although
still crude, was creditable for
one who had never written until she
was over forty. "Her joy at her success
was great enough to repay me
many times over for my efforts to teach
her," remarked Miss Meyers.

The exact cost to the firm of conducting    VI. COST OF SCHOOL
the school, including the wages                 1. Expense to firm
paid for the time spent by the girls in
the classroom, has been itemized by
Mr. Sicher for the year just closed, as
follows:

  Floor space                   $175.00            Short table of figures
  Rent, light, and heat          105.00            is comprehensible
  Janitor                        357.00            and not uninteresting
  Wages at 17¬¢ an hr., 40
  girls                          375.00
                                -------
  Total cost, 40 girls          $672.00
  Total cost per girl             16.80

The Board of Education, for its part            2. Cost to Board of
of the school, paid out $560 for the               Education
teacher's salary and for supplies. This
was an expense of $14.80 for each pupil.

The entire cost for educating each              3. Entire cost per pupil
one of the forty girl workers, therefore,
was only $31.60.

That this money has been well spent             4. Returns outweigh
is the opinion of the employer, for the            cost
school work increases the efficiency in
the factory sufficiently to make up for
the time taken out of working hours.

"I would rather have these girls in                Head of firm's statement
my employ whom I can afford to pay                 given to convince
from ten to twenty dollars a week,"                readers
declares Mr. Sicher, "than many more
whom I have to pay low wages simply
because they aren't worth higher ones.
From a business point of view, it saves
space and space is money."

That the result has been what the          VII. SUMMARY CONCLUSION
firm had anticipated in establishing
the school is shown by the following            1. Results quoted from
statement which was made on the commencement       program
program: "It is the present
belief of the firm that the workers                Note appeal of
who have been thus trained have                    "efficiency" to
gained from 20 to 70 per cent in efficiency."      practical readers

How much the girls themselves have              2. Impression given
gained more vital to them even than                by girls
efficiency was very evident to everyone            Note patriotic appeal
who looked into their faces as they received       in closing
the certificates that recognize                    phrase, which was
them as "Literate American Citizens."              a happy choice.

ANOTHER ARTICLE ON THE SAME SUBJECT. This commencement at the factory
school furnished another writer, Nixola Greeley Smith, with material for
a special feature story which was sent out by a syndicate, the Newspaper
Enterprise Association, for publication in several hundred newspapers.
Her story contains only 375 words and is thus less than one fifth the
length of the other article. The author centers the interest in one of
the pupils, and shows the value of the school in terms of this girl's
experience. The girl's own account of what the school has meant to her
makes a strong "human interest" appeal. By thus developing one concrete
example effectively, the author is able to arouse more interest in the
results of the school than she would have done if in the same space she
had attempted to give a greater number of facts about it. Unlike the
longer article, her story probably would not suggest to the reader the
possibility of undertaking a similar enterprise, because it does not
give enough details about the organization and methods of the school to
show how the idea could be applied elsewhere.

The beginning of the shorter story was doubtless suggested by the
presence at the exercises of Mary Antin, the author of "The Promised
Land," who addressed the girls. The first sentence of it piques our
curiosity to know how "the promised land" has kept its promise, and the
story proceeds to tell us. The article, with an analysis of its main
points, follows:

WONDERFUL AMERICA! THINKS LITTLE AUSTRIAN
WHO GRADUATES FROM FACTORY SCHOOL

"The promised land" has kept its             I. STORY OF REBECCA
promise to Rebecca Meyer!                       MEYER

Eight months ago an illiterate Austrian         1. Striking statement
immigrant girl, unable to speak or                 beginning
write English, went to work in a New               Note effective use of
York garment factory.                              device of contrast

To-day, speaking and writing fluently
the language of her adopted country,               Second and third
proficient in other studies, she                   paragraphs show
proudly cherishes the first "certificate           striking results in
of literacy" issued by a factory--a                one concrete case.
factory which has paid her for going to
school during working hours!

It was Rebecca Meyer who received               2. Commencement
this first certificate, at the graduation          Note that Rebecca
exercises held on the top floor of the             is the central figure
big women's wear factory of D.E.
Sicher & Co. It was Rebecca Meyer
who delivered the address of welcome
to the members of the board of education,
the members of the firm, her fellow
employees, and all the others gathered
at these exercises--the first of                   Dash used to set off
their kind ever held in any commercial             unique element
establishment, anywhere!

"Isn't it wonderful!" she said.                 3. Rebecca's statement
"When I came from Austria, I hoped                 Slightly unidiomatic
to find work. That was all. How I                  English is suggestive
should learn to speak the English language,
I did not know. It might take
me years, I thought. That I should go
to school every day, while I worked--who
could dream of such a thing? It
could not be in any other country except
America."

Dudley E. Sicher, head of the firm,         II. STORY OF THE SCHOOL
in whose workrooms a regularly organized        1. Origin of school
class of the New York public                       Note method of
schools has held its sessions all winter,          introducing head of firm
stood smiling in the background. Mr.
Sicher is president of the Cotton Goods
Manufacturers' Association. It was
he who conceived the idea, about a
year ago, of increasing the efficiency
of his women employees by giving them
an education free of cost, during working
hours.

"One of the first and most noticeable           2. Results of school
results of the factory school has                  Statement of head
been a marked decrease in the friction             of firm
and the waste of time caused by the
inability of employees to comprehend
directions. A girl who understands
English, and has been enabled thereby
to school herself in factory methods
and conditions, doesn't hesitate and
blunder; she understands, and does.
And what then? Why, higher pay."

No wonder Rebecca Meyer is grateful        III. CONCLUSION
for the 45 minutes a day in which               Rebecca again made
button-sewing has given place to study--no      the central figure
wonder she thinks America must                  Appeal to reader's
be the wonderland of all the world!             pride in his country.

ARTICLES COMPOSED OF UNITS. The study of the two special feature stories
on the factory school shows how articles of this type are built up out
of a number of units, such as examples, incidents, and statistics. A
similar study of the other types of articles exemplified in Chapter V
will show that they also are made up of various kinds of units. Again,
if we turn to the types of beginnings illustrated in Chapter VII, we
shall find that they, too, are units, which in some cases might have
been used in the body of the article instead of as an introduction.
Since, then, every division of a subject may be regarded as a unit that
is complete in itself whatever its position in the article, each of the
several kinds of units may be studied separately. For this purpose we
may discuss five common types of units: (1) examples, (2) incidents, (3)
statistics, (4) scientific and technical processes, and (5) recipes and
directions.

METHODS OF DEVELOPING UNITS. In order to present these units most
effectively, and to vary the form of presentation when occasion demands,
a writer needs to be familiar with the different methods of developing
each one of these types. Four common methods of handling material
within these units are: (1) exposition, narration, or description in
the writer's own words; (2) dialogue; (3) the interview; (4) direct or
indirect quotation. Statistics and recipes may also be given in tabular
form.

When a unit may be developed with equal effectiveness by any one of
several methods, a writer should choose the one that gives variety to
his article. If, for example, the units just before and after the one
under consideration are to be in direct quotation, he should avoid any
form that involves quoted matter.

    EXAMPLES. In all types of articles the concrete example is the
    commonest and most natural means of explaining a general idea. To
    most readers, for instance, the legal provisions of an old age
    pension law would be neither comprehensible nor interesting, but a
    story showing how a particular old man had been benefited by the law
    would appeal to practically every one. That is, to explain the
    operation and advantages of such a law, we give, as one unit, the
    concrete example of this old man. Actual examples are preferable to
    hypothetical ones, but the latter may occasionally be used when real
    cases are not available. Imaginary instances may be introduced by
    such phrases as, "If, for example," or "Suppose, for instance,
    that."

    To explain why companies that insure persons against loss of their
    jewelry are compelled to investigate carefully every claim filed
    with them, a writer in the _Buffalo News_ gave several cases in
    which individuals supposed that they were entitled to payment for
    losses although subsequent investigation showed that they had not
    actually sustained any loss. One of these cases, that given below,
    he decided to relate in his own words, without conversation or
    quotation, although he might have quoted part of the affidavit, or
    might have given the dialogue between the detective and the woman
    who had lost the pin. No doubt he regarded the facts themselves,
    together with the suspense as to the outcome of the search, as
    sufficiently interesting to render unnecessary any other device for
    creating interest.

    Another woman of equal wealth and equally undoubted honesty lost a
    horseshoe diamond pin. She and her maid looked everywhere, as they
    thought, but failed to find it. So she made her "proof of loss" in
    affidavit form and asked the surety company with which she carried
    the policy on all her jewelry to replace the article.

    She said in her affidavit that she had worn the pin in a restaurant
    a few nights before and had lost it that night, either in the
    restaurant or on her way there or back. The restaurant management
    had searched for it, the restaurant help had been questioned
    closely, the automobile used that night had been gone over
    carefully, and the woman's home had been ransacked. Particular
    attention had been given to the gown worn by the woman on that
    occasion; every inch of it had been examined with the idea that the
    pin, falling from its proper place, had caught in the folds.

    The surety company assigned one of its detectives to look for the
    pin. From surface indications the loss had the appearance of a
    theft--an "inside job." The company, however, asked that its
    detective be allowed to search the woman's house itself. The request
    was granted readily. The detective then inquired for the various
    gowns which the woman had worn for dress occasions within the
    preceding several weeks.

    This line of investigation the owner of the pin considered a waste
    of time, since she remembered distinctly wearing the pin to the
    restaurant on that particular night, and her husband also remembered
    seeing it that night and put his memory in affidavit form. But the
    detective persisted and with the help of a maid examined carefully
    those other gowns.

    In the ruffle at the bottom of one of them, worn for the last time
    at least a week before the visit to the restaurant, she found the
    pin. The woman and her husband simply had been mistaken--honestly
    mistaken. She hadn't worn the pin to the restaurant, and her husband
    hadn't seen it that night. The error was unintentional, but it came
    very near costing the surety company a large sum of money.

The benefits of a newly established clinic for animals
were demonstrated in a special feature article in the _New
York Times_ by the selection of several animal patients as
typical cases. Probably the one given below did not seem
to the writer to be sufficiently striking if only the bare facts
were given, and so he undertook to create sympathy by
describing the poor, whimpering little dog and the distress
of the two young women. By arousing the sympathies of
the readers, he was better able to impress them with the
benefits of the clinic.

    The other day Daisy, a little fox terrier, was one of the patients.
    She was a pretty little thing, three months old, with a silky coat
    and big, pathetic eyes. She was escorted to the clinic by two
    hatless young women, in shawls, and three children. The children
    waited outside in the reception room, standing in a line, grinning
    self-consciously, while the women followed Daisy into the
    examination room. There she was gently muzzled with a piece of
    bandage, and the doctor examined her. There was something the matter
    with one hind leg, and the poor little animal whimpered pitifully,
    as dogs do, while the doctor searched for a broken bone. It was too
    much for one of the women. She left the room, and, standing outside
    the door, put her fingers in her ears, while the tears rolled down
    her cheeks.

    "Well, I wouldn't cry for a dog," said a workman, putting in some
    S.P.C.A. receiving boxes, with a grin, while the three children--and
    children are always more or less little savages--grinned
    sympathetically. But it was a very real sorrow for Daisy's mistress.

    There was no reason for alarm; it was only a sprain, caused by her
    mistress' catching the animal by the leg when she was giving her a
    bath. Her friends were told to take her home, bathe the leg with
    warm water, and keep her as quiet as possible. Her mistress, still
    with a troubled face, wrapped her carefully in the black shawl she
    was wearing, so that only the puppy's little white head and big,
    soft eyes peeped out, and the small procession moved away.

In a special feature story designed to show how much more intelligently
the first woman judge in this country could deal with cases of
delinquent girls in the juvenile court than could the ordinary police
court judge, a writer selected several cases that she had disposed of in
her characteristic way. The first case, which follows, he decided could
best be reported _verbatim_, as by that method he could show most
clearly the kindly attitude of the judge in dealing with even the least
appreciative of girls.

    The first case brought in the other day was that of a girl of 16,
    who hated her home and persisted in running away, sometimes to a
    married sister, and sometimes to a friend. She was accompanied by
    her mother and older sister, both with determined lower jaws and
    faces as hard as flint. She swaggered into the room in an impudent
    way to conceal the fact that her bravado was leaving her.

    "Ella," said Miss Bartelme, looking up from her desk, "why didn't
    you tell me the truth when you came in here the other day? You did
    not tell me where you had been. Don't you understand that it is much
    easier for me to help you if you speak the truth right away?"

    Ella hung her head and said nothing. The older sister scowled at the
    girl and muttered something to the mother.

    "No," refused the mother, on being questioned. "We don't want
    nothing more to do with her."

    "Humph," snorted Ella, "you needn't think I want to come back. I
    don't want nothing more to do with you, either."

    Miss Bartelme often lets the family fight things out among
    themselves; for in this way, far more than by definite questioning,
    she learns the attitude of the girl and the family toward each
    other, and indirectly arrives at most of the actual facts of the
    case.

    "How would you like to go into a good home where some one would love
    you and care for you?" asked the judge.

    "I don't want nobody to love me."

    "Why, Ella, wouldn't you like to have a kind friend, somebody you
    could confide in and go walking with and who would be interested in
    you?"

    "I don't want no friends. I just want to be left alone."

    "Well, Ella," said the judge, patiently, ignoring her sullenness, "I
    think we shall send you back to Park Ridge for a while. But if you
    ever change your mind about wanting friends let us know, because
    we'll be here and shall feel the same way as we do now about it."

To explain to readers of the _Kansas City Star_ how a bloodhound runs
down a criminal, a special feature writer asked them to imagine that a
crime had been committed at a particular corner in that city and that a
bloodhound had been brought to track the criminal; then he told them
what would happen if the crime were committed, first, when the streets
were deserted, or second, when they were crowded. In other words, he
gave two imaginary instances to illustrate the manner in which
bloodhounds are able to follow a trail. Obviously these two hypothetical
cases are sufficiently plausible and typical to explain the idea.

    If a bloodhound is brought to the scene of the crime within a
    reasonable length of time after it has been committed, and the dog
    has been properly trained, he will unfailingly run down the
    criminal, provided, of course, that thousands of feet have not
    tramped over the ground.

    If, for instance, a crime were committed at Twelfth and Walnut
    streets at 3 o'clock in the morning, when few persons are on the
    street, a well-trained bloodhound would take the trail of the
    criminal at daybreak and stick to it with a grim determination that
    appears to be uncanny, and he would follow the trail as swiftly as
    if the hunted man had left his shadow all along the route.

    But let the crime be committed at noon when the section is alive
    with humanity and remain undiscovered until after dark, then the
    bloodhound is put at a disadvantage and his wonderful powers would
    fail him, no doubt.

INCIDENTS. Narrative articles, such as personal experience stories,
confessions, and narratives in the third person, consist almost entirely
of incidents. Dialogue and description are very frequently employed in
relating incidents, even when the greater part of the incident is told
in the writer's own words. The incidents given as examples of narrative
beginnings on pages 135-37 are sufficient to illustrate the various
methods of developing incidents as units.

STATISTICS. To make statistical facts comprehensible and interesting is
usually a difficult problem for the inexperienced writer. Masses of
figures generally mean very little to the average reader. Unless the
significance of statistics can be quickly grasped, they are almost
valueless as a means of explanation. One method of simplifying them is
to translate them into terms with which the average reader is familiar.
This may often be done by reducing large figures to smaller ones.
Instead of saying, for example, that a press prints 36,000 newspapers an
hour, we may say that it prints 10 papers a second, or 600 a minute. To
most persons 36,000 papers an hour means little more than a large
number, but 10 papers and one second are figures sufficiently small to
be understood at a glance. Statistics sometimes appear less formidable
if they are incorporated in an interview or in a conversation.

In undertaking to explain the advantages of a co√∂perative community
store, a writer was confronted with the problem of handling a
considerable number of figures. The first excerpt below shows how he
managed to distribute them through several paragraphs, thus avoiding any
awkward massing of figures. In order to present a number of comparative
prices, he used the concrete case, given below, of an investigator
making a series of purchases at the store.

    (1)

    Here's the way the manager of the community store started. He
    demonstrated to his neighbors by actual figures that they were
    paying anywhere from $2 to $8 a week more for their groceries and
    supplies than they needed to. This represented the middlemen's
    profits.

    He then proposed that if a hundred families would pay him regularly
    50 cents a week, he would undertake to supply them with garden
    truck, provisions and meats at wholesale prices. To clinch the
    demonstration he showed that an average family would save this
    50-cent weekly fee in a few days' purchases.

       *       *       *       *       *

    There is no difference in appearance between the community store and
    any other provision store. There is no difference in the way you buy
    your food. The only difference is that you pay 50 cents a week on a
    certain day each week and buy food anywhere from 15 to 40 per cent
    less than at the commercial, non-co√∂perative retail stores.

    (2)

    The other day an investigator from the department of agriculture
    went to the Washington community store to make an experiment. He
    paid his 50-cent weekly membership fee and made some purchases. He
    bought a 10-cent carton of oatmeal for 8 cents; a 10-cent loaf of
    bread for 8 cents; one-half peck of string beans for 20 cents,
    instead of for 30 cents, the price in the non-co√∂perative stores;
    three pounds of veal for 58 cents instead of 80 cents; a half dozen
    oranges for 13 cents instead of the usual price of from 20 to 25
    cents. His total purchases amounted to $1.32, and the estimated
    saving was 49 cents--within 1 cent of the entire weekly fee.

Since to the average newspaper reader it would not mean much to say that
the cost of the public schools amounted to several hundred thousand
dollars a year, a special feature writer calculated the relation of the
school appropriation to the total municipal expenditure and then
presented the results as fractions of a dollar, thus:

    Of every dollar that each taxpayer in this city paid to the city
    treasurer last year, 45 cents was spent on the public schools. This
    means that nearly one-half of all the taxes were expended on giving
    boys and girls an education.

    Of that same dollar only 8 cents went to maintain the police
    department, 12 cents to keep up the fire department, and 13 cents
    for general expenses of the city offices.

    Out of the 45 cents used for school purposes, over one-half, or 24
    cents, was paid as salaries to teachers and principals. Only 8 cents
    went for operation, maintenance, and similar expenses.

How statistics may be effectively embodied in an interview is
demonstrated by the following excerpt from a special feature story on a
workmen's compensation law administered by a state industrial board:

    Judge J.B. Vaughn, who is at the head of the board, estimates that
    the system of settling compensation by means of a commission instead
    of by the regular courts has saved the state $1,000,000 a year since
    its inception in 1913. "Under the usual court proceedings," he says,
    "each case of an injured workman versus his employer costs from $250
    to $300. Under the workings of the industrial board the average cost
    is no more than $20.

    "In three and one-half years 8,000 cases have come before us. Nine
    out of every ten have been adjusted by our eight picked
    arbitrators, who tour the state, visiting promptly each scene of an
    accident and adjusting the compensation as quickly as possible. The
    tenth case, which requires a lengthier or more painstaking hearing,
    is brought to the board.

    "Seven million dollars has been in this time ordered to be paid to
    injured men and their families. Of this no charge of any sort has
    been entered against the workers or their beneficiaries. The costs
    are taken care of by the state. Fully 90 per cent of all the cases
    are settled within the board, which means that only 10 per cent are
    carried further into the higher courts for settlement."

PROCESSES. To make scientific and technical processes sufficiently
simple to appeal to the layman, is another problem for the writer of
popular articles. A narrative-descriptive presentation that enables the
reader to visualize and follow the process, step by step, as though it
were taking place before his eyes, is usually the best means of making
it both understandable and interesting.

In a special feature story on methods of exterminating mosquitoes, a
writer in the _Detroit News_ undertook to trace the life history of a
mosquito. In order to popularize these scientific details, he describes
a "baby mosquito" in a concrete, informal manner, and, as he tells the
story of its life, suggests or points out specifically its likeness to a
human being.

    The baby mosquito is a regular little water bug. You call him a
    "wiggler" when you see him swimming about in a puddle. His head is
    wide and flat and his eyes are set well out at the sides, while in
    front of them he has a pair of cute little horns or feelers. While
    the baby mosquito is brought up in the water, he is an air-breather
    and comes to the top to breathe as do frogs and musk-rats and many
    other water creatures of a higher order.

    Like most babies the mosquito larva believes that his mission is to
    eat as much as he can and grow up very fast. This he does, and if
    the weather is warm and the food abundant, he soon outgrows his
    skin. He proceeds to grow a new skin underneath the old one, and
    when he finds himself protected, he bursts out of his old clothes
    and comes out in a spring suit. This molting process occurs several
    times within a week or two, but the last time he takes on another
    form. He is then called a pupa, and is in a strange transition
    period during which he does not eat. He now slowly takes on the form
    of a true mosquito within his pupal skin or shell.

    After two or three days, or perhaps five or six, if conditions are
    not altogether favorable, he feels a great longing within him to
    rise to something higher. His tiny shell is floating upon the water
    with his now winged body closely packed within. The skin begins to
    split along the back and the true baby mosquito starts to work
    himself out. It is a strenuous task for him and consumes many
    minutes.

    At last he appears and sits dazed and exhausted, floating on his old
    skin as on a little boat, and slowly working his new wings in the
    sunlight, as if to try them out before essaying flight. It is a
    moment of great peril. A passing ripple may swamp his tiny craft and
    shipwreck him to become the prey of any passing fish or vagrant
    frog. A swallow sweeping close to the water's surface may gobble him
    down. Some ruthless city employe may have flooded the surface of the
    pond with kerosene, the merest touch of which means death to a
    mosquito. Escaping all of the thousand and one accidents that may
    befall, he soon rises and hums away seeking whom he may devour.

A mechanical process, that of handling milk at a model dairy farm, was
effectively presented by Constance D. Leupp in an article entitled, "The
Fight for Clean Milk," printed in the _Outlook_. By leading "you," the
reader, to the spot, as it were, by picturing in detail what "you" would
see there, and then by following in story form the course of the milk
from one place to another, she succeeded in making the process clear and
interesting.

    Here at five in the afternoon you may see long lines of sleek,
    well-groomed cows standing in their cement-floored, perfectly
    drained sheds. The walls and ceilings are spotless from constant
    applications of whitewash, ventilation is scientifically arranged,
    doors and windows are screened against the flies. Here the
    white-clad, smooth-shaven milkers do their work with scrubbed and
    manicured hands. You will note that all these men are studiously
    low-voiced and gentle in movement; for a cow, notwithstanding her
    outward placidity, is the most sensitive creature on earth, and
    there is an old superstition that if you speak roughly to your cow
    she will earn no money for you that day.

    As each pail is filled it is carried directly into the milk-house;
    not into the bottling-room, for in that sterilized sanctum nobody
    except the bottler is admitted, but into the room above, where the
    pails are emptied into the strainer of a huge receptacle. From the
    base of this receptacle it flows over the radiator in the
    bottling-room, which reduces it at once to the required temperature,
    thence into the mechanical bottler. The white-clad attendant places
    a tray containing several dozen empty bottles underneath, presses a
    lever, and, presto! they are full and not a drop spilled. He caps
    the bottles with another twist of the lever, sprays the whole with a
    hose, picks up the load and pushes it through the horizontal
    dumb-waiter, where another attendant receives it in the
    packing-room. The second man clamps a metal cover over the
    pasteboard caps and packs the bottles in ice. Less than half an hour
    is consumed in the milking of each cow, the straining, chilling,
    bottling, and storing of her product.

PRACTICAL GUIDANCE UNITS. To give in an attractive form complete and
accurate directions for doing something in a certain way, is another
difficult problem for the inexperienced writer. For interest and
variety, conversation, interviews and other forms of direct quotation,
as well as informal narrative, may be employed.

Various practical methods of saving fuel in cooking were given by a
writer in _Successful Farming_, in what purported to be an account of a
meeting of a farm woman's club at which the problem was discussed. By
the device of allowing the members of the club to relate their
experiences, she was able to offer a large number of suggestions. Two
units selected from different portions of the article illustrate this
method:

    "I save dollars by cooking in my furnace," added a practical worker.
    "Potatoes bake nicely when laid on the ledge, and beans, stews,
    roasts, bread--in fact the whole food list--may be cooked there. But
    one must be careful not to have too hot a fire. I burned several
    things before I learned that even a few red coals in the fire-pot
    will be sufficient for practically everything. And then it does
    blacken the pans! But I've solved that difficulty by bending a piece
    of tin and setting it between the fire and the cooking vessel. This
    prevents burning, too, if the fire should be hot. Another plan is
    to set the vessel in an old preserving kettle. If this outer kettle
    does not leak, it may be filled with water, which not only aids in
    the cooking process but also prevents burning. For broiling or
    toasting, a large corn popper is just the thing."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "My chief saving," confided the member who believes in preparedness,
    "consists in cooking things in quantities, especially the things
    that require long cooking, like baked beans or soup. I never think
    of cooking less than two days' supply of beans, and as for soup,
    that is made up in quantity sufficient to last a week. If I have no
    ice, reheating it each day during warm weather prevents spoiling.
    Most vegetables are not harmed by a second cooking, and, besides the
    saving in fuel it entails, it's mighty comforting to know that you
    have your dinner already prepared for the next day, or several days
    before for that matter. In cold weather, or if you have ice, it will
    not be necessary to introduce monotony into your meals in order to
    save fuel, for one can wait a day or two before serving the extra
    quantity. Sauces, either for vegetables, meats or puddings, may just
    as well be made for more than one occasion, altho if milk is used in
    their preparation, care must be taken that they are kept perfectly
    cold, as ptomaines develop rapidly in such foods. Other things that
    it pays to cook in large portions are chocolate syrup for making
    cocoa, caramel for flavoring, and apple sauce."

By using a conversation between a hostess and her guest, another writer
in the same farm journal succeeded in giving in a novel way some
directions for preparing celery.

    "Your escalloped corn is delicious. Where did you get your recipe?"

    Mrs. Field smiled across the dining table at her guest. "Out of my
    head, I suppose, for I never saw it in print. I just followed the
    regulation method of a layer of corn, then seasoning, and repeat,
    only I cut into small pieces a stalk or two of celery with each
    layer of corn."

    "Celery and corn--a new combination, but it's a good one. I'm so
    glad to learn of it; but isn't it tedious to cut the celery into
    such small bits?"

    "Not at all, with my kitchen scissors. I just slash the stalk into
    several lengthwise strips, then cut them crosswise all at once into
    very small pieces."

    "You always have such helpful ideas about new and easy ways to do
    your work. And economical, too. Why, celery for a dish like this
    could be the outer stalks or pieces too small to be used fresh on
    the table."

    "That's the idea, exactly. I use such celery in soups and stews of
    all kinds; it adds such a delicious flavor. It is especially good in
    poultry stuffings and meat loaf. Then there is creamed celery, of
    course, to which I sometimes add a half cup of almonds for variety.
    And I use it in salads, too. Not a bit of celery is wasted around
    here. Even the leaves may be dried out in the oven, and crumbled up
    to flavor soups or other dishes."

    "That's fine! Celery is so high this season, and much of it is not
    quite nice enough for the table, unless cooked."

A number of new uses for adhesive plaster were suggested by a writer in
the _New York Tribune_, who, in the excerpt below, employs effectively
the device of the direct appeal to the reader.

    Aside from surgical "First Aid" and the countless uses to which this
    useful material may be put, there are a great number of household
    uses for adhesive plaster.

    If your pumps are too large and slip at the heel, just put a strip
    across the back and they will stay in place nicely. When your
    rubbers begin to break repair them on the inside with plaster cut to
    fit. If the children lose their rubbers at school, write their names
    with black ink on strips of the clinging material and put these
    strips inside the top of the rubber at the back.

    In the same way labels can be made for bottles and cans. They are
    easy to put on and to take off. If the garden hose, the rubber tube
    of your bath spray, or your hot water bag shows a crack or a small
    break, mend it with adhesive.

    A cracked handle of a broom, carpet sweeper, or umbrella can be
    repaired with this first aid to the injured. In the same way the
    handles of golf sticks, baseball bats, flagstaffs and whips may be
    given a new lease on life.

    If your sheet music is torn or the window shade needs repairing, or
    there is a cracked pane of glass in the barn or in a rear window,
    apply a strip or patch of suitable size.

In an article in the _Philadelphia Ledger_ on "What Can I Do to Earn
Money?" Mary Hamilton Talbot gave several examples of methods of earning
money, in one of which she incorporated practical directions, thus:

    A resourceful girl who loved to be out-of-doors found her
    opportunity in a bed of mint and aromatic herbs. She sends bunches
    of the mint neatly prepared to various hotels and caf√©s several
    times a week by parcel post, but it is in the over-supply that she
    works out best her original ideas. Among the novelties she makes is
    a candied mint that sells quickly. Here is her formula: Cut bits of
    mint, leaving three or four small leaves on the branch; wash well;
    dry and lay in rows on a broad, level surface. Thoroughly dissolve
    one pound of loaf sugar, boil until it threads and set from the
    fire. While it is still at the boiling point plunge in the bits of
    mint singly with great care. Remove them from the fondant with a
    fork and straighten the leaves neatly with a hatpin or like
    instrument. If a second plunging is necessary, allow the first
    coating to become thoroughly crystalized before dipping them again.
    Lay the sweets on oiled paper until thoroughly dry. With careful
    handling these mints will preserve their natural aroma, taste, and
    shape, and will keep for any length of time if sealed from the air.
    They show to best advantage in glass. The sweet-smelling herbs of
    this girl's garden she dries and sells to the fancy goods trade, and
    they are used for filling cushions, pillows, and perfume bags. The
    seasoning herbs she dries, pulverizes, and puts in small glasses,
    nicely labeled, which sell for 10 cents each, and reliable grocers
    are glad to have them for their fastidious customers.




CHAPTER VII

HOW TO BEGIN


IMPORTANCE OF THE BEGINNING. The value of a good beginning for a news
story, a special feature article, or a short story results from the way
in which most persons read newspapers and magazines. In glancing through
current publications, the average reader is attracted chiefly by
headlines or titles, illustrations, and authors' names. If any one of
these interests him, he pauses a moment or two over the beginning "to
see what it is all about." The first paragraphs usually determine
whether or not he goes any further. A single copy of a newspaper or
magazine offers so much reading matter that the casual reader, if
disappointed in the introduction to one article or short story, has
plenty of others to choose from. But if the opening sentences hold his
attention, he reads on. "Well begun is half done" is a saying that
applies with peculiar fitness to special feature articles.

STRUCTURE OF THE BEGINNING. To accomplish its purpose an introduction
must be both a unit in itself and an integral part of the article. The
beginning, whether a single paragraph in form, or a single paragraph in
essence, although actually broken up into two or more short paragraphs,
should produce on the mind of the reader a unified impression. The
conversation, the incident, the example, or the summary of which it
consists, should be complete in itself. Unless, on the other hand, the
introduction is an organic part of the article, it fails of its purpose.
The beginning must present some vital phase of the subject; it should
not be merely something attractive attached to the article to catch the
reader's notice. In his effort to make the beginning attractive, an
inexperienced writer is inclined to linger over it until it becomes
disproportionately long. Its length, however, should be proportionate to
the importance of that phase of the subject which it presents. As a
vital part of the article, the introduction must be so skillfully
connected with what follows that a reader is not conscious of the
transition. Close coherence between the beginning and the body of the
article is essential.

The four faults, therefore, to be guarded against in writing the
beginning are: (1) the inclusion of diverse details not carefully
coordinated to produce a single unified impression; (2) the development
of the introduction to a disproportionate length; (3) failure to make
the beginning a vital part of the article itself; (4) lack of close
connection or of skillful transition between the introduction and the
body of the article.

TYPES OF BEGINNINGS. Because of the importance of the introduction, the
writer should familiarize himself with the different kinds of
beginnings, and should study them from the point of view of their
suitability for various types of articles. The seven distinct types of
beginnings are: (1) summary; (2) narrative; (3) description; (4)
striking statement; (5) quotation; (6) question; (7) direct address.
Combinations of two or more of these methods are not infrequent.

Summary Beginnings. The general adoption by newspapers of the summary
beginning, or "lead," for news stories has accustomed the average reader
to finding most of the essential facts of a piece of news grouped
together in the first paragraph. The lead, by telling the reader the
nature of the event, the persons and things concerned, the time, the
place, the cause, and the result, answers his questions, What? Who?
When? Where? Why? How? Not only are the important facts summarized in
such a beginning, but the most striking detail is usually "played up" in
the first group of words of the initial sentence where it catches the
eye at once. Thus the reader is given both the main facts and the most
significant feature of the subject. Unquestionably this news story lead,
when skillfully worked out, has distinct advantages alike for the news
report and for the special article.

    SUMMARY BEGINNINGS


    (1)

    (_Kansas City Star_)

    A FRESH AIR PALACE READY

    A palace of sunshine, a glass house of fresh air, will be the
    Christmas offering of Kansas City to the fight against tuberculosis,
    the "Great White Plague." Ten miles from the business district of
    the city, overlooking a horizon miles away over valley and hill,
    stands the finest tuberculosis hospital in the United States. The
    newly completed institution, although not the largest hospital of
    the kind, is the best equipped and finest appointed. It is symbolic
    of sunshine and pure air, the cure for the disease.



    (2)

    (_New York World_)

    STOPPING THE COST OF LIVING LEAKS

    BY MARIE COOLIDGE RASK

    After ten weeks' instruction in domestic economy at a New York high
    school, a girl of thirteen has been the means of reducing the
    expenditure in a family of seven to the extent of five dollars a
    week.

    The girl is Anna Scheiring, American born, of Austrian ancestry,
    living with her parents and brothers and sisters in a five-room
    apartment at No. 769 East One Hundred and Fifty-eighth Street, where
    her father, Joseph Scheiring is superintendent of the building.

    The same economic practices applied by little Anna Scheiring are at
    the present time being worked out in two thousand other New York
    homes whose daughters are pupils in the Washington Irving High
    School.



    (3)

    (_The Outlook_)

    THE FIGHT FOR CLEAN MILK

    BY CONSTANCE D. LEUPP

    Two million quarts of milk are shipped into New York every day. One
    hundred thousand of those who drink it are babies. The milk comes
    from forty-four thousand dairy farms scattered through New York, New
    Jersey, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Vermont, and even
    Ohio.

    A large proportion of the two million quarts travels thirty-six
    hours before it lands on the front doorstep of the consumer. The
    situation in New York is duplicated in a less acute degree in every
    city in the United States.

NARRATIVE BEGINNINGS. To begin a special feature article in the
narrative form is to give it a story-like character that at once arouses
interest. It is impossible in many instances to know from the
introduction whether what follows is to be a short story or a special
article. An element of suspense may even be injected into the narrative
introduction to stimulate the reader's curiosity, and descriptive
touches may be added to heighten the vividness.

If the whole article is in narrative form, as is the case in a personal
experience or confession story, the introduction is only the first part
of a continuous story, and as such gives the necessary information about
the person involved.

Narrative beginnings that consist of concrete examples and specific
instances are popular for expository articles. Sometimes several
instances are related in the introduction before the writer proceeds to
generalize from them. The advantage of this inductive method of
explanation grows out of the fact that, after a general idea has been
illustrated by an example or two, most persons can grasp it with much
less effort and with much greater interest than when such
exemplification follows the generalization.

Other narrative introductions consist of an anecdote, an incident, or an
important event connected with the subject of the article.

Since conversation is an excellent means of enlivening a narrative,
dialogue is often used in the introduction to special articles, whether
for relating an incident, giving a specific instance, or beginning a
personal experience story.

    Narrative Beginnings


    (1)

    (_The Outlook_)

    BOOKER T. WASHINGTON

    BY EMMETT J. SCOTT AND LYMAN BEECHER STOWE

    It came about that in the year 1880, in Macon County, Alabama, a
    certain ex-Confederate colonel conceived the idea that if he could
    secure the Negro vote he could beat his rival and win the seat he
    coveted in the State Legislature. Accordingly the colonel went to
    the leading Negro in the town of Tuskegee and asked him what he
    could do to secure the Negro vote, for Negroes then voted in Alabama
    without restriction. This man, Lewis Adams by name, himself an
    ex-slave, promptly replied that what his race most wanted was
    education, and what they most needed was industrial education, and
    that if he (the colonel) would agree to work for the passage of a
    bill appropriating money for the maintenance of an industrial school
    for Negroes, he, Adams, would help to get for him the Negro vote and
    the election. This bargain between an ex-slaveholder and an ex-slave
    was made and faithfully observed on both sides, with the result that
    the following year the Legislature of Alabama appropriated $2,000 a
    year for the establishment of a normal and industrial school for
    Negroes in the town of Tuskegee. On the recommendation of General
    Armstrong, of Hampton Institute, a young colored man, Booker T.
    Washington, a recent graduate of and teacher at the Institute, was
    called from there to take charge of this landless, buildingless,
    teacherless, and studentless institution of learning.



    (2)

    (_Leslie's Weekly_)

    MILLIONAIRES MADE BY WAR

    BY HOMER CROY

    A tall, gaunt, barefooted Missouri hill-billy stood beside his
    rattly, dish-wheeled wagon waiting to see the mighty proprietor of
    the saw mill who guessed only too well that the hill-billy had
    something he wanted to swap for lumber.

    "What can I do for you?"

    The hillman shifted his weight uneasily. "I 'low I got somethun of
    powerful lot of interest to yuh." Reaching over the side of the
    wagon he placed his rough hand tenderly on a black lump. "I guess
    yuh know what it is."

    The saw mill proprietor glanced at it depreciatingly and turned
    toward the mill.

    "It's lead, pardner, pure lead, and I know where it come from. I
    could take you right to the spot--ef I wanted to."

    The mill proprietor hooked a row of fingers under the rough stone
    and tried to lift it. But he could not budge it. "It does seem to
    have lead in it. What was you calc'lating askin' for showin' me
    where you found it?"

    The farmer from the foothills cut his eyes down to crafty slits. "I
    was 'lowing just tother day as how a house pattern would come in
    handy. Ef you'll saw me out one I'll take you to the spot." And so
    the deal was consummated, the hill-billy gleefully driving away,
    joyous over having got a fine house pattern worth $40 for merely
    showing a fellow where you could pick up a few hunks of lead.

    That was forty-five years ago and it was thus that the great Joplin
    lead and zinc district was made known to the world.



    (3)

    (_Munsey's Magazine_)

    FRANK A. SCOTT, CHAIRMAN OF THE WAR INDUSTRIES BOARD

    BY THEODORE TILLER

    One day in the year 1885 a twelve-year-old boy, who had to leave
    school and make his own way in the world on account of his father's
    death, applied for a job in a railroad freight-office in Cleveland,
    Ohio.

    "I'm afraid you won't do," said the chief. "We need a boy, but
    you're not tall enough to reach the letter-press."

    "Well, couldn't I stand on a box?" suggested the young seeker of
    employment.

    That day a box was added to the equipment of the freight-office and
    the name of Frank A. Scott to the payroll.

    (4)

    (_New York Times_)

    NEW YORKER INVENTS NEW EXPLOSIVE AND GIVES IT TO THE UNITED STATES

    Nine young men recently rowed to the middle of the Hudson River with
    a wooden box to which wires were attached, lying in the bottom of
    the boat. They sank the box in deep water very cautiously, and then
    rowed slowly back to land, holding one end of the wire. Presently a
    column of water 40 feet through and 300 feet high shot into the air,
    followed by a deafening detonation, which tore dead branches from
    trees.

    The nine young men were congratulating one man of the group on the
    explosion when an irate farmer ran up, yelling that every window in
    his farmhouse, nearly a mile away, had been shattered. The party of
    young men didn't apologize then; they gathered about the one who was
    being congratulated and recongratulated him.

    The farmer did not know until later that the force which broke his
    windows and sent the huge column of water into the air was the War
    Department's newest, safest, and most powerful explosive; that the
    young men composed the dynamite squad of the Engineer Corps of the
    New York National Guard; and that the man they were congratulating
    was Lieut. Harold Chase Woodward, the inventor of the explosive.



    (5)

    (_System_)

    WHY THE EMPLOYEES RUN OUR BUSINESS

    A BUSINESS OF THE WORKERS, BY THE WORKERS, AND FOR THE WORKERS--HOW
    IT SUCCEEDS.

    BY EDWARD A. FILENE

    "I know I am right. Leave it to any fair-minded person to decide."

    "Good enough," I replied; "you name one, I will name another, and
    let them select a third."

    She agreed; we selected the umpires and they decided against the
    store!

    It had come about in this way. The store rule had been that cashiers
    paid for shortages in their accounts as--in our view--a penalty for
    carelessness; we did not care about the money. This girl had been
    short in an account; the amount had been deducted from her pay, and,
    not being afraid to speak out, she complained:

    "If I am over in my accounts, it is a mistake; but if I am short, am
    I a thief? Why should I pay back the money? Why can't a mistake be
    made in either direction?"

    This arbitration--although it had caused a decision against
    us--seemed such a satisfactory way of ending disputes that we
    continued the practice in an informal way. Out of it grew the
    present arbitration board, which is the corner-stone of the relation
    between our store and the employees, because it affords the
    machinery for getting what employees are above all else interested
    in--a square deal.

DESCRIPTIVE BEGINNINGS. Just as description of characters or of scene
and setting is one method of beginning short stories and novels, so also
it constitutes a form of introduction for an article. In both cases the
aim is to create immediate interest by vivid portrayal of definite
persons and places. The concrete word picture, like the concrete
instance in a narrative beginning, makes a quick and strong appeal. An
element of suspense or mystery may be introduced into the description,
if a person, a place, or an object is described without being identified
by name until the end of the portrayal.

The possibilities of description are not limited to sights alone;
sounds, odors and other sense impressions, as well as emotions, may be
described. Frequently several different impressions are combined. To
stir the reader's feelings by a strong emotional description is
obviously a good method of beginning.

A descriptive beginning, to be clear to the rapid reader, should be
suggestive rather than detailed. The average person can easily visualize
a picture that is sketched in a few suggestive words, whereas he is
likely to be confused by a mass of details. Picture-making words and
those imitative of sounds, as well as figures of speech, may be used to
advantage in descriptive beginnings. For the description of feelings,
words with a rich emotional connotation are important.

    DESCRIPTIVE BEGINNINGS

    (1)

    (_Munsey's Magazine_)

    OUR HIGHEST COURT

    BY HORACE TOWNER


    "The Honorable the Supreme Court of the United States!"

    Nearly every week-day during the winter months, exactly at noon,
    these warning words, intoned in a resonant and solemn voice, may be
    heard by the visitor who chances to pass the doors of the Supreme
    Court Chamber in the Capitol of the United States. The visitor sees
    that others are entering those august portals, and so he, too, makes
    bold to step softly inside.

    If he has not waited too long, he finds himself within the chamber
    in time to see nine justices of our highest court, clad in long,
    black robes, file slowly into the room from an antechamber at the
    left.

    Every one within the room has arisen, and all stand respectfully at
    attention while the justices take their places. Then the voice of
    the court crier is heard again:

    "_Oyez, oyez, oyez_! All persons having business with the Supreme
    Court of the United States are admonished to draw near and give
    their attention, for the court is now sitting."

    Then, after a slight pause:

    "God save the United States and this honorable court!"

    The justices seat themselves; the attorneys at the bar and visitors
    do likewise. The Supreme Court of the United States, generally held
    to be the most powerful tribunal on earth, is in session.



    (2)

    (_Collier's Weekly_)

    JAMES WHITCOMB BROUGHER, A PREACHER TO THE PROCESSION

    BY PETER CLARK MACFARLANE


    Imagine the Hippodrome--the largest playhouse of New York and of the
    New World! Imagine it filled with people from foot-lights to the
    last row in the topmost gallery--orchestra, dress circle, and
    balconies--a huge uprising, semicircular bowl, lined with human
    beings. Imagine it thus, and then strip the stage; take away the
    Indians and the soldiers, the elephants and the camels; take away
    the careening stage coaches and the thundering hoofs of horses, and
    all the strange conglomeration of dramatic activities with which
    these inventive stage managers are accustomed to panoply their
    productions. Instead of all this, people the stage with a chorus
    choir in white smocks, and in front of the choir put a lean,
    upstanding, shock-headed preacher; but leave the audience--a regular
    Hippodrome audience on the biggest Saturday night. Imagine all of
    this, I say, and what you have is not the Hippodrome, not the
    greatest play in the New World, nor any playhouse at all, but the
    Temple Baptist Church of Los Angeles, California, with James
    Whitcomb Brougher, D.D., in the pulpit.



    (3)

    (_The Independent_)

    THE LITTLE RED SCHOOLHOUSE A "FAKE"

    What the Country Schoolhouse Really Is, and Why

    BY EDNA M. HILL


    The schoolhouse squats dour and silent in its acre of weeds. A
    little to the rear stand two wretched outbuildings. Upon its gray
    clapboarded sides, window blinds hang loose and window sashes sag
    away from their frames. Groaning upon one hinge the vestibule door
    turns away from lopsided steps, while a broken drain pipe sways
    perilously from the east corner of the roof.

    Within and beyond the vestibule is the schoolroom, a monotony of
    grimy walls and smoky ceiling. Cross lights from the six windows
    shine upon rows of desks of varying sizes and in varying stages of
    destruction. A kitchen table faces the door. Squarely in the middle
    of the rough pine floor stands a jacketed stove. A much torn
    dictionary and a dented water pail stand side by side on the shelf
    below the one blackboard.

    And this is the "little red schoolhouse" to which I looked forward
    so eagerly during the summer--nothing but a tumbledown shack set in
    the heart of a prosperous farming district.

    (4)

    (_New York Tribune_)

    THE ONE WOMAN OFFICIAL AT PLATTSBURG

    BY ELENE FOSTER


    The tramp, tramp of feet on a hard road; long lines of khaki figures
    moving over the browning grass of the parade ground; rows of faces,
    keen and alert, with that look in the eyes that one sees in LePage's
    Jeanne d'Arc; the click, click of bullets from the distant rifle
    range blended with a chorus of deep voices near at hand singing
    "Over There"; a clear, blue sky, crisp autumn air and the sparkling
    waters of Lake Champlain--that's Plattsburg.



    (5)

    (_Good Housekeeping_)

    NEW ENGLAND MILL SLAVES

    BY MARY ALDEN HOPKINS

    In the pale light of an early winter morning, while a flat, white
    moon awaited the dawn and wind-driven clouds flung faint scudding
    shadows across the snow, two little girls, cloaked, shawled, hooded
    out of all recognition, plodded heavily along a Vermont mountain
    road. Each carried a dangling dinner pail.

    The road was lonely. Once they passed a farmhouse, asleep save for a
    yellow light in a chamber. Somewhere a cock crowed. A dog barked in
    the faint distance.

    Where the road ascended the mountain--a narrow cut between dark,
    pointed firs and swaying white-limbed birches--the way was slushy
    with melting snow. The littler girl, half dozing along the
    accustomed way, slipped and slid into puddles.

    At the top of the mountain the two children shrank back into their
    mufflers, before the sweep of the wet, chill wind; but the mill was
    in sight--beyond the slope of bleak pastures outlined with stone
    walls--sunk deep in the valley beside a rapid mountain stream, a dim
    bulk already glimmering with points of light. Toward this the two
    little workwomen slopped along on squashy feet.

    They were spinners. One was fifteen. She had worked three years.
    The other was fourteen. She had worked two years. The terse record
    of the National Child Labor Committee lies before me, unsentimental,
    bare of comment:

    "They both get up at four fifteen A.M. and after breakfast start for
    the mill, arriving there in time not to be late, at six. Their home
    is two and one-half miles from the mill. Each earns three dollars a
    week--So they cannot afford to ride. The road is rough, and it is
    over the mountains."



    (6)

    (_Providence Journal_)

    HOW TO SING THE NATIONAL SONGS

    To Interpret the Text Successfully the Singer Must Memorize,
    Visualize, Rhythmize, and Emphasize

    BY JOHN G. ARCHER


    The weary eye of the toastmaster looks apologetically down long rows
    of tables as he says with a sorry-but-it-must-be-done air, "We will
    now sing 'The Star Spangled Banner'"; the orchestra starts, the
    diners reach frantically for their menus and each, according to his
    musical inheritance and patriotic fervor, plunges into the unknown
    with a resolute determination to be in on the death of the sad rite.

    Some are wrecked among the dizzy altitudes, others persevere through
    uncharted shoals, all make some kind of a noisy noise, and lo, it is
    accomplished; and intense relief sits enthroned on every dewy brow.

    In the crowded church, the minister announces the "Battle Hymn of
    the Republic," and the organist, armed with plenary powers, crashes
    into the giddy old tune, dragging the congregation resistingly along
    at a hurdy gurdy pace till all semblance of text or meaning is
    irretrievably lost.

    Happy are they when the refrain, "Glory, Glory, Hallelujah,"
    provides a temporary respite from the shredded syllables and
    scrambled periods, and one may light, as it were, and catch up with
    himself and the organist.

    At the close of an outdoor public meeting the chairman, with fatuous
    ineptitude, shouts that everybody will sing three verses of
    "America." Granting that the tune is pitched comfortably, the first
    verse marches with vigor and certitude, but not for long; dismay
    soon smites the crowd in sections as the individual consciousness
    backs and fills amid half learned lines.

    The trick of catching hopefully at a neighbor's phrase usually
    serves to defeat itself, as it unmasks the ignorance of said
    neighbor, and the tune ends in a sort of polyglot mouthing which is
    not at all flattering to the denizens of an enlightened community.

    These glimpses are not a whit over-drawn, and it is safe to say that
    they mirror practically every corner of our land to-day. Why is it,
    then, that the people make such a sorry exhibition of themselves
    when they attempt to sing the patriotic songs of our country? Is it
    the tunes or the words or we ourselves?

BEGINNING WITH A STRIKING STATEMENT. When the thought expressed in the
first sentence of an article is sufficiently unusual, or is presented in
a sufficiently striking form, it at once commands attention. By
stimulating interest and curiosity, it leads the average person to read
on until he is satisfied.

A striking statement of this sort may serve as the first sentence of one
of the other types of beginning, such as the narrative or the
descriptive introduction, the quotation, the question, or the direct
address. But it may also be used entirely alone.

Since great size is impressive, a statement of the magnitude of
something is usually striking. Numerical figures are often used in the
opening sentences to produce the impression of enormous size. If these
figures are so large that the mind cannot grasp them, it is well, by
means of comparisons, to translate them into terms of the reader's own
experience. There is always danger of overwhelming and confusing a
person with statistics that in the mass mean little or nothing to him.

To declare in the first sentence that something is the first or the only
one of its kind immediately arrests attention, because of the universal
interest in the unique.

An unusual prediction is another form of striking statement. To be told
at the beginning of an article of some remarkable thing that the future
holds in store for him or for his descendants, fascinates the average
person as much as does the fortune-teller's prophecy. There is danger of
exaggeration, however, in making predictions. When writers magnify the
importance of their subject by assuring us that what they are explaining
will "revolutionize" our ideas and practices, we are inclined to
discount these exaggerated and trite forms of prophecy.

A striking figure of speech--an unusual metaphor, for example--may often
be used in the beginning of an article to arouse curiosity. As the
comparison in a metaphor is implied rather than expressed, the points of
likeness may not immediately be evident to the reader and thus the
figurative statement piques his curiosity. A comparison in the form of a
simile, or in that of a parable or allegory, may serve as a striking
introduction.

A paradox, as a self-contradictory statement, arrests the attention in
the initial sentence of an article. Although not always easy to frame,
and hence not so often employed as it might be, a paradoxical expression
is an excellent device for a writer to keep in mind when some phase of
his theme lends itself to such a striking beginning.

Besides these readily classified forms of unusual statements, any novel,
extraordinary expression that is not too bizarre may be employed. The
chief danger to guard against is that of making sensational,
exaggerated, or false statements, merely to catch the reader's notice.


    STRIKING STATEMENT BEGINNINGS

    (1)

    (_Illustrated World_)

    FIRE WRITES A HEART'S RECORD

    BY H.G. HUNTING


    A human heart, writing its own record with an actual finger of
    flame, is the startling spectacle that has recently been witnessed
    by scientists. It sounds fanciful, doesn't it? But it is literally a
    fact that the automatic recording of the heart's action by means of
    tracings from the point of a tiny blaze appears to have been made a
    practicable method of determining the condition of the heart, more
    reliable than any other test that can be applied.



    (2)

    (_Boston Transcript_)

    TAKING HOSPITALS TO THE EMERGENCY By F.W. COBURN

    Taking the hospital to the emergency instead of the emergency to the
    hospital is the underlying idea of the Bay State's newest medical
    unit--one which was installed in three hours on the top of Corey
    Hill, and which in much less than half that time may tomorrow or the
    next day be en route post haste for Peru, Plymouth, or
    Pawtucketville.



    (3)

    (_Kansas City Star_)

    MUST YOUR HOME BURN?

    Autumn is the season of burning homes.

    Furnaces and stoves will soon be lighted. They have been unused all
    summer and rubbish may have been piled near them or the flues may
    have rusted and slipped out of place unobserved in the long period
    of disuse. Persons start their fires in a sudden cold snap. They
    don't take time to investigate. Then the fire department has work to
    do.



    (4)

    (_New York Times_)

    ONLY PUBLIC SCHOOL FOR CHILDREN WITH POOR EYES

    There was opened down Hester Street way last week the only public
    school in the world for children with defective eyes. Bad eyesight
    has been urged for years as a cause of backwardness and
    incorrigibility in school children. Now the public school
    authorities plan, for the first time, not only to teach children
    whose eyes are defective, but to cure them as well.

    (5) (_The Outlook_)

    DISEASED TEETH AND BAD HEALTH BY MATTHIAS NICOLL, JR.

    The complete disappearance of teeth from the human mouth is the
    condition towards which the most highly cultivated classes of
    humanity are drifting. We have already gone far on a course that
    leads to the coming of a toothless age in future generations. Only
    by immediate adoption of the most active and widespread measures of
    prevention can the human tooth be saved from the fate that has
    befallen the leg of the whale.



    (6)

    (_Harper's Weekly_)

    THE SPAN OF LIFE

    BY WALTER E. WEYL

    You who begin this sentence may not live to read its close. There is
    a chance, one in three or four billions, that you will die in a
    second, by the tick of the watch. The chair upon which you sit may
    collapse, the car in which you ride may collide, your heart may
    suddenly cease. Or you may survive the sentence and the article, and
    live twenty, fifty, eighty years longer.

    No one knows the span of your life, and yet the insurance man is
    willing to bet upon it. What is life insurance but the bet of an
    unknown number of yearly premiums against the payment of the
    policy? * * * * The length of your individual life is a guess, but the
    insurance company bets on a sure thing, on the average death rate.



    (7)

    (_The Outlook_)

    "AMERICANS FIRST"

    BY GREGORY MASON

    Every third man you meet in Detroit was born in a foreign country.
    And three out of every four persons there were either born abroad or
    born here of foreign-born parents. In short, in Detroit, only every
    fourth person you meet was born in this country of American parents.
    Such is the make-up of the town which has been called "the most
    American city in the United States."



    (8)

    (_Kansas City Star_)

    A KANSAS TOWN FEELS ITS OWN PULSE

    Lawrence, Kas., was not ill. Most of its citizens did not even think
    it was ailing, but there were some anxious souls who wondered if the
    rosy exterior were not the mockery of an internal fever. They called
    in physicians, and after seven months spent in making their
    diagnosis, they have prescribed for Lawrence, and the town is
    alarmed to the point of taking their medicine.

    That is the medical way of saying that Lawrence has just completed
    the most thorough municipal survey ever undertaken by a town of its
    size, and in so doing has found out that it is afflicted with a lot
    of ills that all cities are heir to. Lawrence, however, with Kansas
    progressiveness, proposes to cure these ills.

    Prof. F.W. Blackmar, head of the department of sociology at the
    University of Kansas, and incidentally a sort of city doctor, was
    the first "physician" consulted. He called his assistant, Prof. B.W.
    Burgess, and Rev. William A. Powell in consultation, and about one
    hundred and fifty club women were taken into the case. Then they got
    busy. That was April 1. This month they completed the examination,
    set up an exhibit to illustrate what they had to report, and read
    the prescription.



    (9)

    (_Popular Science Monthly_)

    BREAKING THE CHAIN THAT BINDS US TO EARTH

    BY CHARLES NEVERS HOLMES

    Man is chained to this Earth, his planet home. His chain is
    invisible, but the ball is always to be seen--the Earth itself. The
    chain itself is apparently without weight, while the chain's ball
    weighs about 7,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 tons!

    (10)

    (_Associated Sunday Magazine_)

    IN TUNE WHEN OUT OF TUNE

    BY JOHN WARREN

    How many persons who own pianos and play them can explain why a
    piano cannot be said to be in tune unless it is actually out of
    tune?



    (11)

    (_Railroad Man's Magazine_)

    MAKING STEEL RAILS

    BY CHARLES FREDERICK CARTER

    To make steel rails, take 2 pounds of iron ore, 1 pound of coke, ¬Ω
    pound of limestone, and 4¬Ω pounds of air for each pound of iron to
    be produced. Mix and melt, cast in molds, and roll to shape while
    hot. Serve cold.

    Rail-making certainly does seem to be easy when stated in its
    simplest terms; it also seems attractive from a business standpoint.



    (12)

    (_Leslie's Weekly_)

    WHAT ELECTRICITY MEANS TO YOU

    ONE CENT'S WORTH OF ELECTRICITY AT TEN CENTS PER KILOWATT-HOUR WILL
    OPERATE:

      Sixteen candle-power Mazda lamp for five hours
      Six pound flatiron 15 minutes
      Radiant toaster long enough to produce ten slices of toast
      Sewing machine for two hours
      Fan 12 inches in diameter for two hours
      Percolator long enough to make five cups of coffee
      Heating pad from two to four hours
      Domestic buffer for 1¬º hours
      Chafing dish 12 minutes
      Radiant grill for 10 minutes
      Curling iron once a day for two weeks
      Luminous 500 watt radiator for 12 minutes

    Hardly as old as a grown man, the electrical industry--including
    railways, telephones and telegraphs--has already invested
    $8,125,000,000 in the business of America. Its utility companies
    alone pay Uncle Sam $200,000,000 every year for taxes--seven out of
    every ten use it in some form every day. It is unmistakably the most
    vital factor to-day in America's prosperity. Its resources are
    boundless. As Secretary of the Interior Lane expresses it, there is
    enough hydro-electric energy running to waste to equal the daily
    labor of 1,800,000,000 men or 30 times our adult population.

BEGINNING WITH A QUOTATION. Words enclosed in quotation marks or set
off in some distinctive form such as verse, an advertisement, a letter,
a menu, or a sign, immediately catch the eye at the beginning of an
article. Every conceivable source may be drawn on for quotations,
provided, of course, that what is quoted has close connection with the
subject. If the quotation expresses an extraordinary idea, it possesses
an additional source of interest.

Verse quotations may be taken from a well-known poem, a popular song, a
nursery rhyme, or even doggerel verse. Sometimes a whole poem or song
prefaces an article. When the verse is printed in smaller type than the
article, it need not be enclosed in quotation marks. In his typewritten
manuscript a writer may indicate this difference in size of type by
single-spacing the lines of the quotation.

Prose quotations may be taken from a speech or an interview, or from
printed material such as a book, report, or bulletin. The more
significant the quoted statement, the more effective will be the
introduction. When the quotation consists of several sentences or of one
long sentence, it may comprise the first paragraph, to be followed in
the second paragraph by the necessary explanation.

Popular sayings, slogans, or current phrases are not always enclosed in
quotation marks, but are often set off in a separate paragraph as a
striking form of beginning.

The most conspicuous quotation beginnings are reproductions of newspaper
clippings, advertisements, price lists, menus, telegrams, invitations,
or parts of legal documents. These are not infrequently reproduced as
nearly as possible in the original form and may be enclosed in a frame,
or "box."


    QUOTATION BEGINNINGS

    (1)

    (_New York Evening Post_)

    "DIGNIFIED AND STATELY"

    BEING AN ACCOUNT OF SOME HIGH AND LOW JINKS PRACTICED ABOUT THIS
    TIME ON COLLEGE CLASS DAYS

    BY EVA ELISE VOM BAUR

      _Our sorrows are forgotten,
      And our cares are flown away,
      While we go marching through Princeton_.

    Singing these words, 'round and 'round the campus they marched,
    drums beating time which no one observed, band clashing with band,
    in tune with nothing but the dominant note--the joy of reunion. A
    motley lot of men they are--sailors and traction engineers,
    Pierrots, soldiers, and even vestal virgins--for the June
    Commencement is college carnival time.

    Then hundreds upon thousands of men, East, West, North and South,
    drop their work and their worries, and leaving families and
    creditors at home, slip away to their respective alma maters, "just
    to be boys again" for a day and a night or two.


    (2)

    (_Harper's Monthly_)

    THE PARTY OF THE THIRD PART

    BY WALTER E. WEYL

    "The quarrel," opined Sir Lucius O'Trigger, "is a very pretty
    quarrel as it stands; we should only spoil it by trying to explain
    it."

    Something like this was once the attitude of the swaggering youth of
    Britain and Ireland, who quarreled "genteelly" and fought out their
    bloody duels "in peace and quietness." Something like this, also,
    after the jump of a century, was the attitude of employers and
    trade-unions all over the world toward industrial disputes. Words
    were wasted breath; the time to strike or to lock out your employees
    was when you were ready and your opponent was not. If you won, so
    much the better; if you lost--at any rate, it was your own business.
    Outsiders were not presumed to interfere. "Faith!" exclaimed Sir
    Lucius, "that same interruption in affairs of this nature shows very
    great ill-breeding."


    (3)

    (_McClure's Magazine_)

    RIDING ON BUBBLES

    BY WALDEMAR KAEMPFFERT

    "And the Prince sped away with his princess in a magic chariot, the
    wheels of which were four bubbles of air."

    Suppose you had read that in an Andersen or a Grimm fairy tale in
    the days when you firmly believed that Cinderella went to a ball in
    a state coach which had once been a pumpkin; you would have accepted
    the magic chariot and its four bubbles of air without question.

    What a pity it is that we have lost the credulity and the wonder of
    childhood! We have our automobiles--over two and a half million of
    them--but they have ceased to be magic chariots to us. And as for
    their tires, they are mere "shoes" and "tubes"--anything but the
    bubbles of air that they are.

    In the whole mechanism of modern transportation there is nothing so
    paradoxical, nothing so daring in conception as these same bubbles
    of air which we call tires.


    (4)

    (_Good Housekeeping_)

    GERALDINE FARRAR'S ADVICE TO ASPIRING SINGERS

    INTERVIEW BY JOHN CORBIN

    "When did I first decide to be an opera singer?" Miss Farrar smiled.
    "Let me see. At least as early as the age of eight. This is how I
    remember. At school I used to get good marks in most of my studies,
    but in arithmetic my mark was about sixty. That made me unhappy. But
    once when I was eight, I distinctly remember, I reflected that it
    didn't really matter because I was going to be an opera singer. How
    long before that I had decided on my career I can't say."


    (5)

    (_The Delineator_)

    HOW TO START A CAFETERIA

    BY AGNES ATHOL

    "If John could only get a satisfactory lunch for a reasonable amount
    of money!" sighs the wife of John in every sizable city in the
    United States, where work and home are far apart.

    "He hates sandwiches, anyway, and has no suitable place to eat them;
    and somehow he doesn't feel that he does good work on a cold box
    lunch. But those clattery quick-lunch places which are all he has
    time for, or can afford, don't have appetizing cooking or
    surroundings, and all my forethought and planning over our good home
    meals may be counteracted by his miserable lunch. I believe half the
    explanation of the 'tired business man' lies in the kind of lunches
    he eats."

    Twenty-five cents a day is probably the outside limit of what the
    great majority of men spend on their luncheons. Some cannot spend
    over fifteen. What a man needs and so seldom gets for that sum is
    good, wholesome, appetizing food, quickly served. He wants to eat in
    a place which is quiet and not too bare and ugly. He wants to buy
    real food and not table decorations. He is willing to dispense with
    elaborate service and its accompanying tip, if he can get more food
    of better quality.

    The cafeteria lunch-room provides a solution for the mid-day lunch
    problem and, when wisely located and well run, the answer to many a
    competent woman or girl who is asking: "What shall I do to earn a
    living?"


    (6)

    (_Newspaper Enterprise Association_)

    AMERICANIZATION OF AMERICA IS PLANNED

    BY E.C. RODGERS

    Washington, D.C.--America Americanized!

    That's the goal of the naturalization bureau of the United States
    department of labor, as expressed by Raymond P. Crist, deputy
    commissioner, in charge of the Americanization program.


    (7)

    (_Tractor and Gas Engine Review_)

    FIRE INSURANCE THAT DOESN'T INSURE

    BY A.B. BROWN

    "This entire policy, unless otherwise provided by agreement endorsed
    hereon, or added hereto, shall be void if the interest of the
    insured be other than unconditional and sole ownership."

    If any farmer anywhere in the United States will look up the fire
    insurance policy on his farm building, and will read it carefully,
    in nine cases out of ten, he will find tucked away somewhere therein
    a clause exactly like the one quoted above, or practically in the
    same words.

BEGINNING WITH A QUESTION. Every question is like a riddle; we are never
satisfied until we know the answer. So a question put to us at the
beginning of an article piques our curiosity, and we are not content
until we find out how the writer answers it.

Instead of a single question, several may be asked in succession. These
questions may deal with different phases of the subject or may repeat
the first question in other words. It is frequently desirable to break
up a long question into a number of short ones to enable the rapid
reader to grasp the idea more easily. Greater prominence may be gained
for each question by giving it a separate paragraph.

Rhetorical questions, although the equivalent of affirmative or negative
statements, nevertheless retain enough of their interrogative effect to
be used advantageously for the beginning of an article.

That the appeal may be brought home to each reader personally, the
pronoun "you," or "yours," is often embodied in the question, and
sometimes readers are addressed by some designation such as "Mr. Average
Reader," "Mrs. Voter," "you, high school boys and girls."

The indirect question naturally lacks the force of the direct one, but
it may be employed when a less striking form of beginning is desired.
The direct question, "Do you know why the sky is blue?" loses much of
its force when changed into the indirect form, "Few people know why the
sky is blue"; still it possesses enough of the riddle element to
stimulate thought. Several indirect questions may be included in the
initial sentence of an article.

    QUESTION BEGINNINGS

    (1)

    (_Kansas City Star_)

    TRACING THE DROUTH TO ITS LAIR

    What becomes of the rainfall in the plains states? This region is
    the veritable bread basket of our country; but in spite of the fact
    that we have an average rainfall of about thirty-six inches, lack of
    moisture, more frequently than any other condition, becomes a
    limiting factor in crop production. Measured in terms of wheat
    production, a 36-inch rainfall, if properly distributed through the
    growing season and utilized only by the crop growing land, is
    sufficient for the production of ninety bushels of wheat an acre.
    The question as to what becomes of the rainfall, therefore, is of
    considerable interest in this great agricultural center of North
    America, where we do well if we average twenty-five bushels to the
    acre.


    (2)

    (_New York Evening Sun_)

    WE WASTE ONE-QUARTER OF OUR FOOD

    If a family of five using twenty-five bushels of potatoes a year at
    $2 a bushel, lose 20 per cent on a bushel by paring, how much has
    the family thrown into the garbage can during the year? Answer, $10.
    Applying this conservative estimate of dietitians to other foods,
    the average family might save at least $100 a year on its table.


    (3)

    (_New York Times)_

    FARM WIZARD ACHIEVES AGRICULTURAL WONDERS

    BY ROBERT G. SKERRETT


    Can a farm be operated like a factory? Can fickle nature be offset
    and crops be brought to maturity upon schedule time?

    These are questions that a farmer near Bridgeton, N.J., has answered
    in the most practical manner imaginable.


    (4)

    (_San Francisco Call_)

    DOES IT PAY THE STATE TO EDUCATE PRETTY GIRLS FOR TEACHERS?

    BY KATHERINE ATKINSON


    Does it pay the state to educate its teachers?

    Do normal school and university graduates continue teaching long
    enough to make adequate return for the money invested in their
    training?


    (5)

    (_Newspaper Feature Service_)

    HOW HUNGER IS NOW MEASURED AND PHOTOGRAPHED

    Just what hunger is, why all living creatures suffer this feeling
    and what the difference is between hunger and appetite have always
    been three questions that puzzled scientists. Not until Dr. A.J.
    Carlson devised a method of ascertaining exactly the nature of
    hunger by measuring and comparing the degrees of this sensation,
    have investigators along this line of scientific research been able
    to reach any definite conclusion.


    (6)

    (_The Outlook_)

    GROW OLD ALONG WITH ME

    BY CHARLES HENRY LERRIGO

    Are you interested in adding fifteen years to your life?

    Perhaps you are one of those sound strong persons absolutely assured
    of perfect health.

    Very well. Two thousand young persons, mostly men, average age
    thirty, employees of commercial houses and banks in New York City,
    were given a medical examination in a recent period of six months;
    1,898 of them were positive of getting a perfect bill of health.

    Here are the findings:

    Sixty-three were absolutely sound.

    The remaining 1,937 all suffered from some defect, great or small,
    which was capable of improvement.


    (7)

    (_Country Gentleman_)

    SIMPLE ACCOUNTS FOR FARM BUSINESS

    BY MORTON O. COOPER

    Is your farm making money or losing it? What department is showing a
    profit? What one is piling up a loss? Do you know? Not one farmer in
    ten does know and it is all because not one in ten has any accounts
    apart from his bankbook so he can tell at the end of the year
    whether he has kept the farm or the farm has kept him.


    (8)

    (_The Outlook_)

    AN ENFORCED VACATION

    BY A CITY DWELLER

    Have you, my amiable male reader, felt secretly annoyed when your
    friends--probably your wife and certainly your physician--have
    suggested that you cut your daily diet of Havanas in two, feeling
    that your intimate acquaintance with yourself constituted you a
    better judge of such matters than they? Have you felt that your
    physician's advice to spend at least three-quarters of an hour at
    lunch was good advice for somebody else, but that you had neither
    time nor inclination for it? Have you felt that you would _like_ to
    take a month's vacation, but with so many "irons in the fire" things
    would go to smash if you did? Do you know what it is to lie awake at
    night and plan your campaign for the following day? Then _you_ are
    getting ready for an enforced vacation.


    (9)

    (_Leslie's Weekly_)

    TAKING THE STARCH OUT OF THE MARCH

    BY GERALD MYGATT

    Don't most of us--that is, those of us who are unfamiliar with army
    life and with things military in general--don't most of us picture
    marching troops as swinging down a road in perfect step, left arms
    moving in unison, rifles held smartly at the right shoulder, head
    and eyes straight to the front (with never so much as a forehead
    wrinkled to dislodge a mosquito or a fly), and with the band of the
    fife-and-drum corps playing gaily at the head of the column? Of
    course we do. Because that's the way we see them on parade.

    A march is a far different thing. A march is simply the means of
    getting so many men from one place to another in the quickest time
    and in the best possible condition. And it may astonish one to be
    told that marching is the principal occupation of troops in the
    field--that it is one of the hardest things for troops to learn to
    do properly, and that it is one of the chief causes of loss.

ADDRESSING THE READER DIRECTLY. A direct personal appeal makes a good
opening for an article. The writer seems to be talking to each reader
individually instead of merely writing for thousands. This form of
address may seem to hark back to the days of the "gentle reader," but
its appeal is perennial. To the pronoun "you" may be added the
designation of the particular class of readers addressed, such as "You,
mothers," or "You, Mr. Salaried Man." The imperative verb is perhaps the
strongest form of direct address. There is danger of overdoing the
"do-this-and-don't-do-that" style, particularly in articles of practical
guidance, but that need not deter a writer from using the imperative
beginning occasionally.

    DIRECT ADDRESS BEGINNINGS

    (1)

    (_New York Times_)

    SMALL CHANCE FOR DRAFT DODGERS IF DOCTORS KNOW THEIR BUSINESS

    A word with you, Mr. Would-Be-Slacker. If you 're thinking of trying
    to dodge the selective draft by pretending physical disability when
    you get before the local exemption board, here's a bit of advice:
    Don't. Since you are Mr. Would-Be-Slacker there is no use preaching
    patriotism to you. But here is something that will influence you: If
    you try to dodge the draft and are caught, there is a heavy penalty,
    both fine and imprisonment; and you're almost sure to get caught.


    (2)

    (_American Magazine_)

    THE GENERAL MANAGER OF COWBELL "HOLLER"

    BY BRUCE BARTON

    You would never in the world find Cowbell "Holler" alone, so I will
    tell you how to get there. You come over the Big Hill pike until you
    reach West Pinnacle. It was from the peak of West Pinnacle that
    Daniel Boone first looked out over the blue grass region of
    Kentucky. You follow the pike around the base of the Pinnacle, and
    there you are, right in the heart of Cowbell "Holler," and only two
    pastures and a creek away from Miss Adelia Fox's rural social
    settlement--the first of its kind, so far as I know, in America.

    (3)

    (_Chicago Tribune_)

    THE ROAD TO RETAIL SUCCESS

    BY BENJAMIN H. JEFFERSON

    You all know the retail druggist who has worked fifteen or sixteen
    hours a day all his life, and now, as an old man, is forced to
    discharge his only clerk. You all know the grocer who has changed
    from one store to another and another, and who finally turns up as a
    collector for your milkman. You all know the hard working milliner
    and, perhaps, have followed her career until she was lost to sight
    amid sickness and distress. You all have friends among stationers
    and newsdealers. You have seen them labor day in and day out, from
    early morning until late at night; and have observed with sorrow the
    small fruits of their many years of toil.

    Why did they fail?


    (4)

    (_Illustrated Sunday Magazine_)

    THE MAN WHO PUT THE "PEP" IN PRINTING

    Look at your watch.

    How long is a second? Gone as you look at the tiny hand, isn't it?
    Yet within that one second it is possible to print, cut, fold and
    stack sixteen and two-thirds newspapers!

    Watch the second hand make one revolution--a minute. Within that
    minute it is possible to print, cut, fold and stack in neat piles
    one thousand big newspapers! To do that is putting "pep" in
    printing, and Henry A. Wise Wood is the man who did it.




CHAPTER VIII

STYLE


STYLE DEFINED. Style, or the manner in which ideas and emotions are
expressed, is as important in special feature writing as it is in any
other kind of literary work. A writer may select an excellent subject,
may formulate a definite purpose, and may choose the type of article
best suited to his needs, but if he is unable to express his thoughts
effectively, his article will be a failure. Style is not to be regarded
as mere ornament added to ordinary forms of expression. It is not an
incidental element, but rather the fundamental part of all literary
composition, the means by which a writer transfers what is in his own
mind to the minds of his readers. It is a vehicle for conveying ideas
and emotions. The more easily, accurately, and completely the reader
gets the author's thoughts and feelings, the better is the style.

The style of an article needs to be adapted both to the readers and to
the subject. An article for a boys' magazine would be written in a style
different from that of a story on the same subject intended for a Sunday
newspaper. The style appropriate to an entertaining story on odd
superstitions of business men would be unsuitable for a popular
exposition of wireless telephony. In a word, the style of a special
article demands as careful consideration as does its subject, purpose,
and structure.

Since it may be assumed that any one who aspires to write for newspapers
and magazines has a general knowledge of the principles of composition
and of the elements and qualities of style, only such points of style as
are important in special feature writing will be discussed in this
chapter.

The elements of style are: (1) words, (2) figures of speech, (3)
sentences, and (4) paragraphs. The kinds of words, figures, sentences,
and paragraphs used, and the way in which they are combined, determine
the style.

WORDS. In the choice of words for popular articles, three points are
important: (1) only such words may be used as are familiar to the
average person, (2) concrete terms make a much more definite impression
than general ones, and (3) words that carry with them associated ideas
and feelings are more effective than words that lack such intellectual
and emotional connotation.

The rapid reader cannot stop to refer to the dictionary for words that
he does not know. Although the special feature writer is limited to
terms familiar to the average reader, he need not confine himself to
commonplace, colloquial diction; most readers know the meaning of many
more words than they themselves use in everyday conversation. In
treating technical topics, it is often necessary to employ some
unfamiliar terms, but these may readily be explained the first time they
appear. Whenever the writer is in doubt as to whether or not his readers
will understand a certain term, the safest course is to explain it or to
substitute one that is sure to be understood.

Since most persons grasp concrete ideas more quickly than abstract ones,
specific words should be given the preference in popular articles. To
create concrete images must be the writer's constant aim. Instead of a
general term like "walk," for example, he should select a specific,
picture-making word such as hurry, dash, run, race, amble, stroll,
stride, shuffle, shamble, limp, strut, stalk. For the word "horse" he
may substitute a definite term like sorrel, bay, percheron, nag,
charger, steed, broncho, or pony. In narrative and descriptive writing
particularly, it is necessary to use words that make pictures and that
reproduce sounds and other sense impressions. In the effort to make his
diction specific, however, the writer must guard against bizarre effects
and an excessive use of adjectives and adverbs. Verbs, quite as much as
nouns, adjectives, and adverbs, produce clear, vivid images when
skillfully handled.

Some words carry with them associated ideas and emotions, while others
do not. The feelings and ideas thus associated with words constitute
their emotional and intellectual connotation, as distinct from their
logical meaning, or denotation. The word "home," for example, denotes
simply one's place of residence, but it connotes all the thoughts and
feelings associated with one's own house and family circle. Such a word
is said to have a rich emotional connotation because it arouses strong
feeling. It also has a rich intellectual connotation since it calls up
many associated images. Words and phrases that are peculiar to the Bible
or to the church service carry with them mental images and emotions
connected with religious worship. In a personality sketch of a spiritual
leader, for example, such words and phrases would be particularly
effective to create the atmosphere with which such a man might very
appropriately be invested. Since homely, colloquial expressions have
entirely different associations, they would be entirely out of keeping
with the tone of such a sketch, unless the religious leader were an
unconventional revivalist. A single word with the wrong connotation may
seriously affect the tone of a paragraph. On the other hand, words and
phrases rich in appropriate suggestion heighten immeasurably the
effectiveness of an article.

The value of concrete words is shown in the following paragraphs taken
from a newspaper article describing a gas attack:

    There was a faint green vapor, which swayed and hung under the lee
    of the raised parapet two hundred yards away. It increased in
    volume, and at last rose high enough to be caught by the wind. It
    strayed out in tattered yellowish streamers toward the English
    lines, half dissipating itself in twenty yards, until the steady
    outpour of the green smoke gave it reinforcement and it made
    headway. Then, creeping forward from tuft to tuft, and preceded by
    an acrid and parching whiff, the curling and tumbling vapor reached
    the English lines in a wall twenty feet high.

    As the grayish cloud drifted over the parapet, there was a stifled
    call from some dozen men who had carelessly let their protectors
    drop. The gas was terrible. A breath of it was like a wolf at the
    throat, like hot ashes in the windpipe.

    The yellowish waves of gas became more greenish in color as fresh
    volumes poured out continually from the squat iron cylinders which
    had now been raised and placed outside the trenches by the Germans.
    The translucent flood flowed over the parapet, linking at once on
    the inner side and forming vague, gauzy pools and backwaters, in
    which men stood knee deep while the lighter gas was blown in their
    faces over the parapet.


FAULTS IN DICTION. Since newspaper reporters and correspondents are
called upon day after day to write on similar events and to write at top
speed, they are prone to use the same words over and over again, without
making much of an effort to "find the one noun that best expresses the
idea, the one verb needed to give it life, and the one adjective to
qualify it." This tendency to use trite, general, "woolly" words instead
of fresh, concrete ones is not infrequently seen in special feature
stories written by newspaper workers. Every writer who aims to give to
his articles some distinction in style should guard against the danger
of writing what has aptly been termed "jargon." "To write jargon," says
Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch in his book, "On the Art of Writing," "is to be
perpetually shuffling around in the fog and cotton-wool of abstract
terms. So long as you prefer abstract words, which express other men's
summarized concepts of things, to concrete ones which lie as near as can
be reached to things themselves and are the first-hand material for your
thoughts, you will remain, at the best, writers at second-hand. If your
language be jargon, your intellect, if not your whole character, will
almost certainly correspond. Where your mind should go straight, it will
dodge; the difficulties it should approach with a fair front and grip
with a firm hand it will be seeking to evade or circumvent. For the
style is the man, and where a man's treasure is there his heart, and his
brain, and his writing, will be also."

FIGURES OF SPEECH. To most persons the term "figure of speech" suggests
such figures as metonymy and synecdoche, which they once learned to
define, but never thought of using voluntarily in their own writing.
Figures of speech are too often regarded as ornaments suited only to
poetry or poetical prose. With these popular notions in mind, a writer
for newspapers and magazines may quite naturally conclude that
figurative expressions have little or no practical value in his work.
Figures of speech, however, are great aids, not only to clearness and
conciseness, but to the vividness of an article. They assist the reader
to grasp ideas quickly and they stimulate his imagination and his
emotions.

Association of ideas is the principle underlying figurative expressions.
By a figure of speech a writer shows his readers the relation between a
new idea and one already familiar to them. An unfamiliar object, for
example, is likened to a familiar one, directly, as in the simile, or by
implication, as in the metaphor. As the object brought into relation
with the new idea is more familiar and more concrete, the effect of the
figure is to simplify the subject that is being explained, and to make
it more easy of comprehension.

A figure of speech makes both for conciseness and for economy of mental
effort on the part of the reader. To say in a personality sketch, for
example, that the person looks "like Lincoln" is the simplest, most
concise way of creating a mental picture. Or to describe a smoothly
running electric motor as "purring," instantly makes the reader hear the
sound. Scores of words may be saved, and clearer, more vivid impressions
may be given, by the judicious use of figures of speech.

As the familiar, concrete objects introduced in figures frequently have
associated emotions, figurative expressions often make an emotional
appeal. Again, to say that a person looks "like Lincoln" not only
creates a mental picture but awakes the feelings generally associated
with Lincoln. The result is that readers are inclined to feel toward the
person so described as they feel toward Lincoln.

Even in practical articles, figurative diction may not be amiss. In
explaining a method of splitting old kitchen boilers in order to make
watering troughs, a writer in a farm journal happily described a cold
chisel as "turning out a narrow shaving of steel and rolling it away
much as the mold-board of a plow turns the furrow."

The stimulating effect of a paragraph abounding in figurative
expressions is well illustrated by the following passage taken from a
newspaper personality sketch of a popular pulpit orator:

    His mind is all daylight. There are no subtle half-tones, or
    sensitive reserves, or significant shadows of silence, no landscape
    fading through purple mists to a romantic distance. All is clear,
    obvious, emphatic. There is little atmosphere and a lack of that
    humor that softens the contours of controversy. His thought is
    simple and direct and makes its appeal, not to culture, but to the
    primitive emotions. * * * * His strenuousness is a battle-cry to the
    crowd. He keeps his passion white hot; his body works like a
    windmill in a hurricane; his eyes flash lightnings; he seizes the
    enemy, as it were, by the throat, pommels him with breathless blows,
    and throws him aside a miserable wreck.

SENTENCES. For rapid reading the prime requisite of a good sentence is
that its grammatical structure shall be evident; in other words, that
the reader shall be able at a glance to see the relation of its parts.
Involved sentences that require a second perusal before they yield their
meaning, are clearly not adapted to the newspaper or magazine. Short
sentences and those of medium length are, as a rule, more easily grasped
than long ones, but for rapid reading the structure of the sentence,
rather than its length, is the chief consideration. Absolute clearness
is of paramount importance.

In hurried reading the eye is caught by the first group of words at the
beginning of a sentence. These words make more of an impression on the
reader's mind than do those in the middle or at the end of the sentence.
In all journalistic writing, therefore, the position of greatest
emphasis is the beginning. It is there that the most significant idea
should be placed. Such an arrangement does not mean that the sentence
need trail off loosely in a series of phrases and clauses. Firmness of
structure can and should be maintained even though the strongest
emphasis is at the beginning. In revising his article a writer often
finds that he may greatly increase the effectiveness of his sentences by
so rearranging the parts as to bring the important ideas close to the
beginning.

LENGTH OF THE SENTENCE. Sentences may be classified according to length
as (1) short, containing 15 words or less; (2) medium, from 15 to 30
words; and (3) long, 30 words or more. Each of these types of sentence
has its own peculiar advantages.

The short sentence, because it is easily apprehended, is more emphatic
than a longer one. Used in combination with medium and long sentences it
gains prominence by contrast. It makes an emphatic beginning and a
strong conclusion for a paragraph. As the last sentence of an article it
is a good "snapper." In contrast with longer statements, it also serves
as a convenient transition sentence.

The sentence of medium length lends itself readily to the expression of
the average thought; but when used continuously it gives to the style a
monotony of rhythm that soon becomes tiresome.

The long sentence is convenient for grouping details that are closely
connected. In contrast with the rapid, emphatic short sentence, it moves
slowly and deliberately, and so is well adapted to the expression of
dignified and impressive thoughts.

To prevent monotony, variety of sentence length is desirable. Writers
who unconsciously tend to use sentences of about the same length and of
the same construction, need to beware of this uniformity.

The skillful use of single short sentences, of series of short
sentences, of medium, and of long sentences, to give variety, to express
thoughts effectively, and to produce harmony between the movement of the
style and the ideas advanced, is well illustrated in the selection
below. It is the beginning of a personality sketch of William II, the
former German emperor, published in the London _Daily News_ before the
world war, and written by Mr. A.G. Gardiner, the editor of that paper.

    When I think of the Kaiser I think of a bright May morning at
    Potsdam. It is the Spring Parade, and across from where we are
    gathered under the windows of the old palace the household troops
    are drawn up on the great parade ground, their helmets and banners
    and lances all astir in the jolly sunshine. Officers gallop hither
    and thither shouting commands. Regiments form and reform. Swords
    flash out and flash back again. A noble background of trees frames
    the gay picture with cool green foliage. There is a sudden
    stillness. The closely serried ranks are rigid and moveless. The
    shouts of command are silenced.

    "The Kaiser."

    He comes slowly up the parade ground on his white charger, helmet
    and eagle flashing in the sunshine, sitting his horse as if he lived
    in the saddle, his face turned to his men as he passes by.

    "Morgen, meine Kinder." His salutation rings out at intervals in the
    clear morning air. And back from the ranks in chorus comes the
    response: "Morgen, Majest√§t."

    And as he rides on, master of a million men, the most powerful
    figure in Europe, reviewing his troops on the peaceful parade ground
    at Potsdam, one wonders whether the day will ever come when he will
    ride down those ranks on another errand, and when that cheerful
    response of the soldiers will have in it the ancient ring of
    doom--"Te morituri salutamus."

    For answer, let us look at this challenging figure on the white
    charger. What is he? What has he done?

By the three short sentences in the first paragraph beginning "Officers
gallop," the author depicts the rapid movement of the soldiers. By the
next three short sentences in the same paragraph beginning, "There is a
sudden stillness," he produces an impression of suspense. To picture the
Kaiser coming up "slowly," he uses a long, leisurely sentence. The
salutations "ring out" in short, crisp sentences. The more serious,
impressive thought of the possibility of war finds fitting expression in
the long, 64-word sentence, ending with the sonorous--"ring of doom,"
"Te morituri salutamus."

The transition between the introduction and the body of the sketch is
accomplished by the last paragraph consisting of three short sentences,
in marked contrast with the climactic effect with which the description
closed.

PARAGRAPHS. The paragraph is a device that aids a writer to convey to
readers his thoughts combined in the same groups in which they are
arranged in his own mind. Since a small group of thoughts is more easily
grasped than a large one, paragraphs in journalistic writing are usually
considerably shorter than those of ordinary English prose. In the narrow
newspaper column, there is room for only five or six words to a line. A
paragraph of 250 words, which is the average length of the literary
paragraph, fills between forty and fifty lines of a newspaper column.
Such paragraphs seem heavy and uninviting. Moreover, the casual reader
cannot readily comprehend and combine the various thoughts in so large a
group of sentences. Although there is no standard column width for
magazines, the number of words in a line does not usually exceed eight.
A paragraph of 250 words that occupies 30 eight-word lines seems less
attractive than one of half that length. The normal paragraph in
journalistic writing seldom exceeds 100 words and not infrequently is
much shorter. As such a paragraph contains not more than four or five
sentences, the general reading public has little difficulty in
comprehending it.

The beginning of the paragraph, like the beginning of the sentence, is
the part that catches the eye. Significant ideas that need to be
impressed upon the mind of the reader belong at the beginning. If his
attention is arrested and held by the first group of words, he is likely
to read on. If the beginning does not attract him, he skips down the
column to the next paragraph, glancing merely at enough words in the
paragraph that he skips to "get the drift of it." An emphatic beginning
for a paragraph will insure attention for its contents.

REVISION. It is seldom that the first draft of an article cannot be
improved by a careful revision. In going over his work, word by word and
sentence by sentence, the writer will generally find many opportunities
to increase the effectiveness of the structure and the style. Such
revision, moreover, need not destroy the ease and naturalness of
expression.

To improve the diction of his article, the writer should eliminate (1)
superfluous words, (2) trite phrases, (3) general, colorless words, (4)
terms unfamiliar to the average reader, unless they are explained, (5)
words with a connotation inappropriate to the context, (6) hackneyed and
mixed metaphors. The effectiveness of the expression may often be
strengthened by the addition of specific, picture-making, imitative, and
connotative words, as well as of figures of speech that clarify the
ideas and stimulate the imagination.

Sentences may frequently be improved (1) by making their grammatical
structure more evident, (2) by breaking up long, loose sentences into
shorter ones, (3) by using short sentences for emphasis, (4) by varying
the sentence length, (5) by transferring important ideas to the
beginning of the sentence.

Every paragraph should be tested to determine whether or not it is a
unified, coherent group of thoughts, containing not more than 100 words,
with important ideas effectively massed at the beginning.

Finally, revision should eliminate all errors in grammar, spelling,
punctuation, and capitalization. Every minute spent in improving an
article adds greatly to its chances of being accepted.




CHAPTER IX

TITLES AND HEADLINES


IMPORTANCE OF HEAD AND TITLE. Headlines or titles, illustrations, and
names of authors are the three things that first catch the eye of the
reader as he turns over the pages of a newspaper or magazine. When the
writer's name is unknown to him, only the illustrations and the heading
remain to attract his attention.

The "attention-getting" value of the headline is fully appreciated not
only by newspaper and magazine editors but by writers of advertisements.
Just as the striking heads on the front page of a newspaper increase its
sales, so, also, attractive titles on the cover of a magazine lead
people to buy it, and so, too, a good headline in an advertisement
arouses interest in what the advertiser is trying to sell.

A good title adds greatly to the attractiveness of an article. In the
first place, the title is the one thing that catches the eye of the
editor or manuscript reader, as he glances over the copy, and if the
title is good, he carries over this favorable impression to the first
page or two of the article itself. To secure such favorable
consideration for a manuscript among the hundreds that are examined in
editorial offices, is no slight advantage. In the second place, what is
true of the editor and the manuscript is equally true of the reader and
the printed article. No writer can afford to neglect his titles.

VARIETY IN FORM AND STYLE. Because newspapers and magazines differ in
the size and the "make-up" of their pages, there is considerable variety
in the style of headlines and titles given to special feature articles.
Some magazine sections of newspapers have the full-size page of the
regular edition; others have pages only half as large. Some newspapers
use large eight-column display heads on their special articles, while
others confine their headlines for feature stories to a column or two.
Some papers regularly employ sub-titles in their magazine sections,
corresponding to the "lines," "banks," and "decks" in their news
headlines. This variety in newspapers is matched by that in magazines.
Despite these differences, however, there are a few general principles
that apply to all kinds of titles and headlines for special feature
articles.

CHARACTERISTICS OF A GOOD TITLE. To accomplish their purpose most
effectively titles should be (1) attractive, (2) accurate, (3) concise,
and (4) concrete.

The attractiveness of a title is measured by its power to arrest
attention and to lead to a reading of the article. As a statement of the
subject, the title makes essentially the same appeal that the subject
itself does; that is, it may interest the reader because the idea it
expresses has timeliness, novelty, elements of mystery or romance, human
interest, relation to the reader's life and success, or connection with
familiar or prominent persons or things. Not only the idea expressed,
but the way in which it is expressed, may catch the eye. By a
figurative, paradoxical, or interrogative form, the title may pique
curiosity. By alliteration, balance, or rhyme, it may please the ear. It
permits the reader to taste, in order to whet his appetite. It creates
desires that only the article can satisfy.

In an effort to make his titles attractive, a writer must beware of
sensationalism and exaggeration. The lurid news headline on the front
page of sensational papers has its counterpart in the equally
sensational title in the Sunday magazine section. All that has been said
concerning unwholesome subject-matter for special feature stories
applies to sensational titles. So, too, exaggerated, misleading
headlines on news and advertisements are matched by exaggerated,
misleading titles on special articles. To state more than the facts
warrant, to promise more than can be given, to arouse expectations that
cannot be satisfied--all are departures from truth and honesty.

Accuracy in titles involves, not merely avoidance of exaggerated and
misleading statement, but complete harmony in tone and spirit between
title and article. When the story is familiar and colloquial in style,
the title should reflect that informality. When the article makes a
serious appeal, the title should be dignified. A good title, in a word,
is true to the spirit as well as to the letter.

Conciseness in titles is imposed on the writer by the physical
limitations of type and page. Because the width of the column and of the
page is fixed, and because type is not made of rubber, a headline must
be built to fit the place it is to fill. Although in framing titles for
articles it is not always necessary to conform to the strict
requirements as to letters and spaces that limit the building of news
headlines, it is nevertheless important to keep within bounds. A study
of a large number of titles will show that they seldom contain more than
three or four important words with the necessary connectives and
particles. Short words, moreover, are preferred to long ones. By
analyzing the titles in the publication to which he plans to send his
article, a writer can frame his title to meet its typographical
requirements.

The reader's limited power of rapid comprehension is another reason for
brevity. A short title consisting of a small group of words yields its
meaning at a glance. Unless the reader catches the idea in the title
quickly, he is likely to pass on to something else. Here again short
words have an advantage over long ones.

Concreteness in titles makes for rapid comprehension and interest.
Clean-cut mental images are called up by specific words; vague ones
usually result from general, abstract terms. Clear mental pictures are
more interesting than vague impressions.

SUB-TITLES. Sub-titles are often used to supplement and amplify the
titles. They are the counterparts of the "decks" and "banks" in news
headlines. Their purpose is to give additional information, to arouse
greater interest, and to assist in carrying the reader over, as it were,
to the beginning of the article.

Since sub-titles follow immediately after the title, any repetition of
important words is usually avoided. It is desirable to maintain the same
tone in both title and sub-title. Occasionally the two together make a
continuous statement. The length of the sub-title is generally about
twice that of the title; that is, the average sub-title consists of from
ten to twelve words, including articles and connectives. The articles,
"a," "an," and "the," are not as consistently excluded from sub-titles
as they are from newspaper headlines.

SOME TYPES OF TITLES. Attempts to classify all kinds of headlines and
titles involve difficulties similar to those already encountered in the
effort to classify all types of beginnings. Nevertheless, a separation
of titles into fairly distinct, if not mutually exclusive, groups may
prove helpful to inexperienced writers. The following are the nine most
distinctive types of titles: (1) label; (2) "how" and "why" statement;
(3) striking statement, including figure of speech, paradox, and
expression of great magnitude; (4) quotation and paraphrase of
quotation; (5) question; (6) direct address, particularly in imperative
form; (7) alliteration; (8) rhyme; (9) balance.

The label title is a simple, direct statement of the subject. It has
only as much interest and attractiveness as the subject itself
possesses. Such titles are the following:

                      (1)
       RAISING GUINEA PIGS FOR A LIVING
One Missouri Man Finds a Ready Market for All He Can Sell

                      (2)
   HUMAN NATURE AS SEEN BY A PULLMAN PORTER

                      (3)
        THE FINANCIAL SIDE OF FOOTBALL

                      (4)
       CONFESSIONS OF AN UNDERGRADUATE

                      (5)
            BEE-KEEPING ON SHARES

                      (6)
         A COMMUNITY WOOD-CHOPPING DAY

                      (7)
  WHAT A WOMAN ON THE FARM THINKS OF PRICE FIXING

The "how-to-do-something" article may be given a "how" title that
indicates the character of the contents; for example:

                      (1)
    HOW I FOUND HEALTH IN THE DENTIST'S CHAIR

                      (2)
        HOW TO STORE YOUR CAR IN WINTER

                      (3)
      HOW A FARMER'S WIFE MADE $55 EXTRA

                      (4)
           HOW TO SUCCEED AS A WRITER
Woman Who "Knew She Could Write" Tells How She Began and
         Finally Got on the Right Road

The "how" title may also be used for an article that explains some
phenomenon or process. Examples of such titles are these:

                      (1)
              HOW A NETTLE STINGS

                      (2)
          HOW RIPE OLIVES ARE MADE

                      (3)
         HOW THE FREIGHT CAR GETS HOME

Articles that undertake to give causes and reasons are appropriately
given "why" titles like the following:

                     (1)
          WHY CAVIAR COSTS SO MUCH

                     (2)
           WHY I LIKE A ROUND BARN

                     (3)
         WHY THE COAL SUPPLY IS SHORT

A title may attract attention because of the striking character of the
idea it expresses; for example:

                     (1)
            WANTED: $50,000 MEN

                     (2)
        200 BUSHELS OF CORN PER ACRE

                     (3)
        FIRE WRITES A HEART'S RECORD

                     (4)
      THE PSYCHOLOGY OF SECOND HELPINGS

The paradoxical form of title piques curiosity by seeming to make a
self-contradictory statement, as, for example, the following:

                     (1)
                SHIPS OF STONE
  Seaworthy Concrete Vessels an Accomplished Fact

                     (2)
              CHRISTIAN PAGANS

                     (3)
     A TELESCOPE THAT POINTS DOWNWARD

                    (4)
           SEEING WITH YOUR EARS

                    (5)
        MAKING SAILORS WITHOUT SHIPS

                    (6)
      HOW TO BE AT HOME WHILE TRAVELING

                    (7)
        CANAL-BOATS THAT CLIMB HILLS

A striking figure of speech in a title stimulates the reader's
imagination and arouses his interest; for example:

                    (1)
          PULLING THE RIVER'S TEETH

                    (2)
        THE OLD HOUSE WITH TWO FACES

                    (3)
         THE HONEY-BEE SAVINGS BANK

                    (4)
             RIDING ON BUBBLES

                    (5)
           THE ROMANCE OF NITROGEN

A familiar quotation may be used for the title and may stand alone, but
often a sub-title is desirable to show the application of the quotation
to the subject, thus:

                    (1)
       THE SHOT HEARD 'ROUND THE WORLD
      America's First Victory in France

                    (2)
          "ALL WOOL AND A YARD WIDE"
What "All Wool" Really Means and Why Shoddy is Necessary

                    (3)
          THE SERVANT IN THE HOUSE
     And Why She Won't Stay in the House

A well-known quotation or common saying may be paraphrased in a novel
way to attract attention; for example:

                    (1)
        FORWARD! THE TRACTOR BRIGADE

                    (2)
         IT'S LO, THE RICH INDIAN

                    (3)
            LEARNING BY UNDOING

                    (4)
   THE GUILELESS SPIDER AND THE WILY FLY
Entomology Modifies our Ideas of the Famous Parlor

Since every question is like a riddle, a title in question form
naturally leads the reader to seek the answer in the article itself. The
directness of appeal may be heightened by addressing the question to the
reader with "you," "your," or by presenting it from the reader's point
of view with the use of "I," "we," or "ours." The sub-title may be
another question or an affirmation, but should not attempt to answer the
question. The following are typical question titles and sub-titles:

                    (1)
      WHAT IS A FAIR PRICE FOR MILK?

                    (2)
    HOW MUCH HEAT IS THERE IN YOUR COAL?

                    (3)
             WHO'S THE BEST BOSS?
 Would You Rather Work For a Man or For a Machine?

                    (4)
       "SHE SANK BY THE BOW"--BUT WHY?

                    (5)
     HOW SHALL WE KEEP WARM THIS WINTER?

                    (6)
           DOES DEEP PLOWING PAY?
   What Some Recent Tests Have Demonstrated

                    (7)
     SHALL I START A CANNING BUSINESS?

The reader may be addressed in an imperative form of title, as well as
in a question, as the following titles show:

                    (1)
             BLAME THE SUN SPOTS
Solar Upheavals That Make Mischief on the Earth

                    (2)
       EAT SHARKS AND TAN THEIR SKINS

                    (3)
          HOE! HOE! FOR UNCLE SAM

                    (4)
           DON'T JUMP OUT OF BED
Give Your Subconscious Self a Chance to Awake Gradually

                    (5)
         RAISE FISH ON YOUR FARM

                    (6)
       BETTER STOP! LOOK! AND LISTEN!

The attractiveness of titles may be heightened by such combinations of
sounds as alliteration and rhyme, or by rhythm such as is produced by
balanced elements. The following examples illustrate the use of
alliteration, rhyme, and balance:

                    (1)
           THE LURE OF THE LATCH

                    (2)
          THE DIMINISHING DOLLAR

                    (3)
         TRACING TELEPHONE TROUBLES

                    (4)
         BOY CULTURE AND AGRICULTURE

                    (5)
      A LITTLE BILL AGAINST BILLBOARDS

                    (6)
           EVERY CAMPUS A CAMP

                    (7)
     LABOR-LIGHTENERS AND HOME-BRIGHTENERS

                    (8)
      THE ARTILLERY MILL AT OLD FORT SILL
How Uncle Sam is Training His Field Artillery Officers

                    (9)
            SCHOLARS VS. DOLLARS

                   (10)
                WAR ON PESTS
When the Spray Gun's Away, Crop Enemies Play

                   (11)
          MORE HEAT AND LESS COAL

                   (12)
     GRAIN ALCOHOL FROM GREEN GARBAGE

HOW TO FRAME A TITLE. The application of the general principles
governing titles may best be shown by means of an article for which a
title is desired. A writer, for example, has prepared a popular article
on soil analysis as a means of determining what chemical elements
different kinds of farm land need to be most productive. A simple label
title like "The Value of Soil Analysis," obviously would not attract the
average person, and probably would interest only the more enterprising
of farmers. The analysis of soil not unnaturally suggests the diagnosis
of human disease; and the remedying of worn-out, run-down farm land by
applying such chemicals as phosphorus and lime, is analogous to the
physician's prescription of tonics for a run-down, an√¶mic person. These
ideas may readily be worked out as the following titles show:

                    (1)
        PRESCRIBING FOR RUN-DOWN LAND
What the Soil Doctor is Doing to Improve Our Farms

                    (2)
       THE SOIL DOCTOR AND HIS TONICS
   Prescribing Remedies for Worn-Out Farm Land

                    (3)
        DIAGNOSING ILLS OF THE SOIL
Science Offers Remedies for Depleted Farms

Other figurative titles like the following may be developed without much
effort from the ideas that soil "gets tired," "wears out," and "needs to
be fed":

                    (1)
          WHEN FARM LAND GETS TIRED
 Scientists Find Causes of Exhausted Fields

                    (2)
            FIELDS WON'T WEAR OUT
 If the Warnings of Soil Experts Are Heeded

                    (3)
       BALANCED RATIONS FOR THE SOIL
Why the Feeding of Farm Land is Necessary for Good Crops




CHAPTER X

PREPARING AND SELLING THE MANUSCRIPT


IMPORTANCE OF GOOD MANUSCRIPT. After an article has been carefully
revised, it is ready to be copied in the form in which it will be
submitted to editors. Because hundreds of contributions are examined
every day in editorial offices of large publications, manuscripts should
be submitted in such form that their merits can be ascertained as easily
and as quickly as possible. A neatly and carefully prepared manuscript
is likely to receive more favorable consideration than a badly typed
one. The impression produced by the external appearance of a manuscript
as it comes to an editor's table is comparable to that made by the
personal appearance of an applicant for a position as he enters an
office seeking employment. In copying his article, therefore, a writer
should keep in mind the impression that it will make in the editorial
office.

FORM FOR MANUSCRIPTS. Editors expect all manuscripts to be submitted in
typewritten form. Every person who aspires to write for publication
should learn to use a typewriter. Until he has learned to type his work
accurately, he must have a good typist copy it for him.

A good typewriter with clean type and a fresh, black, non-copying ribbon
produces the best results. The following elementary directions apply to
the preparation of all manuscripts: (1) write on only one side of the
paper; (2) allow a margin of about three quarters of an inch on all
sides of the page; (3) double space the lines in order to leave room for
changes, sub-heads, and other editing.

Unruled white bond paper of good quality in standard letter size, 8¬Ω
by 11 inches, is the most satisfactory. A high grade of paper not only
gives the manuscript a good appearance but stands more handling and
saves the recopying of returned manuscripts. A carbon copy should be
made of every manuscript so that, if the original copy goes astray in
the mail or in an editorial office, the writer's work will not have been
in vain. The carbon copy can also be used later for comparison with the
printed article. Such a comparison will show the writer the amount and
character of the editing that was deemed necessary to adapt the material
to the publication in which it appears.

A cover sheet of the same paper is a convenient device. It not only
gives the editorial reader some information in regard to the article,
but it protects the manuscript itself. Frequently, for purposes of
record, manuscripts are stamped or marked in editorial offices, but if a
cover page is attached, the manuscript itself is not defaced. When an
article is returned, the writer needs to recopy only the cover page
before starting the manuscript on its next journey. The form for such a
cover page is given on page 184.

The upper half of the first page of the manuscript should be left blank,
so that the editor may write a new title and sub-title if he is not
satisfied with those supplied by the author. The title, the sub-title,
and the author's name should be repeated at the beginning of the article
in the middle of the first page, even though they have been given on the
cover page. At the left-hand side, close to the top of each page after
the first, should be placed the writer's last name followed by a dash
and the title of the article, thus:

    Milton--Confessions of a Freshman.

The pages should be numbered in the upper right-hand corner. By these
simple means the danger of losing a page in the editorial offices is
reduced to a minimum.


     To be paid for at usual                 Written for The Outlook
     rates, or to be returned
     with the ten (10) cents
     in stamps enclosed, to
       Arthur W. Milton,
       582 Wilson Street,
       Des Moines, Iowa.


                         CONFESSIONS OF A FRESHMAN

               Why I Was Dropped From College at the End of My
                                First Year

                           By Arthur W. Milton


    (Note. This article is based on the writer's own experience in a
    large Middle Western state university, and the statistics have been
    obtained from the registrars of four state universities. It contains
    2,750 words.)

    Four (4) Photographs are Enclosed, as follows:

      1. How I Decorated My Room

      2. I Spent Hours Learning to Play My Ukelele

      3. When I Made the Freshman Team

      4. Cramming For My Final Exams

TYPOGRAPHICAL STYLE. Every newspaper and magazine has its own distinct
typographical style in capitalization, abbreviation, punctuation,
hyphenation, and the use of numerical figures. Some newspapers and
periodicals have a style book giving rules for the preparation and
editing of copy. A careful reading of several issues of a publication
will show a writer the salient features of its typographical style. It
is less important, however, to conform to the typographical
peculiarities of any one publication than it is to follow consistently
the commonly accepted rules of capitalization, punctuation,
abbreviation, and "unreformed" spelling. Printers prefer to have each
page end with a complete sentence. At the close of the article it is
well to put the end mark (#).

When a special feature story for newspaper publication must be prepared
so hastily that there is no time to copy the first draft, it may be
desirable to revise the manuscript by using the marks commonly employed
in editing copy. These are as follows:

american                            Three short lines under a letter or a
=                                   word indicate that it is to be set in
-                                   capital letters; thus, American.

New York Times                      Two short lines under a letter or a
 =   =    =                         word indicate that it is to be set in
 -   -    -                         small capital letters; thus, NEW
                                    YORK TIMES.

sine qua non                        One line under a word or words indicates
---- --- ---                        that it is to be set in italics;
                                    thus, _sine qua non_.

He is a /Sophomore                  An oblique line drawn from right to
                                    left through a capital letter indicates
                                    that it is to be set in lower
                                    case; thus, He is a sophomore.
          ____      _____
There are |10| in a |bu.|           A circle around numerical figures or
          ----      -----           abbreviations indicates that they
                                    are to be spelled out; thus, There
                                    are ten in a bushel.
___________              _______
|Professor| A.B.Smith is |sixty|.   A circle around words or figures
-----------              -------    spelled out indicates that they are
                                    to be abbreviated or that numerical
                                    figures are to be used; thus,
                                    Prof. A.B. Smith is 60.
     not        a
It is complimentry to him           A caret is placed at the point in the
     ^          ^                   line where the letters or words written
                                    above the line are to be inserted;
                                    thus, It is not complimentary
                                    to him.
   __________ ______
to |carefullyXstudy|                A line encircling two or more words
   ---------- ------                like an elongated figure "8" indicates
                                    that the words are to be transposed;
                                    thus, to study carefully.

to[=()]morrow                       Half circles connecting words or
                                    letters indicate that they are to be
                                    brought together; thus, tomorrow.

all/right                           A vertical line between parts of a
                                    word shows that the parts are to be
                                    separated; thus, all right.

U S 4 per cent. bonds               A small cross or a period in a circle
 x x                                may be used to show that a period
                                    is to be used; thus, U.S. 4 per cent.
                                    bonds.

")Yes, ')Love laughs at lock-       Quotation marks are often enclosed
smiths(', you know(", he replied.   in half circles to indicate
                                    whether they are beginning or end
                                    marks.

¬∂"How old are you?" he asked.       The paragraph mark (¬∂) or the
_|"Sixteen", she said.              sign [_|] may be used to call attention
                                    to the beginning of a new paragraph.

MAILING MANUSCRIPTS. Since manuscripts are written matter, they must be
sent sealed as first-class mail at letter rates of postage. For the
return of rejected articles stamps may be attached to the cover page by
means of a clip, or a self-addressed envelope with stamps affixed may be
enclosed. The writer's name and address should always be given on the
envelope in which the manuscript is sent to the publishers.

The envelope containing the article should be addressed to the "Editor"
of a magazine or to the "Sunday Editor" of a newspaper, as nothing is
gained by addressing him or her by name. If a writer knows an editor
personally or has had correspondence with him in regard to a particular
article, it may be desirable to send the manuscript to him personally.
An accompanying letter is not necessary, for the cover page of the
manuscript gives the editor and his assistants all the information that
they need.

Articles consisting of only a few pages may be folded twice and mailed
in a long envelope; bulkier manuscripts should be folded once and sent
in a manila manuscript envelope. Photographs of sizes up to 5 x 7 inches
may be placed in a manuscript that is folded once, with a single piece
of stout cardboard for protection. When larger photographs, up to 8 x 10
inches, accompany the article, the manuscript must be sent unfolded,
with two pieces of cardboard to protect the pictures. Manuscripts should
never be rolled.

HOW MANUSCRIPTS ARE HANDLED. In order to handle hundreds of manuscripts
as expeditiously as possible, most large editorial offices have worked
out systems that, though differing slightly, are essentially the same.
When a manuscript is received, a record is made of it on a card or in a
book, with the name and address of the author, the title and character
of the contribution, and the time of its receipt. The same data are
entered on a blank that is attached to the manuscript by a clip. On this
blank are left spaces for comments by each of the editorial assistants
who read and pass upon the article.

After these records have been made, the manuscript is given to the first
editorial reader. He can determine by glancing at the first page or two
whether or not the article is worth further consideration. Of the
thousands of contributions of all kinds submitted, a considerable
proportion are not in the least adapted to the periodical to which they
have been sent. The first reader, accordingly, is scarcely more than a
skilled sorter who separates the possible from the impossible. All
manuscripts that are clearly unacceptable are turned over to a clerk to
be returned with a rejection slip.

When an article appears to have merit, the first reader looks over it a
second time and adds a brief comment, which he signs with his initials.
The manuscript is then read and commented on by other editorial readers
before it reaches the assistant editor. The best of the contributions
are submitted to the editor for a final decision. By such a system every
meritorious contribution is considered carefully by several critics
before it is finally accepted or rejected. Moreover, the editor and the
assistant editor have before them the comments of several readers with
which to compare their own impressions.

In newspaper offices manuscripts are usually sorted by the assistant
Sunday editor, or assistant magazine editor, and are finally accepted or
rejected by the Sunday or magazine editor.

REJECTED MANUSCRIPTS. In rejecting contributions, editorial offices
follow various methods. The commonest one is to send the author a
printed slip expressing regret that the manuscript is not acceptable and
encouraging him to submit something else. Some ingenious editors have
prepared a number of form letters to explain to contributors the various
reasons why their manuscripts are unacceptable. The editorial assistant
who rejects an unsuitable article indicates by number which of these
form letters is to be sent to the author. A few editors send a personal
letter to every contributor. Sometimes an editor in rejecting a
contribution will suggest some publication to which it might be
acceptable. If a manuscript has merit but is not entirely satisfactory,
he may suggest that it be revised and submitted to him again.

KEEPING A MANUSCRIPT RECORD. Every writer who intends to carry on his
work in a systematic manner should keep a manuscript record, to assist
him in marketing his articles to the best advantage. Either a book or a
card index may be used. The purpose of such a record is to show (1) the
length of time required by various publications to make a decision on
contributions; (2) the rate and the time of payment of each periodical;
(3) the present whereabouts of his manuscript and the periodicals to
which it has already been submitted.

It is important for a writer to know how soon he may expect a decision
on his contributions. If he has prepared an article that depends on
timeliness for its interest, he cannot afford to send it to an editor
who normally takes three or four weeks to make a decision. Another
publication to which his article is equally well adapted, he may find
from his manuscript record, accepts or rejects contributions within a
week or ten days. Naturally he will send his timely article to the
publication that makes the quickest decision. If that publication
rejects it, he will still have time enough to try it elsewhere. His
experience with different editors, as recorded in his manuscript record,
often assists him materially in placing his work to the best advantage.

The rate and the time of payment for contributions are also worth
recording. When an article is equally well suited to two or more
periodicals, a writer will naturally be inclined to send it first to the
publication that pays the highest price and that pays on acceptance.

A manuscript record also indicates where each one of a writer's articles
is at a given moment, and by what publications it has been rejected. For
such data he cannot afford to trust his memory.

A writer may purchase a manuscript record book or may prepare his own
book or card index. At the top of each page or card is placed the title
of the article, followed by the number of words that it contains, the
number of illustrations that accompany it, and the date on which it was
completed. On the lines under the title are written in turn the names of
the periodicals to which the manuscript is submitted, with (1) the dates
on which it was submitted and returned or rejected; (2) the rate and the
time of payment; and (3) any remarks that may prove helpful. A
convenient form for such a page or card is shown on the next page:
___________________________________________________________________________
|Confessions of a Freshman. 2,750 Words. 4 Photos. Written, Jan. 18, 1919.|
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                    |Sent    |Returned|Accepted|Paid    |Amount|Remarks  |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|The Outlook         |1/18/19 |1/30/19 |        |        |      |         |
|The Independent     |1/31/19 |2/10/19 |        |        |      |         |
|The Kansas City Star|2/12/19 |        |2/18/19 |3/12/19 |$9.50 |$4 a col.|
|                    |        |        |        |        |      |         |
|____________________|________|________|________|________|______|_________|

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTS. Contributions accepted for publication are paid
for at the time of their acceptance, at the time of their publication,
or at some fixed date in the month following their acceptance or
publication. Nearly all well-established periodicals pay for articles
when they are accepted. Some publications do not pay until the article
is printed, a method obviously less satisfactory to a writer than prompt
payment, since he may have to wait a year or more for his money.
Newspapers pay either on acceptance or before the tenth day of the month
following publication. The latter arrangement grows out of the practice
of paying correspondents between the first and the tenth of each month
for the work of the preceding month.

After a manuscript has been accepted, a writer usually has no further
responsibility concerning it. Some magazines submit galley proofs to the
author for correction and for any changes that he cares to make. It is
desirable to make as few alterations as possible to avoid the delay and
expense of resetting the type. Corrected proofs should be returned
promptly.

Unless specific stipulations are made to the contrary by the author, an
article on being accepted by a periodical becomes its property and
cannot be republished without its consent. Usually an editor will grant
an author permission to reprint an article in book or pamphlet form. By
copyrighting each issue, as most magazines and some newspapers do, the
publishers establish fully their rights to an author's work.

SYNDICATING ARTICLES. By sending copies of his articles to a number of
newspapers for simultaneous publication, a writer of special feature
stories for newspapers may add to his earnings. This method is known as
syndicating. It is made possible by the fact that the circulation of
newspapers is largely local. Since, for example, Chicago papers are not
read in New York, or Minneapolis papers in St. Louis, these papers may
well publish the same articles on the same day. Organized newspaper
syndicates furnish many papers with reading matter of all kinds.

The same article must not, however, be sent to more than one magazine,
but a single subject may be used for two entirely different articles
intended for two magazines. If two articles are written on the same
subject, different pictures should be secured, so that it will not be
necessary to send copies of the same illustrations to two magazines.
Agricultural journals with a distinctly sectional circulation do not
object to using syndicated articles, provided that the journals to which
the article is sent do not circulate in the same territory.

If a writer desires to syndicate his work, he must conform to several
requirements. First, he must make as many good copies as he intends to
send out and must secure separate sets of photographs to accompany each
one. Second, he must indicate clearly on each copy the fact that he is
syndicating the article and that he is sending it to only one paper in a
city. A special feature story, for instance, sent to the _Kansas City
Star_ for publication in its Sunday edition, he would mark, "Exclusive
for Kansas City. Release for Publication, Sunday, January 19." Third, he
must send out the copies sufficiently far in advance of the release date
to enable all of the papers to arrange for the publication of the
article on that day. For papers with magazine sections that are made up
a week or more before the day of publication, articles should be in the
office of the editor at least two weeks before the release date. For
papers that make up their Sunday issues only a few days in advance,
articles need be submitted only a week before the publication day.

SELLING ARTICLES TO SYNDICATES. The syndicates that supply newspapers
with various kinds of material, including special feature stories, are
operated on the same principle that governs the syndicating of articles
by the writer himself. That is, they furnish their features to a number
of different papers for simultaneous publication. Since, however, they
sell the same material to many papers, they can afford to do so at a
comparatively low price and still make a fair profit. To protect their
literary property, they often copyright their features, and a line of
print announcing this fact is often the only indication in a newspaper
that the matter was furnished by a syndicate. Among the best-known
newspaper syndicates are the Newspaper Enterprise Association,
Cleveland, Ohio; the McClure Newspaper Syndicate, New York; and the
Newspaper Feature Service, New York. A number of large newspapers, like
the _New York Evening Post_, the _Philadelphia Ledger_, and the _New
York Tribune_, syndicate their popular features to papers in other
cities.

A writer may submit his special feature stories to one of the newspaper
syndicates just as he would send it to a newspaper or magazine. These
organizations usually pay well for acceptable manuscripts. It is not as
easy, however, to discover the needs and general policy of each
syndicate as it is those of papers and magazines, because frequently
there is no means of identifying their articles when they are printed in
newspapers.




CHAPTER XI

PHOTOGRAPHS AND OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS


VALUE OF ILLUSTRATIONS. The perfecting of photo-engraving processes for
making illustrations has been one of the most important factors in the
development of popular magazines and of magazine sections of newspapers,
for good pictures have contributed largely to their success. With the
advent of the half-tone process a generation ago, and with the more
recent application of the rotogravure process to periodical
publications, comparatively cheap and rapid methods of illustration were
provided. Newspapers and magazines have made extensive use of both these
processes.

The chief value of illustrations for special articles lies in the fact
that they present graphically what would require hundreds of words to
describe. Ideas expressed in pictures can be grasped much more readily
than ideas expressed in words. As an aid to rapid reading illustrations
are unexcelled. In fact, so effective are pictures as a means of
conveying facts that whole sections of magazines and Sunday newspapers
are given over to them exclusively.

Illustrations constitute a particularly valuable adjunct to special
articles. Good reproductions of photographs printed in connection with
the articles assist readers to visualize and to understand what a writer
is undertaking to explain. So fully do editors realize the great
attractiveness of illustrations, that they will buy articles accompanied
by satisfactory photographs more readily than they will those without
illustrations. Excellent photographs will sometimes sell mediocre
articles, and meritorious articles may even be rejected because they
lack good illustrations. In preparing his special feature stories, a
writer will do well to consider carefully the number and character of
the illustrations necessary to give his work the strongest possible
appeal.

SECURING PHOTOGRAPHS. Inexperienced writers are often at a loss to know
how to secure good photographs. Professional photographers will, as a
rule, produce the best results, but amateur writers often hesitate to
incur the expense involved, especially when they feel uncertain about
selling their articles. If prints can be obtained from negatives that
photographers have taken for other purposes, the cost is so small that a
writer can afford to risk the expenditure. Money spent for good
photographs is usually money well spent.

Every writer of special articles should become adept in the use of a
camera. With a little study and practice, any one can take photographs
that will reproduce well for illustrations. One advantage to a writer of
operating his own camera is that he can take pictures on the spur of the
moment when he happens to see just what he needs. Unconventional
pictures caught at the right instant often make the best illustrations.

The charges for developing films and for making prints and enlargements
are now so reasonable that a writer need not master these technicalities
in order to use a camera of his own. If he has time and interest,
however, he may secure the desired results more nearly by developing and
printing his own pictures.

Satisfactory pictures can be obtained with almost any camera, but one
with a high-grade lens and shutter is the best for all kinds of work. A
pocket camera so equipped is very convenient. If a writer can afford to
make a somewhat larger initial investment, he will do well to buy a
camera of the so-called "reflex" type. Despite its greater weight and
bulk, as compared with pocket cameras, it has the advantage of showing
the picture full size, right side up, on the top of the camera, until
the very moment that the button is pressed. These reflex cameras are
equipped with the fastest types of lens and shutter, and thus are
particularly well adapted to poorly lighted and rapidly moving objects.

A tripod should be used whenever possible. A hastily taken snap shot
often proves unsatisfactory, whereas, if the camera had rested on a
tripod, and if a slightly longer exposure had been given, a good
negative would doubtless have resulted.

REQUIREMENTS FOR PHOTOGRAPHS. All photographs intended for reproduction
by the half-tone or the rotogravure process should conform to certain
requirements.

First: The standard size of photographic prints to be used for
illustrations is 5 x 7 inches, but two smaller sizes, 4 x 5 and 3¬Ω x
5¬Ω, as well as larger sizes such as 6¬Ω x 8¬Ω and 8 x 10, are
also acceptable. Professional photographers generally make their
negatives for illustrations in the sizes, 5 x 7, 6¬Ω x 8¬Ω, and 8 x
10. If a writer uses a pocket camera taking pictures smaller than
post-card size (3¬Ω x 5¬Ω), he must have his negatives enlarged to
one of the above standard sizes.

Second: Photographic prints for illustrations should have a glossy
surface; that is, they should be what is known as "gloss prints." Prints
on rough paper seldom reproduce satisfactorily; they usually result in
"muddy" illustrations. Prints may be mounted or unmounted; unmounted
ones cost less and require less postage, but are more easily broken in
handling.

Third: Objects in the photograph should be clear and well defined; this
requires a sharp negative. For newspaper illustrations it is desirable
to have prints with a stronger contrast between the dark and the light
parts of the picture than is necessary for the finer half-tones and
rotogravures used in magazines.

Fourth: Photographs must have life and action. Pictures of inanimate
objects in which neither persons nor animals appear, seem "dead" and
unattractive to the average reader. It is necessary, therefore, to have
at least one person in every photograph. Informal, unconventional
pictures in which the subjects seem to have been "caught" unawares, are
far better than those that appear to have been posed. Good snap-shots of
persons in characteristic surroundings are always preferable to cabinet
photographs. "Action pictures" are what all editors and all readers
want.

Fifth: Pictures must "tell the story"; that is, they should illustrate
the phase of the subject that they are designed to make clear. Unless a
photograph has illustrative value it fails to accomplish the purpose for
which it is intended.

CAPTIONS FOR ILLUSTRATIONS. On the back of a photograph intended for
reproduction the author should write or type a brief explanation of what
it represents. If he is skillful in phrasing this explanation, or
"caption," as it is called, the editor will probably use all or part of
it just as it stands. If his caption is unsatisfactory, the editor will
have to write one based on the writer's explanation. A clever caption
adds much to the attractiveness of an illustration.

A caption should not be a mere label, but, like a photograph, should
have life and action. It either should contain a verb of action or
should imply one. In this and other respects, it is not unlike the
newspaper headline. Instead, for example, of the label title, "A Large
Gold Dredge in Alaska," a photograph was given the caption, "Digs Out a
Fortune Daily." A picture of a young woman feeding chickens in a
backyard poultry run that accompanied an article entitled "Did You Ever
Think of a Meat Garden?" was given the caption "Fresh Eggs and Chicken
Dinners Reward Her Labor." To illustrate an article on the danger of the
pet cat as a carrier of disease germs, a photograph of a child playing
with a cat was used with the caption, "How Epidemics Start." A portrait
of a housewife who uses a number of labor-saving devices in her home
bore the legend, "She is Reducing Housekeeping to a Science." "A Smoking
Chimney is a Bad Sign" was the caption under a photograph of a chimney
pouring out smoke, which was used to illustrate an article on how to
save coal.

Longer captions describing in detail the subject illustrated by the
photograph, are not uncommon; in fact, as more and more pictures are
being used, there is a growing tendency to place a short statement, or
"overline," above the illustration and to add to the amount of
descriptive matter in the caption below it. This is doubtless due to two
causes: the increasing use of illustrations unaccompanied by any text
except the caption, and the effort to attract the casual reader by
giving him a taste, as it were, of what the article contains.

DRAWINGS FOR ILLUSTRATIONS. Diagrams, working drawings, floor plans,
maps, or pen-and-ink sketches are necessary to illustrate some articles.
Articles of practical guidance often need diagrams. Trade papers like to
have their articles illustrated with reproductions of record sheets and
blanks designed to develop greater efficiency in office or store
management. If a writer has a little skill in drawing, he may prepare in
rough form the material that he considers desirable for illustration,
leaving to the artists employed by the publication the work of making
drawings suitable for reproduction. A writer who has had training in
pen-and-ink drawing may prepare his own illustrations. Such drawings
should be made on bristol board with black drawing ink, and should be
drawn two or three times as large as they are intended to appear when
printed. If record sheets are to be used for illustration, the ruling
should be done with black drawing ink, and the figures and other data
should be written in with the same kind of ink. Typewriting on blanks
intended for reproduction should be done with a fresh record black
ribbon. Captions are necessary on the back of drawings as well as on
photographs.

MAILING PHOTOGRAPHS AND DRAWINGS. It is best to mail flat all
photographs and drawings up to 8 x 10 in size, in the envelope with the
manuscript, protecting them with pieces of stout cardboard. Only very
large photographs or long, narrow panoramic ones should be rolled and
mailed in a heavy cardboard tube, separate from the manuscript. The
writer's name and address, as well as the title of the article to be
illustrated, should be written on the back of every photograph and
drawing.

As photographs and drawings are not ordinarily returned when they are
used with an article that is accepted, writers should not promise to
return such material to the persons from whom they secure it. Copies can
almost always be made from the originals when persons furnishing writers
with photographs and drawings desire to have the originals kept in good
condition.






PART II


AN OUTLINE FOR THE ANALYSIS OF SPECIAL
FEATURE ARTICLES

I.  SOURCES OF MATERIAL

 1.  What appears to have suggested the subject to the writer?

 2.  How much of the article was based on his personal experience?

 3.  How much of it was based on his personal observations?

 4.  Was any of the material obtained from newspapers or periodicals?

 5.  What portions of the article were evidently obtained by interviews?

 6.  What reports, documents, technical periodicals, and books of
     reference were used as sources in preparing the article?

 7.  Does the article suggest to you some sources from which you might
     obtain material for your own articles?


II.  INTEREST AND APPEAL

 1.  Is there any evidence that the article was timely when it was
     published?

 2.  Is the article of general or of local interest?

 3.  Does it seem to be particularly well adapted to the readers of
     the publication in which it was printed? Why?

 4.  What, for the average reader, is the source of interest in the
     article?

 5.  Does it have more than one appeal?

 6.  Is the subject so presented that the average reader is led to
     see its application to himself and to his own affairs?

 7.  Could an article on the same subject, or on a similar one, be
     written for a newspaper in your section of the country?

 8.  What possible subjects does the article suggest to you?


III. PURPOSE

 1.  Did the writer aim to entertain, to inform, or to give practical
    guidance?

 2.  Does the writer seem to have had a definitely formulated
     purpose?

 3.  How would you state this apparent purpose in one sentence?

 4.  Is the purpose a worthy one?

 5.  Did the writer accomplish his purpose?

 6.  Does the article contain any material that seems unnecessary
     to the accomplishment of the purpose?


IV. TYPE OF ARTICLE

 1.  To which type does this article conform?

 2.  Is there any other type better adapted to the subject and
     material?

 3.  How far did the character of the subject determine the
     methods of treatment?

 4.  What other methods might have been used to advantage in
     presenting this subject?

 5.  Is the article predominantly narrative, descriptive, or expository?

 6.  To what extent are narration and description used for expository
     purposes?

 7.  Are concrete examples and specific instances employed
     effectively?

 8.  By what means are the narrative passages made interesting?

 9.  Do the descriptive parts of the article portray the impressions
     vividly?


V. STRUCTURE

 1.  What main topics are taken up in the article?

 2.  Could any parts of the article be omitted without serious
     loss?

 3.  Could the parts be rearranged with gain in clearness, interest,
     or progress?

 4.  Does the article march on steadily from beginning to end?

 5.  Is the material so arranged that the average reader will
     reach the conclusion that the writer intended to have him reach?

 6.  Is there variety in the methods of presentation?

 7.  Is the length of the article proportionate to the subject?

 8.  What type of beginning is used?

 9.  Is the type of beginning well adapted to the subject and the
     material?

10.  Would the beginning attract the attention and hold the interest
     of the average reader?

11.  Is the beginning an integral part of the article?

12.  Is the length of the beginning proportionate to the length of
     the whole article?

13.  Is the beginning skillfully connected with the body of the article?


VI. STYLE

 1.  Is the article easy to read? Why?

 2.  Is the diction literary or colloquial, specific or general, original
     or trite, connotative or denotative?

 3.  Are figures of speech used effectively?

 4.  Do the sentences yield their meaning easily when read rapidly?

 5.  Is there variety in sentence length and structure?

 6.  Are important ideas placed at the beginning of sentences?

 7.  Are the paragraphs long or short?

 8.  Are they well-organized units?

 9.  Do the paragraphs begin with important ideas?

10.  Is there variety in paragraph beginnings?

11.  Is the tone well suited to the subject?

12.  Do the words, figures of speech, sentences, and paragraphs
     in this article suggest to you possible means of improving
     your own style?


VII. TITLES AND HEADLINES

 1.  Is the title attractive, accurate, concise, and concrete?

 2.  To what type does it conform?

 3.  What is the character of the sub-title, and what relation
     does it bear to the title?


(_Boston Herald_)

TEACH CHILDREN LOVE OF ART THROUGH STORY-TELLING

"----And so," ended the story, "St. George slew the dragon."

A great sigh, long drawn and sibilant, which for the last five minutes
had been swelling 57 little thoraxes, burst out and filled the space of
the lecture hall at the Museum of Fine Arts.

"O-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o!" said 27 little girls.

"Aw-w-w-w-w-w-w-w-w, gosh!" said 30 little boys. "Say, Mis' Cronan,
there wasn't no real dragon, was they?" A shock-headed youngster pushed
his way to the platform where Mrs. Mary C. Cronan, professional story
teller, stood smiling and wistfully looked up at her. "They wasn't no
really dragon, was they?"

"'Course they was a dragon! Whadd'ye think the man wanted to paint the
picture for if there wasn't a dragon? Certn'y there was a dragon. I
leave it to Mis' Cronan if there wasn't."

Steering a narrow course between fiction and truth, Mrs. Cronan told her
class that she thought there certainly must have been a dragon or the
picture wouldn't have been painted.

It was at one of the regular morning story hours at the Museum of Fine
Arts, a department opened three years ago at the museum by Mrs. Cronan
and Mrs. Laura Scales, a department which has become so popular that now
hundreds of children a week are entertained, children from the public
playgrounds and from the settlement houses.

On this particular day it was children from the Bickford street
playground under the guidance of two teachers from the Lucretia Crocker
School, Miss Roche and Miss Hayes, who had, in some mysterious manner,
convoyed these 57 atoms to the museum by car without mishap and who
apparently did not dread the necessity of getting them back again,
although to the uninitiated it appeared a task beside which grasping a
comet by the tail was a pleasant afternoon's amusement.

For the most part the story of St. George and the Dragon was a new thing
to these children. They might stand for St. George, although his
costume was a little out of the regular form at Jamaica Plain, but the
Dragon was another thing.

"I don't believe it," insisted an 8-year-old. "I seen every animal in
the Zoo in the park and I don't see any of them things." But the wistful
little boy kept insisting that there must be such an animal or Mrs.
Cronan wouldn't say so.

"That is the way they nearly always take it at first," said Mrs. Cronan.
"Nearly all of these children are here for the first time. Later they
will bring their fathers and mothers on Sunday and you might hear them
explaining the pictures upstairs as if they were the docents of the
museum.

"The object of the story hour is to familiarize the children with as
many as possible of the pictures of the Museum and to get them into the
way of coming here of themselves. When they go away they are given cards
bearing a reproduction of the picture about which the story of the day
has been told, and on these cards is always an invitation to them to
bring their families to the Museum on Saturday and Sunday, when there is
no entrance fee."

The idea of the story hour was broached several years ago and at first
it was taken up as an experiment. Stereopticon slides were made of
several of the more famous pictures in the Museum, and Mrs. Cronan, who
was at the time achieving a well earned success at the Public Library,
was asked to take charge of the story telling. The plan became a success
at once.

Later Mrs. Scales was called in to take afternoon classes, and now more
than 1000 children go to the Museum each week during July and August and
hear stories told entertainingly that fix in their minds the best
pictures of the world. Following the stories they are taken through the
halls of the Museum and are given short talks on some art subject. One
day it may be some interesting thing on Thibetan amulets, or on
tapestries or on some picture, Stuart's Washington or Turner's Slave
Ship, or a colorful canvas of Claude Monet.

It is hoped that the movement may result in greater familiarity with and
love for the Museum, for it is intended by the officials that these
children shall come to love the Museum and to care for the collection
and not to think of it, as many do, as a cold, unresponsive building
containing dark mysteries, or haughty officials, or an atmosphere of
"highbrow" iciness.

"I believe," says Mrs. Cronan, "that our little talks are doing just
this thing. And although some of them, of course, can't get the idea
quite all at once, most of these children will have a soft spot
hereafter for Donatello's St. George."

At least some of them were not forgetting it, for as they filed out the
wistful little boy was still talking about it.

"Ya," he said to the scoffer, "you mightn't a seen him at the Zoo.
That's all right, but you never went over to the 'quarium. Probably they
got one over there. Gee! I wish I could see a dragon. What color are
they?"

But the smallest boy of all, who had hold of Miss Hayes's hand and who
had been an interested listener to all this, branched out mentally into
other and further fields.

"Aw," said he, "I know a feller what's got a ginny pig wit' yeller spots
on 'im and he--" And they all trailed out the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Christian Science Monitor_)

One illustration, a half-tone reproduction of a photograph showing the
interior of the greenhouse with girls at work.

WHERE GIRLS LEARN TO WIELD SPADE AND HOE

To go to school in a potato patch; to say one's lessons to a farmer; to
study in an orchard and do laboratory work in a greenhouse--this is the
pleasant lot of the modern girl who goes to a school of horticulture
instead of going to college, or perhaps after going to college.

If ever there was a vocation that seemed specially adapted to many
women, gardening would at first glance be the one. From the time of

    "Mistress Mary, quite contrary,
    How does your garden grow?"

down to the busy city woman who to-day takes her recreation by digging
in her flowerbeds, gardens have seemed a natural habitat for womankind,
and garden activities have belonged to her by right.

In various parts of the country there have now been established schools
where young women may learn the ways of trees and shrubs, vegetables and
flowers, and may do experimental work among the growing things
themselves. Some of these schools are merely adjuncts of the state
agricultural colleges, with more or less limited courses of
instruction; but, just out of Philadelphia, there is a school, to which
women only are admitted, that is located on a real farm, and covers a
wide range of outdoor study.

One begins to feel the homely charm of the place the moment instructions
are given as to how to reach it.

"Out the old Lime-kiln road," you are told. And out the old Lime-kiln
road you go, until you come to a farm which spells the perfection of
care in every clump of trees and every row of vegetables. Some girls in
broad-brimmed hats are working in the Strawberry bed--if you go in
strawberry time--and farther on a group of women have gathered, with an
overalled instructor, under an apple tree the needs of which are being
studied.

Under some sedate shade trees, you are led to an old Pennsylvania stone
farmhouse--the administration building, if you please. Beyond are the
barns, poultry houses, nurseries and greenhouses, and a cottage which is
used as a dormitory for the girls--as unlike the usual dormitory as the
school is unlike the usual school. A bee colony has its own little white
village near by.

Then the director, a trained woman landscape gardener, tells you all
that this school of horticulture has accomplished since its founding
five years ago.

"Women are naturally fitted for gardening, and for some years past there
have been many calls for women to be teachers in school gardens,
planners of private gardens, or landscape gardeners in institutions for
women. Very few women, however, have had the practical training to
enable them to fill such positions, and five years ago there was little
opportunity for them to obtain such training. At that time a number of
women in and about Philadelphia, who realized the need for thorough
teaching in all the branches of horticulture, not merely in theory but
in practice, organized this school. The course is planned to equip women
with the practical knowledge that will enable them to manage private and
commercial gardens, greenhouses or orchards. Some women wish to learn
how to care for their own well-loved gardens; some young girls study
with the idea of establishing their own greenhouses and raising flowers
as a means of livelihood; still others want to go in for fruit farming,
and even for poultry raising or bee culture.

"In other countries, schools of gardening for women are holding a
recognized place in the educational world. In England, Belgium,
Germany, Italy, Denmark and Russia, such institutions have long passed
the experimental stage; graduates from their schools are managing large
estates or holding responsible positions as directors of public or
private gardens, as managers of commercial greenhouses, or as consulting
horticulturists and lecturers. In this country there is a growing demand
for supervisors of home and school gardens, for work on plantations and
model farms, and for landscape gardeners. Such positions command large
salaries, and the comparatively few women available for them are almost
certain to attain success."

Already one of the graduates has issued a modest brown circular stating
that she is equipped to supply ideas for gardens and personally to plant
them; to expend limited sums of money to the best advantage for beauty
and service; to take entire charge of gardens and orchards for the
season and personally to supervise gardens during the owners' absence;
to spray ornamental trees and shrubs, and prune them; and to care for
indoor plants and window boxes.

"She is making a success of it, too. She has all she can do," comments
one of the women directors, who is standing by.

A smiling strawberry student, who is passing, readily tells all that
going to a garden school means.

"Each one of us has her own small plot of ground for which she is
responsible. We have to plant it, care for it, and be marked on it. We
all have special care of certain parts of the greenhouse, too, and each
has a part of the nursery, the orchard and the vineyard. Even the work
that is too heavy for us we have to study about, so that we can direct
helpers when the time comes. We have to understand every detail of it
all. We have to keep a daily record of our work. This is the way to
learn how long it takes for different seeds to germinate, and thus we
watch the development of the fruits and flowers and vegetables. You see,
the attendance at the school is limited to a small number; so each one
of us receives a great deal of individual attention and help.

"We learn simple carpentry, as part of the course, so that we shall be
able to make window boxes, flats, cold frames and other articles that we
need. We could even make a greenhouse, if we had to. We are taught the
care and raising of poultry, we learn bee culture, and we have a course
in landscape gardening. There is a course in canning and preserving,
too, so that our fruits and berries can be disposed of in that way, if
we should not be able to sell them outright, when we have the gardens
of our own that we are all looking forward to."

In the cozy cottage that serves as a dormitory, there is a large
classroom, where the lectures in botany, entomology, soils and
horticultural chemistry are given. There is a staff of instructors, all
from well-known universities, and a master farmer to impart the
practical everyday process of managing fields and orchards. Special
lectures are given frequently by experts in various subjects. In the
cottage is a big, homelike living-room, where the girls read and sing
and dance in the evening. Each girl takes care of her own bedroom.

The costumes worn by these garden students are durable, appropriate and
most becoming. The school colors are the woodsy ones of brown and green,
and the working garb is carried out in these colors. Brown khaki or
corduroy skirts, eight inches from the ground, with two large pockets,
are worn under soft green smocks smocked in brown. The sweaters are
brown or green, and there is a soft hat for winter and a large shade hat
for summer. Heavy working gloves and boots are provided, and a large
apron with pockets goes with the outfit.

All in all, you feel sure, as you go back down the "old Lime-Kiln road,"
that the motto of the school will be fulfilled in the life of each of
its students: "So enter that daily thou mayst become more thoughtful and
more learned. So depart that daily thou mayst become more useful to
thyself and to all mankind."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Boston Transcript_)

BOYS IN SEARCH OF JOBS

BY RAYMOND G. FULLER

One morning lately, if you had stood on Kneeland street in sight of the
entrance of the State Free Employment Office, you would have seen a long
line of boys--a hundred of them--waiting for the doors to open. They
were of all sorts of racial extraction and of ages ranging through most
of the teens. Some you would have called ragamuffins, street urchins,
but some were too well washed, combed and laundered for such a
designation. Some were eagerly waiting, some anxiously, some
indifferently. Some wore sober faces; some were standing soldierly
stiff; but others were bubbling over with the spirits of their age,
gossiping, shouting, indulging in colt-play. When they came out, some
hustled away to prospective employers and others loitered in the street.
Disappointment was written all over some of them, from face to feet; on
others the inscription was, "I don't care."

Two hundred boys applied for "jobs" at the employment office that day.
Half the number were looking for summer positions. Others were of the
vast army of boys who quit school for keeps at the eighth or ninth grade
or thereabouts. Several weeks before school closed the office had more
than enough boy "jobs" to go around. With the coming of vacation time
the ratio was reversed. The boy applicants were a hundred or two hundred
daily. For the two hundred on the day mentioned there were fifty places.

Says Mr. Deady, who has charge of the department for male minors:
"Ranging from fourteen to nineteen years of age, of all nationalities
and beliefs, fresh from the influence of questionable home environment,
boisterous and brimful of animation, without ideas and thoughtless to a
marked degree--this is the picture of the ordinary boy who is in search
of employment. He is without a care and his only thought, if he has one,
is to obtain as high a wage as possible. It is safe to say that of the
thousands of boys who apply annually at the employment office,
two-thirds are between sixteen and eighteen years of age. Before going
further, we can safely say that twenty per cent of the youngest lads
have left school only a few weeks before applying for work.
Approximately sixty per cent have not completed a course in the
elementary grammar schools."

The boy of foreign parentage seems to be more in earnest, more
ambitious, than the American boy (not to quibble over the definition of
the adjective "American"). Walter L. Sears, superintendent of the office
in Kneeland street, tells this story:

An American youngster came in.

"Gotta job?" he asked.

"Yes, here is one"--referring to the card records--"in a printing
office; four dollars a week."

"'Taint enough money. Got anything else?"

"Here's a place in a grocery store--six dollars a week."

"What time d'ye have to get to work in the morning?"

"Seven o'clock."

"Got anything else?"

"Here's something--errand boy--six a week, mornings at eight."

"Saturday afternoons off?"

"Nothing is said about it."

"W-ell-l, maybe I'll drop around and look at it."

American independence!

An Italian boy came in, looking for work. He was told of the printing
office job.

"All right. I'll take it."

For what it is worth, it may be set down that a large proportion of the
boy applicants carefully scrutinize the dollar sign when they talk
wages. Moreover, they are not unacquainted with that phrase concocted by
those higher up, "the high cost of living." The compulsion of the thing,
or the appeal of the phrase--which?

The youthful unemployed, those who seek employment, would cast a
good-sized vote in favor of "shoffer." A youngster comes to Mr. Sears.
He wants to be a "shoffer."

"Why do you want to be a chauffeur?"

"I don't know."

"Haven't you any reasons at all?"

"No, sir."

"Isn't it because you have many times seen the man at the wheel rounding
a corner in an automobile at a 2.40 clip and sailing down the boulevard
at sixty miles an hour?"

The boy's eyes light up with the picture.

"Isn't that it?"

And the boy's eyes light up with discovery.

"Yes, I guess so."

"Well, have you ever seen the chauffeur at night, after being out all
day with the car? Overalls on, sleeves rolled up, face streaming with
perspiration? Repairing the mechanism, polishing the brass? Tired to
death?"

"No, sir."

The boy applicants seldom have any clear idea of the ultimate prospects
in any line of work they may have in mind--as to the salary limit for
the most expert, or the opportunities for promotion and the securing of
an independent position. Many of them have no preconceived idea even of
what they want to do, to say nothing of what they ought to do.

Here is an instance.

"I want a position," says a boy.

"What kind of a position?"

"I don't know."

"Haven't you ever thought about it?"

"No."

"Haven't you ever talked it over at home or at school?"

"No."

"Would you like to be a machinist?"

"I don't know."

"Would you like to be a plumber?"

"I don't know."

Similar questions, with similar answers, continue. Finally:

"Would you like to be a doctor?"

"I don't know--is that a good position?"

Sometimes a boy is accompanied to the office by his father.

"My son is a natural-born electrician," the father boasts.

"What has he done to show that?"

"Why, he's wired the whole house from top to bottom."

It is found by further questions that the lad has installed a push-bell
button at the front door and another at the back door. He had bought dry
batteries, wire and buttons at a hardware store in a box containing full
directions. It is nevertheless hard to convince the father that the boy
may not be a natural-born electrician, after all.

In frequent cases the father has not considered the limitations and
opportunities in the occupation which he chooses for his son.

Mr. Deady has this to say on the subject of the father's relation to the
boy's "job": "The average boy while seeking employment in ninety-nine
cases out of a hundred is unaccompanied by either parent. Such a
condition is deplorable. It not only shows a lack of interest in the
boy's welfare on the part of the parents, but also places the youthful
applicant in an unfair position. Oftentimes, owing to inexperience, a
boy accepts a position without inquiring into the details and nature of
the same. His main thought is the amount of the wage to be received.
Consequently there is but one obvious result. The hours are excessive,
the work is beyond the boy's strength or is hazardous, and finally the
lad withdraws without notice. It is this general apathy on the part of
the parents of a boy, combined with over-zealousness on the part of an
ordinary employer to secure boy labor for a mere trifle, that accounts
for the instability of juvenile labor."

The coming of vacation invariably brings a great influx of boys to the
State employment office, some looking for summer work, others for
permanent employment. Most of them show lack of intelligent
constructive thought on the matter in hand. Few of them have had any
counsel, or any valuable counsel from their parents or others. To Mr.
Sears and his assistants--and they have become very proficient at it--is
left the task of vocational guidance, within such limitations as those
of time and equipment. What can be done to get the boy and his sponsors
to thinking intelligently about the question of an occupation for the
boy, with proper regard to their mutual fitness?

Superintendent Sears has some suggestions to offer. In his opinion the
subject of occupational choice should be debated thoroughly in the
public schools. He favors the introduction of some plan embodying this
idea in the upper grades of the grammar school, under conditions that
would give each boy an opportunity to talk, and that would encourage him
to consult his parents and teachers. The debates might be held monthly,
and preparation should be required. Experts or successful men in various
occupations might be called in to address the pupils and furnish
authoritative information. The questions debated should involve the
advisability of learning a trade and the choice of a trade, and the same
considerations with respect to the professions, the mercantile pursuits,
and so on. The pupils should be allowed to vote on the merits of each
question debated. By such a method, thinks Mr. Sears, the boys would
gain the valuable training which debating gives, would devote
considerable thought to the question of their future employment, would
acquire much information, and would get their parents more interested in
the matter than many of them are.

       *       *       *       *       *

(_New York Evening Post_)

GIRLS AND A CAMP

NOW IT IS THAT MANY COVEYS OF STUDENTS ARE HEADED TOWARD LAKE AND
MOUNTAIN--JUST HOW IT PAYS

With the sudden plunge into a muggy heat, more suggestive of July than
of the rare June weather of poets, there has begun the exodus of summer
camp folk, those men and women who add to the slender salary of the
teaching profession the additional income made by running camps for boys
and girls during the long vacation. They stretch, these camps, in
rapidly extending area from Canada through Maine and northern New
England, into the Adirondacks and the Alleghenies, and then across
toward the Northwest and the Rockies. It is quite safe to assert that
there is not a private school of importance that does not take under its
protection and support at least one such institution, while large
numbers of teachers either own camps or assist in their management as
instructors.

One group, unmistakably the advance guard of a girls' camp, assembled at
the Grand Central Station on Wednesday. There were two alert, dignified
women, evidently the co-principals; a younger woman, who, at least so
the tired suburban shopper decided, was probably the athletic
instructor; two neat colored women, and a small girl of twelve, on
tiptoe with excitement, talking volubly about the fun she would have
when they got to the lake and when all the other girls arrived. Her
excited chatter also revealed the fact that father and mother had just
sailed for Europe, and, while she thought of them with regret, there was
only pleasure in prospect as she started northward. There was much
baggage to be attended to, and consultation over express and freight
bills, with interesting references to tents, canoes, and tennis nets.

Success is an excellent testimonial, and there is no longer any need to
point out the advantages of such camps for boys and girls. They fill a
real place for the delicate, the lazy, or the backward, who must needs
do extra work to keep up with their school grade, for those who
otherwise would be condemned to hotel life, or for the children whose
parents, because of circumstances, are compelled to spend the summer in
cities. Even the most jealously anxious of mothers are among the
converts to the movement. As one said the other day of her only son,
"Yes, David will go to Mr. D.'s camp again this summer. It will be his
third year. I thought the first time that I simply could not part with
him. I pictured him drowned or ill from poor food or severe colds.
Indeed, there wasn't a single terror I didn't imagine. But he enjoyed it
so, and came home so well and happy, that I've never worried since."

From the child's point of view, summer camps are a blessing, and, as
such, they have come to stay. But there are those who doubt their
benefits, even the financial ones, for the teachers, who mortgage their
vacations to conduct them. Unfortunately, as every one knows, almost
every teacher has to mortgage her spare time in one way or another in
order to make a more than bare living. Call the roll of those whom you
may know, and you will be surprised--no, scarcely surprised; merely
interested--to find that nine-tenths of them do some additional work. It
may be extra tutoring, hack writing, translating, the editing of school
texts or the writing of text-books, taking agencies for this, that, or
the other commodity, conducting travel parties, lecturing at educational
institutes, running women's clubs, or organizing nature classes. Some
outside vocation is necessary if the teacher is to enjoy the advantages
her training makes almost imperative, or the comforts her tired, nervous
organism demands. So, as one philosopher was heard to remark, it is
perhaps best to run a summer camp, since in the doing of it there is at
least the advantage of being in the open and of leading a wholesomely
sane existence.

Two good friends and fellow-teachers who have conducted a camp in
northern Maine for the last five years have been extremely frank in
setting forth their experiences for the benefit of those who are
standing on the brink of a similar venture. And their story is worth
while, because from every point of view they have been successful. Any
pessimistic touches in their narrative cannot be laid at the door of
failure. Indeed, in their first year they cleared expenses, and that is
rare; and their client√®le has steadily increased until now they have a
camp of forty or more girls, at the very topmost of camp prices. Again,
as there were two of them and they are both versatile, they have needed
little assistance; the mother of one has been house mother and general
camp counsellor. With all this as optimistic preamble, let us hear their
story.

Perhaps their first doubt arises with regard to the wear and tear of
camp life upon those most directly responsible for its conduct. "For
years we even refused to consider it," said the senior partner,
"although urged by friends and would-be patrons, because we realized the
unwisdom of working the year around and living continuously with school
girls--but the inevitable happened. Our income did not keep pace with
our expenses, and it was start a camp or do something less agreeable.
Just at the psychological moment one of our insistent friends found the
right spot, we concluded negotiations, and, behold, we are camp
proprietors, not altogether sure, in our most uncompromisingly frank
moments, that we have done the best thing."

That a girls' camp is a far more difficult proposition than one for boys
is evident on the face of it. Mother may shed tears over parting with
Johnny, but, after all, he's a boy, and sooner or later must depend
upon himself. But Sister Sue is another matter. Can she trust any one
else to watch over her in the matter of flannels and dry stockings? Do
these well-meaning but spinster teachers know the symptoms of
tonsilitis, the first signs of a bilious attack, or the peculiarities of
a spoiled girl's diet? And will not Sue lose, possibly, some of the
gentle manners and dainty ways inculcated at home, by close contact with
divers other ways and manners? She is inclined to be skeptical, is
mother. "And so," acknowledged the senior partner, "the first summer we
were deluged by visits long and short from anxious ladies who could not
believe on hearsay evidence that we knew how to care for their delicate
daughters. They not only came, but they stayed, and as the nearest hotel
was distant many devious miles of mountain road, we were forced to put
them up; finally the maids had to sleep in the old barn, and we were
camping on cots in the hall of the farmhouse which is our headquarters.
Naturally we had to be polite, for we were under the necessity of making
a good impression that first year, but it was most distracting, for
while they stayed they were unconsciously but selfishly demanding a
little more than a fair share of time and attention for their
daughters."

And, indeed, all this maternal anxiety is not entirely misplaced. Sue is
a good deal harder to take care of than Johnny. She needs a few more
comforts, although camp life aims at eliminating all but the essentials
of simple living. Her clothes, even at a minimum, are more elaborate,
which increases the difficulty of laundering, always a problem in
camping. She is infinitely more dependent upon her elders for direction
in the veriest A B C's of daily existence. "Even the matter of tying a
hair-ribbon or cleaning a pair of white canvas shoes is a mountain to a
good many of my girls," said the successful camp counsellor.

Homesickness is "a malady most incident to maids." Boys may suffer from
it, but they suffer alone. If tears are shed they are shed in secret,
lest the other fellows find it out. Except in the case of the very
little chaps, the masters are not disturbed. But girls have no such
reserves; and the teachers in charge of twenty-five strange girls, many
in the throes of this really distressing ailment, are not to be envied.
"Frankly speaking," went on the confession, "there isn't a moment of the
day when we can dismiss them from our thoughts. Are they swimming in
charge of the director of athletics, a most capable girl, one of us must
be there, too, because, should anything happen, we, and not she, are
directly responsible. When the lesson hour is on, we not only teach,
but must see that each girl's work is adapted to her needs, as they come
from a dozen different schools. There are disputes to settle, plans for
outings and entertainments to be made, games to direct, letters to the
home folks to be superintended, or half the girls would never write at
all, to say nothing of the marketing and housekeeping, and our own
business correspondence, that has to be tucked into the siesta hour
after luncheon. Indeed, in the nine weeks of camp last summer I never
once had an hour that I could call my very own."

"And that is only the day's anxiety," sighed her colleague reflectively.
"My specialty is prowling about at night to see that everybody is
properly covered. Not a girl among them would have sense enough to get
up and close windows in case of rain, so I sleep with one ear pricked
for the first patter on the roof. Occasionally there are two or three
who walk in their sleep, and I'm on pins and needles lest harm come to
them, so I make my rounds to see that they're safe. Oh, it is a
peacefully placid existence, I assure you, having charge of forty
darling daughters. Some of them have done nothing for themselves in
their entire lives, and what a splendid place camp is for such girls.
But while they're learning we must be looking out for their sins of
omission, such, for instance, as throwing a soaking wet bathing suit
upon a bed instead of hanging it upon the line."

These are some of the few worries that attach to the care of sensitive
and delicately brought up girls that the boys' camp never knows. But if
the financial return is adequate there will naturally be some
compensation for all these pinpricks. Here again the Senior Partner is
inclined to hem and haw. "Given a popular head of camp," says she, "who
has been fortunate enough to secure a desirable site and a paying
client√®le, and she will certainly not lose money. Her summer will be
paid for. However, that is not enough to reward her for the additional
work and worry. Camp work does not confine itself to the nine weeks of
residence. There are the hours and days spent in planning and purchasing
equipment, the getting out of circulars, the correspondence entailed and
the subsequent keeping in touch with patrons."

Her own venture has so far paid its own way, and after the first year
has left a neat margin of profit. But this profit, because of expansion,
has immediately been invested in new equipment. This year, for example,
there has been erected a bungalow for general living purposes. A dozen
new tents and four canoes were bought, and two dirt tennis courts made.
Then each year there must be a general replenishing of dishes, table and
bed linen, athletic goods, and furniture. The garden has been so
enlarged that the semi-occasional man-of-all-work has been replaced by a
permanent gardener.

Naturally, such extension does mean ultimate profit, and, given a few
more years of continued prosperity, the summer will yield a goodly
additional income. But the teacher who undertakes a camp with the idea
that such money is easily made, is mistaken. One successful woman has
cleared large sums, so large, indeed, that she has about decided to
sever her direct connection with the private school where she has taught
for years, and trust to her camp for a living. She has been so
fortunate, it is but fair to explain, because her camp is upon a
government reserve tract in Canada, and she has had to make no large
investment in land; nor does she pay taxes. Desirable locations are
harder to find nowadays and much more expensive to purchase. A fortunate
pioneer in the movement bought seven acres, with five hundred feet of
lake frontage, for three hundred dollars six years ago. That same land
is worth ten times as much to-day.

And the kind of woman who should attempt the summer camp for girls as a
means of additional income? First of all, the one who really loves
outdoor life, who can find in woods and water compensation for the wear
and tear of summering with schoolgirls. Again, she who can minimize the
petty worries of existence to the vanishing point. And, last of all, she
who has business acumen. For what does it profit a tired teacher if she
fill her camp list and have no margin of profit for her weeks of hard
labor?

       *       *       *       *       *

_(Saturday Evening Post)_

Two half-tone reproductions of wash-drawings by a staff artist.

YOUR PORTER

BY EDWARD HUNGERFORD

He stands there at the door of his car, dusky, grinning,
immaculate--awaiting your pleasure. He steps forward as you near him
and, with a quick, intuitive movement born of long experience and
careful training, inquires:

"What space you got, guv'nor?"

"Lower five," you reply. "Are you full-up, George?"

"Jus' toler'bul, guv'nor."

He has your grips, is already slipping down the aisle toward section
five. And, after he has stowed the big one under the facing bench and
placed the smaller one by your side, he asks again:

"Shake out a pillow for you, guv'nor?"

That "guv'nor," though not a part of his official training, is a part of
his unofficial--his subtlety, if you please. Another passenger might be
the "kunnel"; still another, the "jedge." But there can be no other
guv'nor save you on this car and trip. And George, of the Pullmans, is
going to watch over you this night as a mother hen might watch over her
solitary chick. The car is well filled and he is going to have a hard
night of it; but he is going to take good care of you. He tells you so;
and, before you are off the car, you are going to have good reason to
believe it.

Before we consider the sable-skinned George of to-day, give a passing
thought to the Pullman itself. The first George of the Pullmans--George
M. Pullman--was a shrewd-headed carpenter who migrated from a western
New York village out into Illinois more than half a century ago and gave
birth to the idea of railroad luxury at half a cent a mile. There had
been sleeping cars before Pullman built the Pioneer, as he called his
maiden effort. There was a night car, equipped with rough bunks for the
comfort of passengers, on the Cumberland Valley Railroad along about
1840.

Other early railroads had made similar experiments, but they were all
makeshifts and crude. Pullman set out to build a sleeping car that would
combine a degree of comfort with a degree of luxury. The Pioneer, viewed
in the eyes of 1864, was really a luxurious car. It was as wide as the
sleeping car of to-day and nearly as high; in fact, so high and so wide
was it that there were no railroads on which it might run, and when
Pullman pleaded with the old-time railroad officers to widen the
clearances, so as to permit the Pioneer to run over their lines, they
laughed at him.

"It is ridiculous, Mr. Pullman," they told him smilingly in refusal.
"People are never going to pay their good money to ride in any such
fancy contraption as that car of yours."

Then suddenly they ceased smiling. All America ceased smiling. Morse's
telegraph was sobering an exultant land by telling how its great
magistrate lay dead within the White House, at Washington. And men were
demanding a funeral car, dignified and handsome enough to carry the body
of Abraham Lincoln from Washington to Springfield. Suddenly somebody
thought of the Pioneer, which rested, a virtual prisoner, in a railroad
yard not far from Chicago.

The Pioneer was quickly released. There was no hesitation now about
making clearances for her. Almost in the passing of a night, station
platforms and other obstructions were being cut away, and the first of
all the Pullman cars made a triumphant though melancholy journey to New
York, to Washington, and back again to Illinois. Abraham Lincoln, in the
hour of death--fifty years ago this blossoming spring of 1915--had given
birth to the Pullman idea. The other day, while one of the brisk Federal
commissions down at Washington was extending consideration to the
Pullman porter and his wage, it called to the witness stand the
executive head of the Pullman Company. And the man who answered the call
was Robert T. Lincoln, the son of Abraham Lincoln.

When Pullman built the Pioneer he designated it A, little dreaming that
eventually he might build enough cars to exhaust the letters of the
alphabet. To-day the Pullman Company has more than six thousand cars in
constant use. It operates the entire sleeping-car service and by far the
larger part of the parlor-car service on all but half a dozen of the
railroads of the United States and Canada, with a goodly sprinkling of
routes south into Mexico. On an average night sixty thousand persons--a
community equal in size to Johnstown, Pennsylvania, or South Bend,
Indiana--sleep within its cars.

And one of the chief excuses for its existence is the flexibility of its
service. A railroad in the South, with a large passenger traffic in the
winter, or a railroad in the North, with conditions reversed and travel
running at high tide throughout the hot summer months, could hardly
afford to place the investment in sleeping and parlor cars to meet its
high-tide needs, and have those cars grow rusty throughout the long,
dull months. The Pullman Company, by moving its extra cars backward and
forward over the face of the land in regiments and in battalions, keeps
them all earning money. It meets unusual traffic demands with all the
resources of its great fleet of traveling hotels.

Last summer, when the Knights Templars held their convention in Denver,
it sent four hundred and fifty extra cars out to the capital of
Colorado. And this year it is bending its resources toward finding
sufficient cars to meet the demands for the long overland trek to the
expositions on the Pacific Coast.

The transition from the Pioneer to the steel sleeping car of today
was not accomplished in a single step. A man does not have to be so
very old or so very much traveled to recall the day when the Pullman
was called a palace ear and did its enterprising best to justify that
title. It was almost an apotheosis of architectural bad taste. Disfigured
by all manner of moldings, cornices, grilles and dinky plush
curtains--head-bumping, dust-catching, useless--it was a decorative
orgy, as well as one of the very foundations of the newspaper school of
humor.

Suddenly the Pullman Company awoke to the absurdity of it all. More than
ten years ago it came to the decision that architecture was all right in
its way, but that it was not a fundamental part of car building. It
separated the two. It began to throw out the grilles and the other
knickknacks, even before it had committed itself definitely to the use
of the steel car.

Recently it has done much more. It has banished all but the very
simplest of the moldings, and all the hangings save those that are
absolutely necessary to the operation of the car. It has studied and it
has experimented until it has produced in the sleeping car of to-day
what is probably the most efficient railroad vehicle in the world. Our
foreign cousins scoff at it and call it immodest; but we may reserve our
own opinion as to the relative modesty of some of their institutions.

       *       *       *       *       *

This, however, is not the story of the Pullman car. It is the story of
that ebony autocrat who presides so genially and yet so firmly over it.
It is the story of George the porter--the six thousand Georges standing
to-night to greet you and the other traveling folk at the doors of the
waiting cars. And George is worthy of a passing thought. He was born in
the day when the negro servant was the pride of America--when the black
man stood at your elbow in the dining rooms of the greatest of our
hotels; when a colored butler was the joy of the finest of the homes
along Fifth Avenue or round Rittenhouse Square. Transplanted, he quickly
became an American institution. And there is many a man who avers that
never elsewhere has there been such a servant as a good negro servant.

Fashions change, and in the transplanting of other social ideas the
black man has been shoved aside. It is only in the Pullman service that
he retains his old-time pride and prestige. That company to-day might
almost be fairly called his salvation, despite the vexing questions of
the wages and tips of the sleeping-car porters that have recently come
to the fore. Yet it is almost equally true that the black man has been
the salvation of the sleeping-car service. Experiments have been made in
using others. One or two of the Canadian roads, which operate their own
sleeping cars, have placed white men as porters; down in the Southwest
the inevitable Mexicano has been placed in the familiar blue uniform.
None of them has been satisfactory; and, indeed, it is not every negro
who is capable of taking charge of a sleeping car.

The Pullman Company passes by the West Indians--the type so familiar to
every man who has ridden many times in the elevators of the apartment
houses of upper New York. It prefers to recruit its porters from certain
of the states of the Old South--Georgia and the Carolinas. It almost
limits its choice to certain counties within those states. It shows a
decided preference for the sons of its employees; in fact, it might
almost be said that to-day there are black boys growing up down there in
the cotton country who have come into the world with the hope and
expectation of being made Pullman car porters. The company that operates
those cars prefers to discriminate--and it does discriminate.

That is its first step toward service--the careful selection of the
human factor. The next step lies in the proper training of that factor;
and as soon as a young man enters the service of the Pullmans he goes to
school--in some one of the large railroad centers that act as hubs for
that system. Sometimes the school is held in one of the division
offices, but more often it goes forward in the familiar aisle of a
sleeping car, sidetracked for the purpose.

Its curriculum is unusual but it is valuable. One moment it considers
the best methods to "swat the fly"--to drive him from the vehicle in
which he is an unwelcome passenger; the next moment the class is being
shown the proper handling of the linen closet, the proper methods of
folding and putting away clean linen and blankets, the correct way of
stacking in the laundry bags the dirty and discarded bedding. The porter
is taught that a sheet once unfolded cannot be used again. Though it may
be really spotless, yet technically it is dirty; and it must make a
round trip to the laundry before it can reenter the service.

All these things are taught the sophomore porters by a wrinkled veteran
of the service; and they are minutely prescribed in the voluminous rule
book issued by the Pullman Company, which believes that the first
foundation of service is discipline. So the school and the rule book do
not hesitate at details. They teach the immature porter not merely the
routine of making up and taking down beds, and the proper maintenance of
the car, but they go into such finer things as the calling of a
passenger, for instance. Noise is tabooed, and so even a soft knocking
on the top of the berth is forbidden. The porter must gently shake the
curtains or the bedding from without.

When the would-be porter is through in this schoolroom his education
goes forward out on the line. Under the direction of one of the grizzled
autocrats he first comes in contact with actual patrons--comes to know
their personalities and their peculiarities. Also, he comes to know the
full meaning of that overused and abused word--service. After all, here
is the full measure of the job. He is a servant. He must realize that.
And as a servant he must perfect himself. He must rise to the countless
opportunities that will come to him each night he is on the run. He must
do better--he must anticipate them.

Take such a man as Eugene Roundtree, who has been running a smoking car
on one of the limited trains between New York and Boston for two
decades--save for that brief transcendent hour when Charles S. Mellen
saw himself destined to become transportation overlord of New England
and appropriated Roundtree for a personal servant and porter of his
private car. Roundtree is a negro of the very finest type. He is a man
who commands respect and dignity--and receives it. And Roundtree, as
porter of the Pullman smoker on the Merchants' Limited, has learned to
anticipate.

He knows at least five hundred of the big bankers and business men of
both New York and Boston--though he knows the Boston crowd best. He
knows the men who belong to the Somerset and the Algonquin Clubs--the
men who are Boston enough to pronounce Peabody "Pebbuddy." And they know
him. Some of them have a habit of dropping in at the New Haven ticket
offices and demanding: "Is Eugene running up on the Merchants'
to-night?"

"It isn't just knowing them and being able to call them by their names,"
he will tell you if you can catch him in one of his rarely idle moments.
"I've got to remember what they smoke and what they drink. When Mr.
Blank tells me he wants a cigar it's my job to remember what he smokes
and to put it before him. I don't ask him what he wants. I anticipate."

And by anticipating Roundtree approaches a sort of _n_th degree of
service and receives one of the "fattest" of all the Pullman runs.

George Sylvester is another man of the Roundtree type--only his run
trends to the west from New York instead of to the east, which means
that he has a somewhat different type of patron with which to deal.

Sylvester is a porter on the Twentieth Century Limited; and, like
Roundtree, he is a colored man of far more than ordinary force and
character. He had opportunity to show both on a winter night, when his
train was stopped and a drunken man--a man who was making life hideous
for other passengers on Sylvester's car--was taken from the train. The
fact that the man was a powerful politician, a man who raved the direst
threats when arrested, made the porter's job the more difficult.

The Pullman Company, in this instance alone, had good cause to remember
Sylvester's force and courage--and consummate tact--just as it has good
cause in many such episodes to be thankful for the cool-headedness of
its black man in a blue uniform who stands in immediate control of its
property.

Sylvester prefers to forget that episode. He likes to think of the nice
part of the Century's runs--the passengers who are quiet, and kind, and
thoughtful, and remembering. They are a sort whom it is a pleasure for a
porter to serve. They are the people who make an excess-fare train a
"fat run." There are other fat runs, of course: the Overland, the
Olympian, the Congressional--and of General Henry Forrest, of the
Congressional, more in a moment--fat trains that follow the route of the
Century.

It was on one of these, coming east from Cleveland on a snowy night in
February last, that a resourceful porter had full use for his store of
tact; for there is, in the community that has begun to stamp Sixth City
on its shirts and its shoe tabs, a bank president who--to put the matter
lightly--is a particular traveler. More than one black man, rising high
in porter service, has had his vanity come to grief when this crotchety
personage has come on his car.

And the man himself was one of those who are marked up and down the
Pullman trails. An unwritten code was being transmitted between the
black brethren of the sleeping cars as to his whims and peculiarities.
It was well that every brother in service in the Cleveland district
should know the code. When Mr. X entered his drawing-room--he never
rides elsewhere in the car--shades were to be drawn, a pillow beaten and
ready by the window, and matches on the window sill. X would never ask
for these things; but God help the poor porter who forgot them!

So you yourself can imagine the emotions of Whittlesey Warren, porter of
the car Thanatopsis, bound east on Number Six on the snowy February
night when X came through the portals of that scarabic antique, the
Union Depot at Cleveland, a redcap with his grips in the wake. Warren
recognized his man. The code took good care as to that. He followed the
banker down the aisle, tucked away the bags, pulled down the shades,
fixed the pillow and placed the matches on the window sill.

The banker merely grunted approval, lighted a big black cigar and went
into the smoker, while Warren gave some passing attention to the other
patrons of his car. It was passing attention at the best; for after a
time the little bell annunciator began to sing merrily and persistently
at him--and invariably its commanding needle pointed to D.R. And on the
drawing-room Whittlesey Warren danced a constant attention.

"Here, you nigger!" X shouted at the first response. "How many times
have I got to tell all of you to put the head of my bed toward the
engine?"

Whittlesey Warren looked at the bed. He knew the make-up of the train.
The code had been met. The banker's pillows were toward the locomotive.
But his job was not to argue and dispute. He merely said:

"Yas-suh. Scuse me!" And he remade the bed while X lit a stogy and went
back to the smoker.

That was at Erie--Erie, and the snow was falling more briskly than at
Cleveland. Slowing into Dunkirk, the banker returned and glanced through
the car window. He could see by the snow against the street lamps that
the train was apparently running in the opposite direction. His chubby
finger went against the push button. Whittlesey Warren appeared at the
door. The language that followed cannot be reproduced in THE SATURDAY
EVENING POST. Suffice it to say that the porter remembered who he was
and what he was, and merely remade the bed.

The banker bit off the end of another cigar and retired once again to
the club car. When he returned, the train was backing into the Buffalo
station. At that unfortunate moment he raised his car shade--and Porter
Whittlesey Warren again reversed the bed, to the accompaniment of the
most violent abuse that had ever been heaped on his defenseless head.

Yet not once did he complain--he remembered that a servant a servant
always is. And in the morning X must have remembered; for a folded bill
went into Warren's palm--a bill of a denomination large enough to buy
that fancy vest which hung in a haberdasher's shop over on San Juan
Hill.

If you have been asking yourself all this while just what a fat run is,
here is your answer: Tips; a fine train filled with fine ladies and fine
gentlemen, not all of them so cranky as X, of Cleveland--thank heaven
for that!--though a good many of them have their peculiarities and are
willing to pay generously for the privilege of indulging those
peculiarities.

Despite the rigid discipline of the Pullman Company the porter's leeway
is a very considerable one. His instructions are never to say "Against
the rules!" but rather "I do not know what can be done about it"--and
then to make a quick reference to the Pullman conductor, who is his
arbiter and his court of last resort. His own initiative, however, is
not small.

Two newspaper men in New York know that. They had gone over to Boston
for a week-end, had separated momentarily at its end, to meet at the
last of the afternoon trains for Gotham. A had the joint finances and
tickets for the trip; but B, hurrying through the traffic tangle of
South Station, just ninety seconds before the moment of departure, knew
that he would find him already in the big Pullman observation car. He
was not asked to show his ticket at the train gate. Boston, with the
fine spirit of the Tea Party still flowing in its blue veins, has always
resented that as a sort of railroad impertinence.

B did not find A. He did not really search for him until Back Bay was
passed and the train was on the first leg of its journey, with the next
stop at Providence. Then it was that A was not to be found. Then B
realized that his side partner had missed the train. He dropped into a
corner and searched his own pockets. A battered quarter and three
pennies came to view--and the fare from Boston to Providence is ninety
cents!

Then it was that the initiative of a well-trained Pullman porter came
into play. He had stood over the distressed B while he was making an
inventory of his resources.

"Done los' something, boss?" said the autocrat of the car.

B told the black man his story in a quick, straightforward manner; and
the black man looked into his eyes. B returned the glance. Perhaps he
saw in that honest ebony face something of the expression of the
faithful servants of wartime who refused to leave their masters even
after utter ruin had come upon them. The porter drew forth a fat roll of
bills.

"Ah guess dat, ef you-all'll give meh yo' business cyard, Ah'll be able
to fee-nance yo' trip dis time."

To initiative the black man was adding intuition. He had studied his
man. He was forever using his countless opportunities to study men. It
was not so much of a gamble as one might suppose.

A pretty well-known editor was saved from a mighty embarrassing time;
and some other people have been saved from similarly embarrassing
situations through the intuition and the resources of the Pullman
porter. The conductor--both of the train and of the sleeping-car
service--is not permitted to exercise such initiative or intuition; but
the porter can do and frequently does things of this very sort. His
recompense for them, however, is hardly to be classed as a tip.

The tip is the nub of the whole situation. Almost since the very day
when the Pioneer began to blaze the trail of luxury over the railroads
of the land, and the autocrat of the Pullman car created his servile but
entirely honorable calling, it has been a mooted point. Recently a great
Federal commission has blazed the strong light of publicity on it.
Robert T. Lincoln, son of the Emancipator, and, as we have already said,
the head and front of the Pullman Company, sat in a witness chair at
Washington and answered some pretty pointed questions as to the division
of the porter's income between the company and the passenger who
employed him. Wages, it appeared, are twenty-seven dollars and a half a
month for the first fifteen years of the porter's service, increasing
thereafter to thirty dollars a month, slightly augmented by bonuses for
good records.

The porter also receives his uniforms free after ten years of service,
and in some cases of long service his pay may reach forty-two dollars a
month. The rest of his income is in the form of tips. And Mr. Lincoln
testified that during the past year the total of these tips, to the best
knowledge and belief of his company, had exceeded two million three
hundred thousand dollars.

The Pullman Company is not an eleemosynary institution. Though it has
made distinct advances in the establishment of pension funds and death
benefits, it is hardly to be classed as a philanthropy. It is a large
organization; and it generally is what it chooses to consider itself.
Sometimes it avers that it is a transportation company, at other times
it prefers to regard itself as a hotel organization; but at all times it
is a business proposition. It is not in business for its health. Its
dividend record is proof of that. All of which is a preface to the
statement that the Pullman Company, like any other large user of labor,
regulates its wage scale by supply and demand. If it can find enough of
the colored brethren competent and willing and anxious to man its cars
at twenty-seven dollars and a half a month--with the fair gamble of two
or three or four times that amount to come in the form of tips--it is
hardly apt to pay more.

No wonder, then, the tip forms the nub of the situation. To-day all
America tips. You tip the chauffeur in the taxi, the redcap in the
station, the barber, the bootblack, the manicure, the boy or girl who
holds your coat for you in the barber's shop or hotel. In the modern
hotel tipping becomes a vast and complex thing--waiters, doormen, hat
boys, chambermaids, bell boys, porters--the list seems almost unending.

The system may be abominable, but it has certainly fastened itself on
us--sternly and securely. And it may be said for the Pullman car that
there, at least, the tip comes to a single servitor--the black autocrat
who smiles genially no matter how suspiciously he may, at heart, view
the quarter you have placed within his palm.

A quarter seems to be the standard Pullman tip--for one person, each
night he may be on the car. Some men give more; some men--alas for poor
George!--less. A quarter is not only average but fairly standard. It is
given a certain official status by the auditing officers of many large
railroads and industrial corporations, who recognize it as a chargeable
item in the expense accounts of their men on the road.

A man with a fat run--lower berths all occupied, with at least a
smattering of riders in the uppers, night after night--ought to be able
easily to put aside a hundred and fifty dollars a month as his income
from this item. There are hundreds of porters who are doing this very
thing; and there are at least dozens of porters who own real estate,
automobiles, and other such material evidences of prosperity.

A tip is not necessarily a humiliation, either to the giver or to the
taker. On the contrary, it is a token of meritorious service. And the
smart porter is going to take good care that he gives such service. But
how about the porter who is not so smart--the man who has the lean run?
As every butcher and every transportation man knows, there is lean with
the fat. And it does the lean man little good to know that his fat
brother is preparing to buy a secondhand automobile. On the contrary, it
creates an anarchist--or at least a socialist--down under that black
skin.

Here is Lemuel--cursed with a lean run and yet trying to maintain at
least an appearance of geniality. Lemuel runs on a "differential"
between New York, Chicago and St. Louis. Every passenger-traffic man
knows that most of the differentials--as the roads that take longer
hours, and so are permitted to charge a slightly lower through fare
between those cities, are called--have had a hard time of it in recent
years. It is the excess-fare trains, the highest-priced carriers--which
charge you a premium of a dollar for every hour they save in placing you
in the terminal--that are the crowded trains. And the differentials have
had increasing difficulty getting through passengers.

It seems that in this day and land a man who goes from New York to
Chicago or St. Louis is generally so well paid as to make it worth
dollars to him to save hours in the journey. It is modern efficiency
showing itself in railroad-passenger travel. But the differentials,
having local territory to serve, as well as on account of some other
reasons, must maintain a sleeping-car service--even at a loss. There is
little or no loss to the Pullman Company--you may be sure of that! The
railroad pays it a mileage fee for hauling a half or three-quarter empty
car over its own line--in addition to permitting the Pullman system to
take all the revenue from the car; but Lemuel sees his end of the
business as a dead loss.

He leaves New York at two-thirty o'clock on Monday afternoon, having
reported at his car nearly three hours before so as to make sure that it
is properly stocked and cleaned for its long trip. He is due at St.
Louis at ten-fifteen on Tuesday evening--though it will be nearly two
hours later before he has checked the contents of the car and slipped
off to the bunking quarters maintained there by his company.

On Wednesday evening at seven o'clock he starts east and is due in New
York about dawn on Friday morning. He cleans up his car and himself, and
gets to his little home on the West Side of Manhattan Island sometime
before noon; but by noon on Saturday he must be back at his car, making
sure that it is fit and ready by two-thirty o'clock--the moment the
conductor's arm falls--and they are headed west again.

This time the destination is Chicago, which is not reached until about
six o'clock Sunday night. He bunks that night in the Windy City and then
spends thirty-two hours going back again to New York. He sees his home
one more night; then he is off to St. Louis again--started on a fresh
round of his eternal schedule.

Talk of tips to Lemuel! His face lengthens. You may not believe it,
white man, but Lemuel made fifty-three cents in tips on the last trip
from New York to Chicago. You can understand the man who gave him the
Columbian antique; but Lemuel believes there can be no future too warm
for that skinny man who gave him the three pennies! He thinks the
gentleman might at least have come across with a Subway ticket. It is
all legal tender to him.

All that saves this porter's bacon is the fact that he is in charge of
the car--for some three hundred miles of its eastbound run he is acting
as sleeping-car conductor, for which consolidated job he draws down a
proportionate share of forty-two dollars a month. This is a small sop,
however, to Lemuel. He turns and tells you how, on the last trip, he
came all the way from St. Louis to New York--two nights on the
road--without ever a "make-down," as he calls preparing a berth. No
wonder then that he has difficulty in making fifty dollars a month, with
his miserable tips on the lean run.

Nor is that all. Though Lemuel is permitted three hours' sleep--on the
bunk in the washroom on the long runs--from midnight to three o'clock in
the morning, there may come other times when his head begins to nod. And
those are sure to be the times when some lynx-eyed inspector comes
slipping aboard. Biff! Bang! Pullman discipline is strict. Something has
happened to Lemuel's pay envelope, and his coffee-colored wife in West
Twenty-ninth Street will not be able to get those gray spats until they
are clean gone out of style.

What can be done for Lemuel? He must bide his time and constantly make
himself a better servant--a better porter, if you please. It will not go
unnoticed. The Pullman system has a method for noticing those very
things--inconsequential in themselves but all going to raise the
standard of its service.

Then some fine day something will happen. A big sleeping-car autocrat,
in the smugness and false security of a fat run, is going to err. He is
going to step on the feet of some important citizen--perhaps a railroad
director--and the important citizen is going to make a fuss. After which
Lemuel, hard-schooled in adversity, in faithfulness and in courtesy,
will be asked in the passing of a night to change places with the old
autocrat.

And the old autocrat, riding in the poverty of a lean run, will have
plenty of opportunity to count the telegraph poles and reflect on the
mutability of men and things. The Pullman Company denies that this is
part of its system; but it does happen--time and time and time again.

George, or Lemuel, or Alexander--whatever the name may be--has no easy
job. If you do not believe that, go upstairs some hot summer night to
the rear bedroom--that little room under the blazing tin roof which you
reserve for your relatives--and make up the bed fifteen or twenty times,
carefully unmaking it between times and placing the clothes away in a
regular position. Let your family nag at you and criticize you during
each moment of the job--while somebody plays an obbligato on the
electric bell and places shoes and leather grips underneath your feet.
Imagine the house is bumping and rocking--and keep a smiling face and a
courteous tongue throughout all of it!

Or do this on a bitter night in midwinter; and between every two or
three makings of the bed in the overheated room slip out of a linen coat
and into a fairly thin serge one and go and stand outside the door from
three to ten minutes in the snow and cold. In some ways this is one of
the hardest parts of George's job. Racially the negro is peculiarly
sensitive to pneumonia and other pulmonary diseases; yet the rules of a
porter's job require that at stopping stations he must be outside of the
car--no matter what the hour or condition of the climate--smiling and
ready to say:

"What space you got, guv'nor?"

However, the porter's job, like nearly every other job, has its glories
as well as its hardships--triumphs that can be told and retold for many
a day to fascinated colored audiences; because there are special
trains--filled with pursy and prosperous bankers from Hartford and
Rochester and Terre Haute--making the trip from coast to coast and back
again, and never forgetting the porter at the last hour of the last day.

There are many men in the Pullman service like Roger Pryor, who has
ridden with every recent President of the land and enjoyed his
confidence and respect. And then there is General Henry Forrest, of the
Congressional Limited, for twenty-four years in charge of one of its
broiler cars, who stops not at Presidents but enjoys the acquaintance
of senators and ambassadors almost without number.

The General comes to know these dignitaries by their feet. When he is
standing at the door of his train under the Pennsylvania Terminal, in
New York, he recognizes the feet as they come poking down the long
stairs from the concourse. And he can make his smile senatorial or
ambassadorial--a long time in advance.

Once Forrest journeyed in a private car to San Francisco, caring for a
Certain Big Man. He took good care of the Certain Big Man--that was part
of his job. He took extra good care of the Certain Big Man--that was his
opportunity. And when the Certain Big Man reached the Golden Gate he
told Henry Forrest that he had understood and appreciated the countless
attentions. The black face of the porter wrinkled into smiles. He dared
to venture an observation.

"Ah thank you, Jedge!" said he. "An' ef it wouldn't be trespassin' Ah'd
lak to say dat when yo' comes home you's gwine to be President of dese
United States."

The Certain Big Man shook his head negatively; but he was flattered
nevertheless. He leaned over and spoke to Henry Forrest.

"If ever I am President," said he, "I will make you a general."

And so it came to pass that on the blizzardy Dakota-made day when
William Howard Taft was inaugurated President of these United States
there was a parade--a parade in which many men rode in panoply and
pride; but none was prouder there than he who, mounted on a magnificent
bay horse, headed the Philippine Band.

A promise was being kept. The bay horse started three times to bolt from
the line of march, and this was probably because its rider was better
used to the Pompeian-red broiler car than to a Pompeian-red bay mare.
But these were mere trifles. Despite them--partly because of them
perhaps--the younger brethren at the terminals were no longer to address
the veteran from the Congressional merely as Mr. Forrest. He was General
Forrest now--a title he bears proudly and which he will carry with him
all the long years of his life.

What becomes of the older porters?

Sometimes, when the rush of the fast trains, the broken nights, the
exposure and the hard, hard work begin to be too much for even sturdy
Afric frames, they go to the "super" and beg for the "sick man's run"--a
leisurely sixty or a hundred miles a day on a parlor car, perhaps on a
side line where travel is light and the parlor car is a sort of
sentimental frippery; probably one of the old wooden cars: the Alicia,
or the Lucille, or the Celeste, still vain in bay windows and grilles,
and abundant in carvings. For a sentimental frippery may be given a
feminine name and may bear her years gracefully--even though she does
creak in all her hundred joints when the track is the least bit uneven.

As to the sick man's tips, the gratuity is no less a matter of keen
interest and doubt at sixty than it is at twenty-six. And though there
is a smile under that clean mat of kinky white hair, it is not all
habit--some of it is still anticipation. But quarters and half dollars
do not come so easily to the old man in the parlor car as to his younger
brother on the sleepers, or those elect who have the smokers on the fat
runs. To the old men come dimes instead--some of them miserable affairs
bearing on their worn faces the faint presentments of the ruler on the
north side of Lake Erie and hardly redeemable in Baltimore or
Cincinnati. Yet even these are hardly to be scorned--when one is sixty.

After the sick man's job? Perhaps a sandy farm on a Carolina
hillside, where an old man may sit and nod in the warm sun, and dream
of the days when steel cars were new--perhaps of the days when the
platform-vestibule first went bounding over the rails--may dream and
nod; and then, in his waking moments, stir the pickaninnies to the
glories of a career on a fast train and a fat run. For if it is true
that any white boy has the potential opportunity of becoming President
of the United States, it is equally true that any black boy may become
the Autocrat of the Pullman Car.

       *       *       *       *       *

_(The Independent)_

THE GENTLE ART OF BLOWING BOTTLES
And the Story of How Sand is Melted into Glass

BY F. GREGORY HARTSWICK

Remedies for our manifold ills; the refreshment that our infant lips
craved; coolness in time of heat; yes--even tho July 1st has come and
gone--drafts to assuage our thirst; the divers stays and supports of our
declining years--all these things come in bottles. From the time of its
purchase to the moment of its consignment to the barrel in the cellar or
the rapacious wagon of the rag-and-bone man the bottle plays a vital
part in our lives. And as with most inconspicuous necessities, but
little is known of its history. We assume vaguely that it is blown--ever
since we saw the Bohemian Glass Blowers at the World's Fair we have
known that glass is blown into whatever shape fancy may dictate--but
that is as far as our knowledge of its manufacture extends.

As a matter of fact the production of bottles in bulk is one of the most
important features of the glass industry of this country today. The
manufacture of window glass fades into insignficance before the hugeness
of the bottle-making business; and even the advent of prohibition, while
it lessens materially the demand for glass containers of liquids, does
not do so in such degree as to warrant very active uneasiness on the
part of the proprietors of bottle factories.

The process of manufacture of the humble bottle is a surprizingly
involved one. It includes the transportation and preparation of raw
material, the reduction of the material to a proper state of
workability, and the shaping of the material according to design, before
the bottle is ready to go forth on its mission.

The basic material of which all glass is made is, of course, sand. Not
the brown sand of the river-bed, the well remembered "sandy bottom" of
the swimmin' hole of our childhood, but the finest of white sand from
the prehistoric ocean-beds of our country. This sand is brought to the
factory and there mixed by experts with coloring matter and a flux to
aid the melting. On the tint of the finished product depends the sort of
coloring agent used. For clear white glass, called flint glass, no color
is added. The mixing of a copper salt with the sand gives a greenish
tinge to the glass; amber glass is obtained by the addition of an iron
compound; and a little cobalt in the mixture gives the finished bottle
the clear blue tone that used to greet the waking eye as it searched the
room for something to allay that morning's morning feeling. The flux
used is old glass--bits of shattered bottles, scraps from the floor of
the factory. This broken glass is called "cullet," and is carefully
swept into piles and kept in bins for use in the furnaces.

The sand, coloring matter, and cullet, when mixed in the proper
proportions, form what is called in bottle-makers' talk the "batch" or
"dope." This batch is put into a specially constructed furnace--a brick
box about thirty feet long by fifteen wide, and seven feet high at the
crown of the arched roof. This furnace is made of the best refractory
blocks to withstand the fierce heat necessary to bring the batch to a
molten state. The heat is supplied by various fuels--producer-gas is the
most common, tho oil is sometimes used. The gas is forced into the
furnace and mixed with air at its inception; when the mixture is ignited
the flame rolls down across the batch, and the burnt gases pass out of
the furnace on the other side. The gases at their exit pass thru a brick
grating or "checkerboard," which takes up much of the heat; about every
half hour, by an arrangement of valves, the inlet of the gas becomes the
outlet, and vice versa, so that the heat taken up by the checkerboard is
used instead of being dissipated, and as little of the heat of
combustion is lost as is possible. The batch is put into the furnace
from the rear; as it liquefies it flows to the front, where it is drawn
off thru small openings and blown into shape.

The temperature in the furnace averages about 2100 degrees Fahrenheit;
it is lowest at the rear, where the batch is fed in, and graduates to
its highest point just behind the openings thru which the glass is drawn
off. This temperature is measured by special instruments called thermal
couples--two metals joined and placed in the heat of the flame. The heat
sets up an electric current in the joined metals, and this current is
read on a galvanometer graduated to read degrees Fahrenheit instead of
volts, so that the temperature may be read direct.

All furnaces for the melting of sand for glass are essentially the same
in construction and principle. The radical differences in bottle
manufacturing appear in the methods used in drawing off the glass and
blowing it into shape.

Glass is blown by three methods: hand-blowing, semi-automatic blowing,
and automatic blowing. The first used was the hand method, and tho the
introduction of machines is rapidly making the old way a back number,
there are still factories where the old-time glass blower reigns
supreme.

One of the great centers of the bottle industry in the United States is
down in the southern end of New Jersey. Good sand is dug there--New
Jersey was part of the bed of the Atlantic before it literally rose to
its present state status--and naturally the factories cluster about the
source of supply of material. Within a radius of thirty miles the
investigator may see bottles turned out by all three methods.

The hand-blowing, while it is the slowest and most expensive means of
making bottles, is by far the most picturesque. Imagine a long, low,
dark building--dark as far as daylight is concerned, but weirdly lit by
orange and scarlet flashes from the great furnaces that crouch in its
shelter. At the front of each of these squatting monsters, men,
silhouetted against the fierce glow from the doors, move about like
puppets on wires--any noise they may make is drowned in the mastering
roar of the fire. A worker thrusts a long blowpipe (in glassworkers'
terminology a wand) into the molten mass in the furnace and twirls it
rapidly. The end of the wand, armed with a ball of refractory clay,
collects a ball of semi-liquid glass; the worker must estimate the
amount of glass to be withdrawn for the particular size of the bottle
that is to be made. This ball of glowing material is withdrawn from the
furnace; the worker rolls it on a sloping moldboard, shaping it to a
cylinder, and passes the wand to the blower who is standing ready to
receive it. The blower drops the cylinder of glass into a mold, which is
held open for its reception by yet another man; the mold snaps shut; the
blower applies his mouth to the end of the blowpipe; a quick puff,
accompanied by the drawing away of the wand, blows the glass to shape in
the mold and leaves a thin bubble of glass protruding above. The mold is
opened; the shaped bottle, still faintly glowing, is withdrawn with a
pair of asbestos-lined pincers, and passed to a man who chips off the
bubble on a rough strip of steel, after which he gives the bottle to one
who sits guarding a tiny furnace in which oil sprayed under pressure
roars and flares. The rough neck of the bottle goes into the flame; the
raw edges left when the bubble was chipped off are smoothed away by the
heat; the neck undergoes a final polishing and shaping twirl in the jaws
of a steel instrument, and the bottle is laid on a little shelf to be
carried away. It is shaped, but not finished.

The glass must not be cooled too quickly, lest it be brittle. It must be
annealed--cooled slowly--in order to withstand the rough usage to which
it is to be subjected. The annealing process takes place in a long,
brick tunnel, heated at one end, and gradually cooling to atmospheric
temperature at the other. The bottles are placed on a moving platform,
which slowly carries them from the heated end to the cool end. The
process takes about thirty hours. At the cool end of the annealing
furnace the bottle is met by the packers and is made ready for shipment.
These annealing furnaces are called "lehrs" or "leers"--either spelling
is correct--and the most searching inquiry failed to discover the reason
for the name. They have always been called that, and probably always
will be.

In the hand-blowing process six men are needed to make one bottle.
There must be a gatherer to draw the glass from the furnace; a blower; a
man to handle the mold; a man to chip off the bubble left by the blower;
a shaper to finish the neck of the bottle; and a carrier-off to take the
completed bottles to the lehr. Usually the gatherer is also the blower,
in which case two men are used, one blowing while the other gathers for
his turn; but on one platform I saw the somewhat unusual sight of one
man doing all the blowing while another gathered for him. The pair used
two wands, so that their production was the same as tho two men were
gathering and blowing. This particular blower was making quart bottles,
and he was well qualified for the job. He weighed, at a conservative
estimate, two hundred and fifty pounds, and when he blew something had
to happen. I arrived at his place of labor just as the shifts were being
changed--a glass-furnace is worked continuously, in three eight-hour
shifts--and as the little whistle blew to announce the end of his day's
toil the giant grabbed the last wand, dropped it into the waiting mold,
and blew a mighty blast. A bubble of glass sprang from the mouth of the
mold, swelled to two feet in diameter, and burst with a bang, filling
the air with shimmering flakes of glass, light enough to be wafted like
motes. When the shining shower had settled and I had opened my eyes--it
would not be pleasant to get an eyeful of those beautiful scraps--the
huge blower was diminishing in perspective toward his dinner, and the
furnace door was, for the moment, without its usual hustling
congregation of workers. I made bold to investigate the platform.

Close to me glared the mouth of the furnace, with masses of silver
threads depending from it like the beard of some fiery gulleted
ogre--the strings of glass left by the withdrawal of the wand. The heat
three feet away was enough to make sand melt and run like water, but I
was not unpleasantly warm. This was because I stood at the focus of
three tin pipes, thru which streams of cold air, fan-impelled, beat upon
me. Without this cooling agent it would be impossible for men to work so
close to the heat of the molten glass.

Later, in the cool offices of the company, where the roar of the
furnaces penetrated only as a dull undertone, and electric fans whizzed
away the heat of the summer afternoon, I learned more of the technique
of the bottle industry. Each shape demanded by the trade requires a
special mold, made of cast iron and cut according to the design
submitted. There are, of course, standard shapes for standard bottles;
these are alluded to (reversing the usual practise of metonymy) by using
thing contained for container, as "ginger ales," "olives," "mustards,"
"sodas" and (low be it spoken) "beers." But when a firm places an order
for bottles of a particular shape, or ones with lettering in relief on
the glass, special molds must be made; and after the lot is finished the
molds are useless till another order for that particular design comes
in. A few standard molds are made so that plates with lettering can be
inserted for customers who want trademarks or firm names on their
bottles; but the great majority of the lettered bottles have their own
molds, made especially for them and unable to be used for any other lot.

All bottles are blown in molds; it is in the handling of the molten
glass and the actual blowing that machinery has come to take the place
of men in the glass industry. The first type of machine to be developed
was for blowing the bottle and finishing it, thus doing away with three
of the six men formerly employed in making one bottle. In appearance the
bottle-blowing machine is merely two circular platforms, revolving in
the same horizontal plane, each carrying five molds. One of the
platforms revolves close to the furnace door, and as each mold comes
around it automatically opens and the gatherer draws from the furnace
enough glass for the bottle which is being made at the time, and places
it in the mold. The mold closes, and the platform turns on, bringing
around another mold to the gatherer. Meanwhile a nozzle has snapped down
over the first mold, shaping the neck of the bottle, and beginning the
blowing. As the mold comes to a point diametrically opposite the furnace
door it opens again, and a handler takes the blank, as the bottle is
called at this stage, and places it in a mold on the second revolving
platform. This mold closes and compressed air blows out the bottle as
the platform revolves. As the mold comes around to the handler again it
opens and the handler takes out the finished bottle, replacing it with a
new blank drawn from the mold on the first platform. This operation
necessitates only three men--a gatherer, a handler, and a carrier-off.
It is also much faster than the old method--an average of about forty
bottles per minute as against barely twenty.

A newer development of this machine does away with the gatherer. A long
rod of refractory clay is given a churning movement in the mouth of the
furnace, forcing the molten glass thru a tube. As enough glass for one
bottle appears at the mouth of the tube a knife cuts the mass and the
blob of glass falls into a trough which conveys it to the blank mold. By
an ingenious device the same trough is made to feed three or four
machines at one time. As many as fifty bottles a minute can be turned
out by this combination blowing machine and feeder.

But the apotheosis of bottle-making is to be seen in another factory in
the south Jersey district. Here it is the boast of the superintendents
that from the time the sand goes out of the freight cars in which it is
brought to the plant till the finished bottle is taken by the packer, no
human hand touches the product; and their statement is amply confirmed
by a trip thru the plant. The sand, coloring matter and cullet are in
separate bins; an electrical conveyor takes enough of each for a batch
to a mixing machine; from there the batch goes on a long belt to the
furnace. At the front of the furnace, instead of doors or mouths, is a
revolving pan, kept level full with the molten glass. Outside the
furnace revolves a huge machine with ten arms, each of which carries its
own mold and blowpipe. As each arm passes over the pan in the furnace
the proper amount of glass is sucked into the mold by vacuum; the bottle
is blown and shaped in the course of one revolution, and the mold,
opening, drops the finished bottle into a rack which carries it to the
lehr on a belt. It passes thru the lehr to the packers; and as each rack
is emptied of its bottles the packers place it again on the belt, which
carries it up to the machine, where it collects its cargo of hot bottles
and conducts it again thru the lehr. The entire plant--mixing, feeding,
actually making the bottles, delivery to the lehr, and packing--is
synchronized exactly. Men unload the cars of sand--men pack the bottles.
The intermediate period is entirely mechanical. The plant itself is as
well lighted and ventilated as a department store, and except in the
immediate vicinity of the furnace there is no heat felt above the daily
temperature. The machines average well over a bottle a second, and by an
exceedingly clever arrangement of electrical recording appliances an
accurate record of the output of each machine, as well as the
temperatures of the furnaces and lehrs, is kept in the offices of the
company. The entire equipment is of the most modern, from the boilers
and motors in the power-plant and producer-gas-plant to the packing
platforms. In addition, the plant boasts a complete machine shop where
all the molds are made and the machines repaired.

It is a far cry from human lung-power to the super-efficient machinery
of the new plants; but it is the logical progress of human events,
applying to every product of man's hands, from battleships to--bottles.

       *       *       *       *       *


SPECIAL FEATURE ARTICLES


(_New York World_)

One illustration, a half-tone reproduction of a photograph of the
exterior of the theater.

THE NEIGHBORHOOD PLAYHOUSE

A GIFT TO THE EAST SIDE--HOW THE SETTLEMENT WORK OF MISSES IRENE AND
ALICE LEWISOHN HAS CULMINATED AT LAST IN A REAL THEATRE--ITS ATTRACTIONS
AND EDUCATIONAL VALUE


The piece is the Biblical "Jephthah's Daughter," adapted from the Book
of Judges. The hero, "a mighty man of valor," has conquered the enemies
of his people. There is great rejoicing over his victory, for the tribe
of Israel has been at its weakest. But now comes payment of the price of
conquest. The leader of the victorious host promised to yield to God as
a burnt sacrifice "whatsoever cometh forth from the doors of my house to
meet me when I return from battle." And his daughter came forth.

In the last act, the girl herself, young and beautiful, advances toward
the altar on which fagots have been piled high. In her hand is the
lighted torch which is to kindle her own death fire.

The chorus chants old Hebraic melodies. Even the audience joins in the
singing. The play takes on the aspect of an ancient religious
ceremonial. Old men and women are in tears, moved by the sad history of
their race, forgetful of the horror of human sacrifice in the intensity
of their religious fervor.

Such is the artistry of the piece; such the perfection of its
production.

Yet this is no professional performance, but the work of amateurs. It is
the opening night of the new community theatre of New York's densely
populated East Side.

At No. 466 Grand Street it stands, far away from Broadway's theatrical
district--a low-lying, little Georgian building. It is but three stories
high, built of light red brick, and finished with white marble. All
around garish millinery shops display their showy goods. Peddlers with
pushcarts lit by flickering flames, vie with each other in their array
of gaudy neckties and bargain shirtwaists. Blazing electric signs herald
the thrills of movie shows. And, salient by the force of extreme
contrast, a plain little white posterboard makes its influence felt. It
is lit by two iron lanterns, and reads simply, "The Neighborhood
Playhouse."

The Misses Irene and Alice Lewisohn of No. 43 Fifth Avenue have built
this theatre. It is their gift to the neighborhood, and symbolizes the
culmination of a work which they have shared with the neighborhood's
people.

Eight years ago the Henry Street Settlement started its scheme of
festivals and pantomimes, portraying through the medium of color, song,
and dance such vague ideas as "Impressions of Spring." It was the boys
and girls of the Settlement who performed in these pantomimes. It was
they who made the costumes, painted the necessary scenery, sang and
danced.

And both daughters of the late Leonard Lewisohn were always interested
and active in promoting this work.

Out of it, in due time, there developed, quite naturally, a dramatic
club. Plays were given in the Settlement gymnasium--full-grown pieces
like "The Silver Box," by John Galsworthy, and inspiring dramas like
"The Shepherd," a plea for Russian revolutionists, by an American
author, Miss Olive Tilford Dargan. Such was the emotional response of
the neighborhood to this drama that four performances had to be given at
Clinton Hall; and as a result a substantial sum of money was forwarded
to "The Friends of Russian Freedom."

Then, in 1913, came the famous Pageant, which roused the entire district
to a consciousness of itself--its history, its dignity and also its
possibilities.

That portion of the East Side which surrounds the Henry Street
Settlement has seen many an invasion since the days when the Dutch first
ousted the Indians. English, Quakers, Scotch have come and gone, leaving
traces more or less distinct. The Irish have given place to the
Italians, who have been replaced by the Russians. In the Pageant of 1913
all these settlers were represented by artistically clad groups who
paraded the streets singing and dancing. No hall could have held the
audience which thronged to see this performance; no host of matin√©e
worshippers could have rivalled it in fervor of appreciation.

When the Misses Lewisohn, then, built their new playhouse in Grand
Street, it was not with the intention of rousing, but rather of
satisfying, an artistic demand among the people of the neighborhood. And
in the new home are to be continued all the varied activities of which
the Henry Street Settlement festival and dramatic clubs were but the
centre. It is to be a genuine community enterprise in which each boy and
girl will have a share. Miss Alice Lewisohn herself thus expresses its
many-sided work:

"The costume designers and makers, fashioners of jewelry, painters and
composers, musicians and seamstresses, as well as actors and directors,
will contribute their share in varying degree.

"Putting aside for a moment the higher and artistic development which
such work must bring, there is the craftsman side, too, which has
practical value. The young men will become familiar with all the
handiwork of the theatre, the construction and handling of scenery, the
electrical equipment and its varied uses. It will be conceded, I think,
that in this respect the community playhouse is really a college of
instruction in the craft of the stage."

It is a college with a very efficient and well-trained staff of
professors. Mrs. Sarah Cowell Le Moyne, already well known as a teacher
of elocution and acting, will be one of its members. Miss Grace
Griswold, an experienced co-worker of the late Augustine Daly, will act
as manager.

The pupils of this novel school are to have amusement as well as work.
The third floor has been planned to meet many more requirements than are
usually considered in a theatre. Across the front runs a large rehearsal
room, large enough to make a fine dance hall when occasion demands.
Here, too, is a kitchenette which will be used to serve refreshments
when social gatherings are in progress or when an over-long rehearsal
tires out the cast. In warm weather the flat-tiled roof will be used as
a playground. It will be the scene, too, of many open air performances.

The Neighborhood Playhouse has been open only a few weeks. Already it is
in full swing. On the nights when the regular players do not appear the
programme consists of motion pictures and music. There is a charming
informality and ease about these entertainments; there is also genuine
art, and a whole-hearted appreciation on the part of the neighborhood's
people.

       *       *       *       *       *

(_New York Evening Post_)

THE SINGULAR STORY OF THE MOSQUITO MAN

BY HELEN BULLITT LOWRY


"Now you just hold up a minute"--the bungalow-owner waved an indignant
hand at the man in the little car chug-chugging over the bumpy road.
"Now I just want to tell you," he protested, "that a mosquito got into
my room last night and bit me, and I want you to know that this has
happened three times this week. I want it to stop."

The man in the car had jumped out, and was turning an animated, and
aggressive, but not at all provoked, face on the complainer.

"Are you certain your drains are not stopped up?" he asked.

"Oh, those drains are all right. It's that damp hollow over in Miss K's
woods that's making the trouble."

"I'll go there immediately," said the aggressive one. "She promised me
she would fill that place this week."

"All right, then," answered the placated bungalow-owner, "I thought
you'd fix it up if you found out about it. I certainly wouldn't have
bought around Darien if you had not cleared this place of mosquitoes."

The aggressive one plunged into the Connecticut woods and began his
search for possible mosquito-breeding spots. He was the "Mosquito Man,"
the self-appointed guardian of the Connecticut coast from Stamford to
Westport.

He was not born a Mosquito Man at all--in fact, he did not become one
until he was forty years old and had retired from business because he
had made enough money to rest and "enjoy life." But he did not rest, and
did not get enjoyment, for the mosquitoes had likewise leased his place
on the Sound and were making good their title.

Came then big fat mosquitoes from the swamp. Came mosquitoes from the
salt marshes. Some lighted on the owner's nose and some looked for his
ankles, and found them. Three days of this sort of rest made him decide
to move away. Then, because he was aggressive, he became the Mosquito
Man. The idea occurred to him when he had gone over to a distant island
and was watching the building of houses.

"This place," he said to the head carpenter, "is going to be a little
heaven."

"More like a little other place," growled the head carpenter. "Here
they've dug out the centre of the island and carted it to the beach to
make hills for the houses to be built on. One good rain will fill their
little heaven with mosquitoes. Why don't the people around here drain
their country?"

That night the Mosquito Man telephoned to a drainage expert in New York
and demanded that he come out the next day.

"I don't like to work on Sunday," the expert objected.

"It is absolutely essential that you come at once," he was told. "Can
you take the first train?"

The first train and the expert arrived in Darien at 5:51. Before the day
was over a contract had been drawn up to the purport that the expert
would drain the salt marshes between Stamford and South Norwalk for
$4,000.

The Mosquito Man now began to talk mosquitoes to every one who would
listen and to many who did not want to listen. "That bug," the old
settlers called him at the time--for old settlers are very settled in
their ways. The young women at the Country Club, whenever they saw him
coming, made bets as to whether he would talk mosquitoes--and he always
did. Every property-owner in the township was asked for a subscription,
and some gave generously and some gave niggardly and some did not give
at all. The subscriptions were voluntary, for no one could be forced to
remove a mosquito-breeding nuisance from his property. This was in 1911,
and only in 1915 has a mosquito law been passed in Connecticut. The
Mosquito Man was forced to use "indirect influence," which does not
expedite matters.

A subscription of $1,000 came from the big land corporation of the
neighborhood, after the "indirect influence" had rather forcibly
expressed itself.

"I want $1,000 from you," said the Mosquito Man to the representative of
the president--the president was in South America. The representative
laughed, so the Mosquito Man spent several days explaining to him why
property is more valuable when it is not infested with pests. But every
time that the $1,000 was mentioned, the representative could not
restrain the smile.

"Well," the Mosquito Man said, at last, "I will make the drainage on
your property anyway, and it will cost me $2,000. If you want it left
you will have to pay me every cent of the $2,000, not just the $1,000
that I am asking now. Otherwise I shall fill up my ditches and let you
enjoy your mosquitoes."

The representative did not laugh at this, but cabled the president in
South America. As the president had just been at Panama, and had seen
the mosquito extermination work, the $1,000 subscription came back by
return cable.

The Darien Board of Health also was a spot against which in direct
influence was knocking, for it was a rich Board of Health with $150 at
its disposal--and the Mosquito Man wanted that appropriation to flaunt
in the faces of the old settlers.

"God sent mosquitoes," objected one member of the Board of Health, "and
it is going in the face of Providence to try to get rid of them."

All in all, the money was raised. Some whom he asked for $100 gave $25,
and some whom he asked for $25 gave $100, and some millionaires did not
give at all--but a sail-maker is still telling proudly of how he gave
$5, and "I haven't regretted a cent of it since."

The draining now commenced, and the expert and the Mosquito Man were of
the same stripe. The work was completed in six weeks. Just about this
time people stopped calling the Mosquito Man "a bug," and the members of
the Country Club even tried to make him talk mosquitoes to them, while
the sail-maker felt sure that his $5 had done the whole job. Hammocks
were swung out in the yards--and a hammock hung outside of the screens
is the barometer of the mosquito condition.

The Mosquito Man was feeling very satisfied the night he went to a dance
at the Country Club. But the east wind blew in the mosquitoes from the
Norwalk marshes.

"It was the most embarrassing experience I have ever had," said the
Mosquito Man. "I sat right behind a big fat lady whose dress was very
low and I watched the mosquitoes bite her; her whole back was covered
with red lumps. That night I telegraphed to the man who had done the
draining and he telegraphed back that all of Norwalk township must be
drained."

Norwalk proved to be a much severer task than Darien. In Darien the
Mosquito Man had found only indifference and prejudice; in Norwalk he
met active opposition. Property owners and city councils seem to be
afraid that the value of property will be brought down if any sanitation
scandal is advertised. It really appeared to be simpler and better
business to ignore the fact.

To do away with this opposition, the Mosquito Man handled his campaign
in a popular manner. The cooperation of the newspapers was gained and
every day he published articles on the mosquito question; some of the
articles were educational and others were facetious--while one came out
that brought the property owners crying "murder" about his ears. This
was the article in which he gave the statistics of Norwalk's health rate
in comparison with other Connecticut towns. The smallest subscriptions
were encouraged, for, after a man has given a dollar to a cause, that
cause is his. Many a child was received with a welcoming smile when he
brought to the campaign offices a ten-cent donation.

True, ten-cent donations were not suggested to adult contributors, and
the Mosquito Man did much to induce the well-to-do citizens to subscribe
according to their means. He still tells with relish of the club of
women which took up a collection, after his talk, and presented him with
two dollars, in small change.

"The women, though, were my greatest help," he adds; "I found that the
women are as a rule better citizens than the men and are glad to be
organized to fight the mosquito and fly menace. Of course, I found some
uneducated ones that owned a piece of property a foot square, and were
afraid that I would walk off with it in my pocket if I came to look it
over--but, as for the educated women, I could not have managed my
campaign without them."

A large contributor to the fund was the monastery at Kaiser Island. For
years this had been a summer resort for the monks, who filled the
dormitories in the old days before the mosquitoes took the island. Only
one priest was there when the Mosquito Man visited the place to ask for
a subscription.

"Very few come any more," said the priest. "It is because of the
mosquitoes."

"Will you contribute $500 to get rid of them?" asked the Mosquito Man.

Briefly, the Mosquito Man offered to repay the $500 himself if he did
not exterminate the mosquitoes. The mosquitoes went; the monks came back
to Kaiser Island.

Yet, in spite of the occasional generous giver, the $7,500 was never
quite raised, and the Mosquito Man himself had to make up the deficit.
The citizens of Norwalk, for instance, contributed only $150.

This all happened three years ago, and now not a child in the twelve
miles but can tell you all about mosquitoes and how a community can
avoid having them. The Mosquito Man is appreciated now, and the
community understands what he has done for them and what he is still
doing--for the contract merely drained the salt marshes, doing away with
the salt-water mosquitoes. There were still the fresh-water mosquitoes,
and there was still much work for some one to do. That some one has
been the Mosquito Man.

During the three years, he has made it his business to drain every
inland marsh within his territory, to turn over every tub which may
collect water, to let the plug out of every old boat which is breeding
mosquitoes, and to convince every ancestor-encumbered autocrat that his
inherited woods can breed mosquitoes just as disastrously as do the tin
cans of the Hungarian immigrant down the road. The Mosquito Man has an
assistant, paid by the towns of Darien and Norwalk--and together they
traverse the country.

"It was difficult finding a man who would go into mud to the waist when
need was," said the Mosquito Man, "but I finally found a good man with
the proper scorn of public opinion on the clothes question, and with a
properly trained wife who cleaned without scolding."

You can find traces of the two men any place you go in the woods of
Darien or Norwalk. In a ferned dell where you are quite sure that yours
is the first human presence, you come upon a ditch, as clean and smooth
as a knife--or you find new grass in a place which you remember as a
swamp. Perhaps you may even be lucky enough to come on the two workers
themselves, digging with their pick and spade--for all summer long the
Mosquito Man is working eight hours a day at his self-appointed task.

You might even find him in New York some off-day--and you will know him,
for surely he will be telling some rebellious apartment-house owner that
the tank on his roof is unscreened. For they do say that he carries his
activities into any part of the world where he may chance to be; they do
say that, when he was in Italy not so very long ago, he went out to
investigate the mosquitoes which had disturbed his rest the night
before.

"Now you must oil your swamp," said he to the innkeeper.

That night there was no salad for dinner, for the innkeeper had obeyed
the order to the best of his ability. He had poured all of his best
olive oil on the mosquito marsh.

       *       *       *       *       *

_(Country Gentleman)_

Five half-tone illustrations, with the following captions:
  1.  "A Traction Ditcher at Work Digging Trench for Tile."
  2.  "Ditch Dug With Dynamite Through Woods."
  3.  "Apple Packing House and Cold Storage at Ransomville."
  4.  "Nelson R. Peet, County Agent and Manager of the Niagara
       County Farm Bureau, New York."
  5.  "Part of the Crowd Listening to the Speakers."


A COUNTY SERVICE STATION

WHERE NEW YORK FARMERS GET HELP IN THEIR FRUIT GROWING AND MARKETING
PROBLEMS

BY D. H. WILLIAMS

You've got to look into the family closet of a county and study its
skeletons before you can decide whether that county's farming business
is mostly on paper or on concrete. You've got to know whether it
standardizes production and marketing, or just markets by as many
methods as there are producers.

As a living example of the possibility of tightening up and retiming the
gears of a county's economic machinery to the end of cutting out power
losses, Niagara County, New York, stands in a distinct class by itself.

Here is an area of 558 square miles, with Lake Ontario spraying its
northern line. A network of electric and steam railways and hundreds of
miles of splendid state highways make up a system of economic arteries
through which the industrial life-blood of the county circulates.

Forty-eight hours to Chicago's markets, the same distance to New York's;
three wealthy industrial and agricultural cities within the county
itself--Lockport, Niagara Falls and North Tonawanda--operating with a
wealth of cheap electric power generated at Niagara Falls--these are
some of the advantages within and without the county, the value of which
is self-evident.

Beginning with the southern plain section, Niagara's agriculture changes
in type from general hay and grain farming to a more intense
fruit-growing industry as the northern plain section is approached,
until within the zone of Lake Ontario's tempering influence the fruit
industry almost excludes all other types of farming.

There is hardly a more favored fruit section in the country than the
northern half of Niagara County. Apples, pears, peaches, plums, grapes,
cherries, quinces make up the county's horticultural catalogue. The
latest available figures rank Niagara County first among the counties of
New York in the number of fruit trees; second in the total number of
bushels of fruit produced; first in the quantity of peaches, pears,
plums and prunes, quinces and cherries; third in the number of bushels
of apples.

Yet there are things about the county which no statistics will ever
show, such things, for instance, as the condition of the orchards, the
market value of the fruit, the earning capacity of the land as a
whole--in other words, the bedrock rating of the county. You have to get
at these things by a different avenue of approach.

A rather close auditing during 1914 of the accounts of some eighty-seven
typical good farms in perhaps the best section of Niagara County brought
out the fact that labor incomes from these farms, on the whole, could
not be classed as strictly giltedge. One diagnosis made by a Niagara
County investigator is recorded in these words:

"Though Niagara County has many of the best fruit farms in New York
State, there are numbers of orchards that have been abandoned to the
ravages of insects and disease. There is also a tendency toward
extensive rather than intensive fruit growing, which has resulted in
many large plantings being made.

"Niagara County does not need more orchards, but rather cultivation and
spraying of the present orchards; it does not need to produce more
fruit, but rather to insure better grading and marketing of the present
production."

This observation is dated 1914, one year after leading farmers and
business men of the county, convinced that all was not so well with them
as the lifeless census figures would have one believe, made the move to
set up and operate for the county a farm bureau. New York is the
national hotbed of farm-bureau enthusiasm and propaganda.

Almost six years to the day after the inauguration of this bureau, I
went into Niagara County. And before I left I was able to sketch a
rather vivid mental picture of what a farm bureau really can do for a
county, be the raw material with which it must work good, bad or
indifferent.

Up in the office of the Niagara County Farm Bureau at Lockport I waited
some two hours for an interview with its manager, Nelson R. Peet. That
wait was an eye-opener.

Three women clerks and stenographers and the assistant manager occupied
this room. The clerks were trying to typewrite, answer the continuous
ringing of the phone, respond to buzzer summons from Manager Peet's
private office and talk with a stream of visitors, all at the same time.

I spent two whole days and half a night in these offices and not once
save at night was there a let-up in this sort of thing. It was business
all the time; the business of service! Niagara County farmers are using
the bureau.

Nelson Peet, manager, is a spectacled human magneto. His speech and his
movements fairly crackle with energy; his enthusiasm is as communicable
as a jump spark. A young man in years, yet mature in the knowledge of
men and the psychology of service, he never wastes a minute dilating
upon the philosophy of farm management; but he has worked twenty hours a
day to see that Niagara County farmers got all the labor they needed
during rush seasons.

This man has been with the bureau three years. When he came to it the
bureau had a paid-up membership of 325. In March this year, when I was
in Niagara County, the membership stood at 2185, and was increasing
daily. It led by a good margin, I was told, the fifty-five New York
county farm bureaus. These, in 1918, had a total membership of 60,000.
More than half the farmers in Niagara County are members of the Niagara
Bureau.

When Peet first took charge there were two broad courses open to him. He
might have planned a program of paternalistic propaganda in behalf of
the farmers of the county. Such a program calls for a tremendous amount
of talking and writing about co√∂peration and community interests, better
economics and better social conditions, but too often results in the
propagandist doing the "coing," while the "operating" is left to
somebody else.

The other course was to find out what the farms and farmers in the
county needed most and then set to work with little ado to get those
things. Peet chose the latter course. And in so doing he has staged one
of the best demonstrations in rural America. He has shown that a farm
bureau can be made into a county service station and actually become the
hub of the county's agricultural activities.

With the aid of state-college men, one of Peet's foremost lines of
bureau work has been that of taking inventories of the farming business
of Niagara County. For four years these records have been taken on some
100 typical farms. Group meetings are regularly held at the homes of the
bureau's community committeemen. Here, with the records they have been
keeping, the farmers assemble. Here they work out their own labor
incomes and compare notes with their neighbors. The farm bureau helps
the men make these business analyses--it does not do the work for them.
Now the farmers ask for the blank forms and are themselves as
enthusiastic over farm-management records as the men who specialize in
such.

These figures serve the bureau as an index to the county's progress.
More than once Peet has referred to them and discovered where leaks
could be plugged. For example, these records showed an average labor
income of $182 a farm for the four years ending 1916.

"This fact," Mr. Peet explained, "we put to work as the reason for doing
something to benefit the fruit industry. What could be done? The answer
in other highly specialized fruit sections seems to have been central
packing houses. We held a meeting, inviting one very influential fruit
grower from each loading station in the county. We showed charts of the
farm-management records. It didn't take long for the meeting to go on
record as favoring the central-packing-house plan.

"Later meetings were held in each community, the farm-management charts
were again shown, and at every loading station the meetings went on
record as favoring central packing houses. To make a long story short,
sites and methods of financing these houses were worked out. There were
already two old central packing houses in operation. They took on new
life. Five new ones have been formed. All were incorporated and
federated into a central parent association, which owns the brand
adopted and makes the rules and regulations under which the fruit is
packed.

"From the very beginning the proposition has been pushed not as a means
of beating the selling game by selling co√∂peratively, but as a means of
securing the confidence of the consuming public, which must ultimately
result in a wider distribution and better prices. In fact, the matter of
selling has not been fostered from the farm-bureau office. We have
concerned ourselves solely with uniform grading and central packing. We
believed from the start that the selling of properly graded and packed
fruit will take care of itself, and this stand has been justified.

"Each association makes its own arrangements for selling, and in every
case has secured better prices than the growers who sold under the old
system. The most satisfactory feature of this work centers round the
fact that the best and most influential growers are heart and soul
behind the proposition. The personnel of co√∂perative movements, I
believe, is the main feature."

When I visited Niagara County the seven central packing associations
were doing a splendid business, handling about $1,000,000 worth of
apples between them. Only two of the associations were more than one
year old. Many of the associations were dickering for additional space
for packing and for extensions for their refrigerator service. Other
communities in Niagara and in other counties were writing in for details
of the plan, to the end of getting the same thing started in their
sections. And inquiries were coming in from states outside of New York.

Even with the best of selling methods, no commodity will bring a profit
to the producer unless the greater portion of it is eligible to the A-1
class. Too many seconds or culls will throw any orchard venture on the
rocks of bankruptcy. It came to Manager Peet's attention early in 1917
that the farm bureau had a golden opportunity to put on another service,
which alone, if it worked out in practice as well as it did on paper,
would justify the existence of the bureau.

He noticed that though orchardists were following spraying
schedules--the best they could find--some had splendid results in
controlling apple scab and other pests, but others got results ranging
between indifferent and poor. This seemed paradoxical, in view of the
fact that one man who followed the same spraying schedule as his
neighbor would have more scabby apples than the other.

At that time L.F. Strickland, orchard inspector for the state department
of agriculture, had paid particular attention to a limited number of
apple orchards in Niagara County with a view to controlling scab by
spraying. He discovered that, though the average spraying calendar is
all right, climatic conditions in different parts of the same county
often upset these standard calculations, so that a difference of one day
or even a few hours in time of spraying often meant the difference
between success and failure. In other words, it was necessary to study
all contributing factors, watch the orchards unremittingly and then
decide on the exact day or even hour when conditions were right for a
successful spray treatment. He found that one must strike the _times
between times_ to get the optimum of results.

So Mr. Strickland, in conjunction with his regular work, kept an eagle
eye on a few orchards and would notify the owners when it seemed the
moment for spraying had come. It worked out that those favored
orchardists had magnificent yields of A-1 fruit; others in the same
sections, following the rather flexible spraying calendars, didn't do
nearly so well.

All this set Manager Peet to thinking. "Strickland hasn't got an
automobile and has lots of other work to do," he reasoned; "but why, if
he had a car and could give all the time necessary to such work,
couldn't the same results be had in orchards all over the county? Why
can't this farm bureau put on a spraying service?"

He put the idea up to the executive committee of the bureau. The idea
was good, they agreed, but it would cost at least $500 to try it out the
first year. The bureau didn't have the available funds.

"Tell you what," they finally said: "If you want to get out and rustle
up 500 new members at one dollar each to pay for this thing, we'll
authorize it."

Peet was telling me about it. "Here the bureau had been working for four
years with a paid-up membership of about 375," he said, "and if I
believed in my idea I had to get 500 more by spring. It was February
eighth when the committee gave me this decision. Well, I did it in time
to start the ball that spring!"

He got the new members because he had a service to sell them.
Arrangements were made whereby the county was divided into six zones,
varying in soil and topographic conditions. Criterion orchards were
selected in each zone. The inspector, with the aid of daily telegraphic
weather reports and through constant inspection of the criterion
orchards, decided when the hour struck for the most effective spraying
of these orchards.

In the meantime Manager Peet and the inspector had worked out a code
system for spraying instructions and put this into the hands of the
growers in the six zones. When it came time to spray, the telephones
from headquarters in Lockport were put to work and the code message sent
to certain orchardists; these in turn repeated the instructions to a
number of other orchardists agreed upon, until every member had received
the message.

The scheme has worked. The first year there were 800 members who took
this service; the second year--1918--there were 900; this year there are
1500. It is paying for itself many times over. One central packing
house with nine grower members reports that eight of the members used
the spraying service and that none of these had more than five per cent
of their fruit to cull out. The ninth member sprayed, but not through
the service. He culled forty-five per cent of his crop. There are scores
of similar instances.

Seeing how quickly he could get the support of the Niagara farmers for
any move which had practice and not theory to recommend it, Manager Peet
next began to agitate for an improvement in city-marketing conditions in
Lockport. Up to August, 1915, the system--if system it might be
called--of distributing farm produce for Lockport's consumption
consisted of sporadic visits by producers to the city with produce to be
sold at prices largely controlled by the local grocerymen. Likewise
retail prices to consumers were chiefly regulated by the same standard.

A grower might drive into Lockport with 100 quarts of strawberries. He
would stop at a grocery and offer them.

"No," the grocer would say, "I don't want any. Say, how much do you want
for them anyhow?"

"Ten cents a quart."

"Too high; I'll give you six."

Whereupon the man would drive on to see the next grocer. But the man who
offered six cents might go straight to his phone, call up the rest of
the trade and inform it that there were 100 quarts of strawberries on
the streets for which he had offered six cents against ten asked. The
result would be that the farmer would get no better offer than six
cents.

So Manager Peet joined hands with the Lockport Board of Commerce and
went at the job of righting this condition. He proposed a city market
for farmers. The nearest approach to a market was a shelter for teams
which the local food dealers had rented.

To 700 farmers in the vicinity of Lockport Manager Peet wrote letters,
calling their attention to these conditions and offering the city-market
idea as a remedy. And he used publicity among Lockport's population of
consumers, showing them the economy of such a move. The farmers held a
get-together meeting, decided on a location for a market in Lockport,
decided on market days and market hours. After this the farm bureau got
the city's common council to pass an ordinance prohibiting the
huckstering of farm produce on the streets during market hours; also an
ordinance setting the market hours, marking off a street section which
should be used as a market stand, and putting the superintendent of
streets in charge.

That was all. Not a cent of appropriation asked for. The market opened
August 10, 1917, with fifty farm wagons in place. Before the summer was
over it was common to find more than 100 at their stands. The local
war-garden supervisor acted as inspector. He looked over the produce,
advised the farmers how to pack and display it, and used every energy in
the direction of popularizing the market among producers and consumers
alike.

Between Manager Peet and the inspector a scheme was worked out whereby
every Thursday was bargain day in market. They would get a certain
number of farmers to agree to pack and offer for sale on those days a
limited number of baskets of their finest tomatoes, say. Or it might be
corn. In the case of tomatoes the bargain price would be ten cents for
baskets which that day were selling regularly for eighteen to
twenty-five cents. To each of these baskets--no farmer was asked to
sacrifice more than ten--was attached a green tag noting that it was a
bargain.

Each bargain day was advertised in advance among Lockport consumers.
Thursday mornings would see an early rush to the market. The bargains
would be cleaned out and then business at normal prices would continue
at a brisker rate than usual.

The first year of its operation this market was held on fifty-one days.
During this period 1300 rigs sold out their produce for a total of
$13,000. This simple move has resulted in stabilizing prices in Lockport
and has encouraged the bringing in of farm produce. Prices automatically
regulate themselves. If they begin to get too low in Lockport, the
supply in sight is immediately reduced through action by the producers
in shipping the stuff to Niagara Falls or Buffalo by motor trucks.

The distribution of Lockport's milk supply, as happens in hundreds of
cities, has been attended by considerable waste and expense as a result
of duplication of delivery routes, breakage of bottles and uneconomic
schedules.

The first night I was in Lockport, Manager Peet was holding a meeting of
the milk producers supplying the city for the purpose of settling this
inequity once and for all. A little agitation had been carried on ahead
of this meeting, but only a little. Peet had a plan.

"It's all wrong to plan for a municipally owned central distributing
system," he was explaining to me the next morning; "these are too likely
to get mixed up in politics. So last night we just about clinched our
arrangement for having our city distributing system owned by the
producers themselves. In the past we have had eight distributors with
fifteen wagons handling the milk supplied from fifty dairy farms. There
has been a big loss in time and money as a result of this competition.

"The farm bureau got the producers together on the plan of securing
options on these distributors' interests, and last night we just about
wound up all the preliminaries. We already have our limited liability
corporation papers. We're incorporating under the Membership Corporation
Law. Our organization comes under the amendment to the Sherman Antitrust
Law, you know, following closely the California law under which the
California fruit growers' associations operate.

"We figure that we will need between $20,000 and $30,000 for the
purchase of buildings, wagons, equipment and good-will now in the hands
of the distributors. At first we thought it would be a good plan to have
every member of the association subscribe to the amount proportioned by
the number of cows he keeps or the amount of milk he has for sale. But
for several reasons this wouldn't work. So we hit on the scheme of
having each man subscribe to the amount he personally is able to
finance.

"We already have $24,000 subscribed in sums between set limits of $100
and $1000. We're issuing five-year certificates of indebtedness bearing
six per cent interest. Our producers will have about $9000 worth of milk
a month to distribute. We plan to deduct five per cent every month from
these milk checks to pay off the certificates. Then later we'll create a
new set of certificates and redistribute these in proportion to the
amounts of milk produced on the members' farms."

Manager Peet and the producers are making it perfectly plain to Lockport
consumers that this is no move contemplating price control. In fact,
they expect to sell milk for a cent a quart under the old price.

The farm-labor shortage which antedated our entrance into the war became
a national menace about the time our selective draft began to operate.
New York farmers were as hard hit as any other farmers, particularly in
the fruit sections, where a tremendous labor supply falls suddenly due
at harvest time. Niagara County came in for its full share of this
trouble and the Niagara County Farm Bureau went its length to meet the
emergency.

In 1917 Western New York produced the biggest crop of peaches in its
history, and in the face of the greatest labor famine. There were nearly
8000 cars of the fruit in danger of spoiling on the trees and on the
ground. Peet anticipated the crisis by converting the farm bureau into a
veritable county labor department. He was promised a good number of
high-school boys who were to help in the peach harvest and who were to
be cleared through a central office in Buffalo.

Manager Peet worked out arrangements for the care of these boys in
forty-two camps strategically located. The camps were to accommodate
thirty boys each. The farmers had asked Peet for 4500 hands. He applied
for 1500 boys and had every reason to expect these. But at the critical
moment something went wrong in Buffalo headquarters and of the 1500
asked for he got only 200!

"I was in Buffalo at the time the news was broken," Manager Peet was
saying to me, "and my first impulse was to jump off one of the docks!"

Here was a nice kettle of fish! The fruit was ripening on the trees, and
the phones in the bureau offices were ringing their plating off with
calls from frantic farmers. Peet didn't jump off a Buffalo dock; he
jumped out of his coat and into the fray. He got a Federal Department of
Labor man to help him. They plastered appeals for help all over Western
New York--on the walls of post offices, railroad stations, on boarding
houses. They worked on long-distance phones, the telegraph, the mails.
They hired trucks and brought city men and boys and women and girls from
cities to work in the orchards over week-ends. Labor, attracted by the
flaring posters, drifted into the bureau's offices in Lockport and
immediately was assigned to farms; and hundreds of laborers whom Peet
never saw also came.

By working seven days a week and often without meals and with cat naps
for sleep the bureau cleared 1200 laborers through its office, to say
nothing of the loads brought overland by motor truck and which never
came near the office. Business houses in the towns closed down and sent
their help to the orchards. Lockport's organization of "live
wires"--lawyers, doctors, bankers--went out and worked in the orchards.

"Well," was Peet's comment, "we saved the crop, that's all!"

Last year the bureau placed 1095 men and four women on farms in Niagara
County. In addition, 1527 soldiers were secured on two-day furloughs
from Fort Niagara to help harvest the fruit crops. "We did this," said
Manager Peet, "mainly by starting early and keeping persistently at it
with the War Department, in order to cut the red tape."

This fall there will go into effect in New York State an amendment to
its drainage law which is going to do more properly to drain the state
than all the steam diggers that could have been crowded on its acres
under former conditions. This action came out of Niagara County, through
the farm bureau.

To realize the importance of drainage in this county one must remember
that it lies in two levels broken by the ridge which forms the locks at
Lockport, the falls at Niagara Falls, and which extends across the
county from east to west. In each plateau the land is very level, there
being but few places in the county having a difference in elevation of
twenty feet within a radius of a mile. Good drainage is very necessary
and in the past has been very hard to secure.

"Practically no man can secure adequate drainage without being concerned
in the drainage of his neighbor's land," said Mr. Peet. "If the neighbor
objects the situation is complicated. And our drainage laws have been
woefully inadequate to handle these problems."

But recently the farm bureau put it up to a conference of county agents
of New York to get the "state leader" to appoint a state committee to
work this thing out and persuade the state legislature to make the
necessary amendments to the drainage law. The plan went through, and one
of the laws passed compels an objecting property owner to open drains
which are necessary for the relief of his neighbors. This law goes into
effect next fall.

Farmers are looking to the farm bureau for help in the cleaning and
repairing of some sixty drainage ditches constructed in the past under
the county-commissioner plan. But the records on file in the county
clerk's office are in bad shape. The farm bureau has taken it upon
itself to arrange all this material so that it is available on a
minute's notice, and as a result has drawn up petitions to the
supervisors for the cleaning out of three of these ditches.

Cooperating with the New York State Food Commission, the farm bureau had
a power-tractor ditcher placed in the county last summer. Peet placed
his assistant in full charge, and the machine never lost a single day as
a result of lack of supervision. It has dug over 4000 rods of ditch for
tile on twenty-eight farms.

For four years Niagara County farmers had not made expenses in growing
tomatoes for the canneries. The farm bureau called a meeting of some
fourteen growers and together they figured the cost of production. The
average cost for 1917 was found to be $85 an acre; the estimated cost
for 1918 was $108 an acre. The average crop was set at six tons to the
acre. A joint committee went out of the conference and laid these facts
before the canners. The result was that the growers got $20 a ton for
their crops in 1918.

These are some outstanding features of the service rendered its farmers
by the Niagara bureau. Here are some of its "lesser" activities:

Taking an agricultural census by school districts of each farm in the
county and completing the job in one week.

Effecting an interchange of livestock and seed.

Distributing 1000 bushels of seed corn among 383 farmers, twenty-two
tons of nitrate of soda at cost among sixty-two farmers, and securing
and distributing six tons of sugar to fifty beekeepers for wintering
bees.

Indorsing 200 applications for military furloughs.

Assisting in organizing Liberty Loan campaigns, especially the third.

Assisting in the delivery of twenty carloads of feed, fertilizer, farm
machinery and barrels, which had been delayed.

Holding twelve demonstration meetings, attended by 602 farmers.

Conducting two tractor schools, attended by 125 farmers.

Arranging eight farmers' institutes, attended by 900 farmers.

Organizing a Federal Farm Loan Association which has loaned $125,000 to
nineteen farmers.

The bureau keeps its members posted on what is going on in the county
and what the bureau is doing through the medium of a well-edited monthly
"News" of eight pages. The best feature of the handling of this
publication is that it costs neither bureau nor members a cent. The
advertisements from local supply dealers pay for it, and two pages of
ads in each issue settles the bill.

The bureau's books show that last year it spent five dollars in serving
each member. The membership fee is only one dollar. The difference comes
from Federal, state and county appropriations.

The success of this bureau comes from having at the head of it the right
man with the right view of what a farm bureau should do. Manager Peet
sees to it that the organization works with the local chamber of
commerce--the one in Lockport has 700 members--which antedates the farm
bureau and which always has supported the bureau. Peet's policy has been
to keep the bureau not only before the farmers but before the city
people as well.

The "live-wire" committee of the Lockport chamber, composed of lawyers,
doctors, bankers, merchants, and the like, has made Manager Peet an
_ex-officio_ member. The Niagara Falls and Tonawanda Chambers of
Commerce get together with the Lockport chamber and the farm bureau and
talk over problems of inter-county importance. These conferences have
worked out a unified plan for road development, for instance. The
Niagara Farm Bureau helped the Niagara Falls city administration to
secure the services of a Federal market inspector. In this way all
rivalry between different sections and towns in Niagara County is freed
of friction.

About the only criticism I heard against the farm bureau of Niagara
County was that Peet was the wrong man. The farmers want a man who will
_stay_ manager. But some of the best members hinted that Peet will not
stay because he's just a bit too efficient. They seem to fear that some
business corporation is going to get him away. And when you look over
the record of his work as organizer and executive, you must admit
there's something in this.

       *       *       *       *       *

_(Detroit News)_

Four half-tone illustrations:
  1. The Settling Basin at the Water Works.
  2. Interior of the Tunnel Through which the Water is Pumped.
  3. Where Detroit's Water Comes From.
  4. Water Rushing into the Settling Basin.

GUARDING A CITY'S WATER SUPPLY

HOW THE CITY CHEMIST WATCHES FOR THE APPEARANCE OF DEADLY BACILLI; WATER
MADE PURE BY CHEMICALS

BY HENRY J. RICHMOND

"COLON." The city chemist spoke the one significant word as he set down
the test tube into which he had been gazing intently. The next morning
the front page of all the city papers displayed the warning, "Citizens
should boil the drinking water."

Every morning, as the first task of the day, the city chemist uncorks a
curious little crooked tube containing a few spoonsful of very ordinary
bouillon, akin to that which you might grab at the quick lunch, but
which has been treated by the admixture of a chemical. This tube begins
in a bulb which holds the fluid and terminates in an upturned crook
sealed at the end. Into this interesting little piece of apparatus, the
chemist pours a small quantity of the city drinking water, and he then
puts the whole into an incubator where it is kept at a temperature
favorable to the reactions which are expected if the water is
contaminated.

After a sufficient time the tube is inspected. To the untrained eye
nothing appears. The bouillon still remains in the little bulb
apparently unchanged. Its color and clearness have not been affected.
But the chemist notices that it does not stand so high in the closed end
of the tube as it did when placed in the incubator. The observation
seems trivial, but to the man of science it is significant.

What has happened? The water contained some minute organisms which when
acted upon by the chemical in the tube have set up a fermentation.
Gradually, one by one in the little bulb, bubbles of gas have formed and
risen to the surface of the liquid in the closed upper end of the tube.
As this gas was liberated, it took the place of the liquid in the tube,
and the liquid was forced downward until there was quite a large space,
apparently vacant but really filled with gas.

It was this phenomenon that had attracted the attention of the chemist.
What did it mean? It was the evidence that the water which was being
furnished to the city for half a million people to drink contained some
living organism.

Now that, in itself, was enough to make an official of the health
department begin to take an interest. It was not, however, in itself a
danger signal.

Not all bacterial life is a menace to health, the chemist will tell you.
Indeed, humanity has come to live on very peaceable terms with several
thousand varieties of bacteria and to be really at enmity with but a
score or more. Without the beneficent work of a certain class of
bacteria the world would not be habitable. This comes about through a
very interesting, though rather repulsive condition--the necessity of
getting rid of the dead to make room for the living.

What would be the result if no provision had been made for the
disintegration of the bodies of all the men and animals that have
inhabited the earth since the beginning? Such a situation is
inconceivable. But very wisely providence has provided that myriads and
myriads of tiny creatures are ever at work breaking up worn-out and dead
animal matter and reducing it to its original elements. These elements
are taken up by plant life, elaborated into living vegetable growth and
made fit again for the nourishment of animal life, thus completing the
marvelous cycle. And so we must not get the notion that all bacteria are
our mortal foes. We could not live without them, and our earth, without
their humble services, would no longer be habitable.

Neither need we fear the presence of bacterial life in our drinking
water. Drinking water always contains bacteria. We, ourselves, even when
in the best of health, are the hosts of millions upon millions of them,
and it is fair to suppose that they serve some useful purpose. At any
rate, it has never been demonstrated that they do us any harm under
normal conditions.

And so, the chemist was not alarmed when he discovered that the
formation of gas in his crooked tube gave indication of bacteria in the
drinking water. He must ascertain what type of bacteria he had
entrapped. To this end, he analyzed the gas, and when he determined that
the fermentation was due to the presence of colon bacilli in the water,
he sent out his warning. Not that the colon bacilli are a menace to
health. The body of every human being in the world is infested with
millions of them. But the presence of colon bacilli in drinking water is
an indication of the presence of a really dangerous thing--sewage.

Thus, when the city chemist turned from his test tube with the
exclamation, "Colon!" he did not fear the thing that he saw, but the
thing that he knew might accompany it.

There has been much discussion of late of the possibility that the great
lakes cities may suffer a water famine. The rapid increase of population
along the borders of these great seas, it has been said, might render
the water unfit for use. This fear is based upon the assumption that we
shall always continue the present very foolish practice of dumping our
sewage into the source of our water supply. The time may come when we
shall know better how to protect the public health and at the same time
husband the public resources. But even at that, the city chemist says
that he hardly expects to see the time when the present intake for
water near the head of Belle Isle will not be both safe and adequate.

No doubt he makes this statement because he has confidence that the
purification of water is both simple and safe. There are two principal
methods. The first, and most expensive, is nature's own--the filter. The
application of this method is comparatively simple though it involves
considerable expense. The trick was learned from the hillside spring
which, welling up through strata of sand and gravel, comes out pure and
clear and sparkling. To make spring water out of lake water, therefore,
it is merely necessary to excavate a considerable area to the desired
depth and lead into it the pipes connected with the wells from which
water is to be pumped. Then the pit is filled with successive layers of
crushed stone graduated in fineness to the size of gravel and then
covered with a deep layer of fine sand. This area is then flooded with
the water to be filtered, which slowly percolates and comes out clear
and pure. The best results in purification of contaminated water
supplies have probably been attained in this way; that is, as measured
by the improvement of health and the general reduction of the death rate
from those diseases caused by the use of contaminated water.

But when the alarm was given this spring by the city chemist there was
no time to excavate and build an extensive filtering plant. The dreaded
typhoid was already making its appearance and babies were dying.
Something had to be done at once.

If some afternoon you take a stroll through Gladwin park your attention
may be attracted to a little white building at the lower end of the
settling basin. It is merely a temporary structure yet it is serving a
very important purpose. Approach the open door and your nostrils will be
greeted by a pungent odor that may make you catch your breath. The
workmen, too, you will notice, do not stay long within doors, but take
refuge in a little shelter booth outside. Strewn about here and there
are traces of a white, powdery substance which seems to have been
tracked down from a platform erected on the roof. This is hypochlorite
of lime, the substance used for sterilizing the city drinking water.

This is so powerful a disinfectant that it destroys all bacteria in
water even in an extremely dilute solution. The method of applying it is
interesting. The city water comes in from the river through a great
tunnel about 10 feet in diameter. The little chlorinating plant is
situated on the line of this tunnel so that the solution is readily
introduced into the water before it reaches the pool called a settling
basin.

The hypochlorite reaches the plant in iron cylinders containing 100
pounds. These are carried up to the roof and poured into the first
mixing tank through a hopper fixed for the purpose. There are within the
building four of these mixing tanks. In the first, up near the roof, a
very strong solution is first made. This is drawn off into a second tank
with a greater admixture of water and thence passes into the third and
fourth. From the last it is forced out into the main tunnel by a pipe
and mingles with the great flood that is pouring constantly into the
wells beneath pumping engines. And this is the strength of the chemical:
five pounds of it mingled with one million gallons of water is
sufficient to render the water fit for drinking purposes. Nearly 98 per
cent of the bacteria in the water is destroyed by this weak solution.
The water is tasteless and odorless. Indeed, probably very few of the
citizens of Detroit who are using the city water all the time, know that
the treatment is being applied.

But the chemist continues his tests every morning. Every morning the
little crooked tubes are brought out and filled and carefully watched to
ascertain if the telltale gas develops which is an index of "death in
the cup." Thus is the city's water supply guarded.

No more important work can devolve on the board of health. Before
science had learned to recognize the tiny enemies which infest drinking
water, typhoid and kindred diseases were regarded as a visitation of
divine providence for the sins of a people. We now know that a rise in
the death rate from these diseases is to be laid rather to the sins of
omission on the part of the board of health and the public works
department.

       *       *       *       *       *

_(The Outlook)_

THE OCCUPATION AND EXERCISE CURE

BY FRANK MARSHALL WHITE

The nerve specialist leaned back in his chair behind the great mahogany
desk in his consulting-room and studied the features of the capitalist
as that important factor in commerce and industry explained the symptoms
that had become alarming enough to drive him, against his will, to seek
medical assistance. The patient was under fifty years of age, though
the deep lines in his face, with his whitening hair--consequences of the
assiduity with which he had devoted himself to the accumulation of his
millions and his position in the Directory of Directors--made him appear
ten years older. An examination had shown that he had no organic disease
of any kind, but he told the physician that he was suffering from what
he called "inward trembling," with palpitation of the heart, poor sleep,
occasional dizziness, pain in the back of the neck, difficulty in
concentrating his attention, and, most of all, from various
apprehensions, such as that of being about to fall, of losing his mind,
of sudden death--he was afraid to be alone, and was continually tired,
worried, and harassed.

"You present merely the ordinary signs of neurasthenia," said the
specialist. "These symptoms are distressing, but not at all serious or
dangerous. You have been thinking a great deal too much about yourself
and your feelings. You watch with morbid interest the perverted
sensations that arise in various parts of your body. You grow
apprehensive about the palpitation of your heart, which is not at all
diseased, but which flutters a little from time to time because the
great nerve of the heart is tired, like the other great nerves and
nerve-centers of your body. You grow apprehensive over the analogous
tremor which you describe as 'inward trembling,' and which you often
feel all through your trunk and sometimes in your knees, hands, and
face, particularly about the eyes and mouth and in the fingers."

The capitalist had started at the mention of the word neurasthenia, and
had seemed much relieved when the physician had declared that the
symptoms were not dangerous. "I had been under the impression that
neurasthenia was practically an incurable disease," he said. "However,
you have described my sensations exactly."

"One hundred per centum of cases of neurasthenia are curable," responded
the specialist. "Neurasthenia is not, as is usually supposed, an equally
diffused general exhaustion of the nervous system. In my opinion, it is
rather an unequally distributed multiple fatigue. Certain more
vulnerable portions of the nervous system are affected, while the
remainder is normal. In the brain we have an overworked area which,
irritated, gives rise to an apprehension or imperative idea. By
concentration of energy in some other region of the brain, by using the
normal portions, we give this affected part an opportunity to rest and
recuperate. New occupations are therefore substituted for the old
habitual one. A change of interests gives the tired centers rest."

"I have heard the 'rest cure' advocated in cases like mine," suggested
the capitalist.

"In the treatment of neurasthenia we must take the whole man into
consideration," said the physician. "We must stimulate nutrition, feed
well the tired and exhausted organism, and, above all, provide some sort
of rest and distraction for the mind. The mind needs feeding as well as
the body. The rest cure is a kind of passive, relaxing, sedative
treatment. The field is allowed to lie fallow, and often to grow up with
weeds, trusting to time to rest and enrich it. The 'exercise and
occupation cure,' on the other hand, is an active, stimulating, and
tonic prescription. You place yourself in the hands of a physician who
must direct the treatment. He will lay out a scheme with a judicious
admixture of exercise which will improve your general health, soothe
your nervous system, induce good appetite and sleep, and of occupation
which will keep your mind from morbid self-contemplation. One of the
best means to this end is manual occupation--drawing, designing,
carpentry, metal-work, leather-work, weaving, basket-making,
bookbinding, clay-modeling, and the like--for in all these things the
hands are kept busy, requiring concentration of attention, while new
interests of an artistic and √¶sthetic nature are aroused. The outdoor
exercise, taken for a part of each day, if of the right sort, also
distracts by taking the attention and creating interest."

The capitalist had called upon the specialist braced for a possible
sentence of death, prepared at the least to be informed that he was
suffering from a progressive mental malady. Now, while a tremendous
weight was lifted from his mind with the information that he might
anticipate a complete return to health, the idea of devoting his trained
intelligence, accustomed to cope with great problems of trade and
finance, to such trivialities as basket-making or modeling in clay
appeared preposterous. Nevertheless, when the physician told him of a
resort near at hand, established for the treatment of cases just such as
his, where he might be under continuous medical supervision, without
confinement indoors or being deprived of any of the comforts or luxuries
of life, he decided to put himself in the other's hands unreservedly.
The specialist informed him that the length of time required for his
cure would depend largely upon himself. He might, for instance, even
keep in touch with his office and have matters of import referred to
him while he was recuperating his mental and physical strength, but such
a course would inevitably retard his recovery, and possibly prevent it.
To get the best results from the treatment he ought to leave every
business interest behind him, he was told.

The fee that the capitalist paid the specialist made his advice so
valuable that the other followed it absolutely. The next evening saw the
patient in the home of the "occupation and exercise cure." He arrived
just in time to sit down to dinner with a score of other patients, not
one of whom showed any outward sign of illness, though all were taking
the cure for some form of nervous trouble. There were no cases of
insanity among them, however, none being admitted to the institution
under any circumstances. The dinner was simple and abundant, and the
conversation at the tables of a lively and cheerful nature. As everybody
went to bed by ten o'clock--almost every one considerably before that
hour, in fact--the newcomer did likewise, he having secured a suite with
a bath in the main building. Somewhat to the surprise of the capitalist,
who was accustomed to be made much of wherever he happened to be, no
more attention was paid to him than to any other guest of the
establishment, a condition of affairs that happened to please him. He
was told on retiring that breakfast would be served in the dining-room
from 7:30 to 8:30 in the morning, but that, if he preferred to remain in
his room, it would be brought to him there at nine o'clock.

The capitalist had a bad night, and was up to breakfast early. After he
had concluded that repast the medical superintendent showed him about
the place, but did not encourage him to talk about his symptoms. The
grounds of the "occupation and exercise cure" comprised a farm of forty
acres located among the hills of northern Westchester County in the
Croton watershed, with large shade trees, lawns, flower gardens, and an
inexhaustible supply of pure spring water from a well three hundred feet
deep in solid rock. The main building, situated on a knoll adjacent to a
grove of evergreen trees, contained a great solarium, which was the
favorite sitting-room of the patients, and the dining-room was also
finished with two sides of glass, both apartments capable of being
thrown open in warm weather, and having the advantage of all the sun
there was in winter. In this building were also the medical offices,
with a clinical laboratory and hydro- and electro-therapeutic equipment,
and accommodations for from twelve to fifteen guests. Two bungalows
under the trees of the apple orchard close at hand, one containing two
separate suites with baths, and the other two living-rooms with hall and
bath-room, were ideal places for quiet and repose. Situated at the
entrance to the grounds was a club-house, with a big sitting-room and an
open fireplace; it also contained a solarium, billiard-room, bowling
alleys, a squash court, a greenhouse for winter floriculture, and the
arts and crafts shops, with seven living-rooms. Every living-room in the
main building, the club-house, and the bungalows was connected with the
medical office by telephone, so that in case of need patients might
immediately secure the services of a physician at any hour of the day or
night.

The arts and crafts shops being the basic principle of the "occupation
and exercise cure," the capitalist was introduced to an efficient and
businesslike young woman, the instructress, who explained to him the
nature of the avocations in which he might choose to interest himself.
Here he found his fellow-patients busily and apparently congenially
employed. In one of the shops a recent alumnus of one of the leading
universities, who had undergone a nervous breakdown after graduation,
was patiently hammering a sheet of brass with a view to converting it
into a lampshade; a matron of nearly sixty, who had previously spent
eight years in sanatoriums, practically bedridden, was setting type in
the printing office with greater activity than she had known before for
two decades; two girls, one sixteen and the other twelve, the latter
inclined to hysteria and the former once subject to acute nervous
attacks, taking the cure in charge of trained nurses, were chattering
gayly over a loom in the construction of a silk rug; a prominent
business man from a Western city, like the New York capitalist broken
down from overwork, was earnestly modeling in clay what he hoped might
eventually become a jardiniere; one of last season's debutantes among
the fashionables, who had been leading a life of too strenuous gayety
that had told on her nerves, was constructing a stamped leather
portfolio with entire absorption; and half a dozen others, mostly young
women, were engaged at wood-carving, bookbinding, block-printing,
tapestry weaving, or basket-making, each one of them under treatment for
some nervous derangement.

The new patient decided to try his hand at basket-making; and, although
he figured out that it would take him about four days to turn out a
product that might sell for ten cents, he was soon so much interested in
mastering the manual details of the craft that he was disinclined to put
the work aside when the medical superintendent suggested a horseback
ride. When, at the advice of the specialist, the capitalist had decided
to try the occupation and exercise cure, he did so with little faith
that it would restore him to health, though he felt that there was
perhaps a slight chance that it might help him. The remedy seemed to him
too simple to overcome a disease that was paralyzing his energies. To
his great surprise, he began to improve at once; and though for the
first week he got little sleep, and his dizziness, with the pain in the
back of his neck and his apprehensions, continued to recur for weeks,
they did so at always increasing intervals.

He learned bookbinding, and sent to his library for some favorite
volumes, and put them into new dress; he made elaborate waste-paper
baskets, and beat brass into ornamental desk-trays, which he proudly
presented to his friends in the city as specimens of his skill. Work
with him, as with the others of the patients, was continually varied by
recreation. In the summer months there were lawn-tennis, golf, croquet,
canoeing, rowing, fishing, riding, and driving. In winter, such outdoor
sports as skating, tobogganing, coasting, skeeing, snowshoeing, and
lacrosse were varied by billiards, bowling, squash, the medicine ball,
and basket and tether ball. The capitalist was astonished to discover
that he could take an interest in games. The specialist, who called upon
his patient at intervals, told him that a point of great importance in
the cure was that exercise that is _enjoyed_ is almost twice as
effective in the good accomplished as exercise which is a mere
mechanical routine of movements made as a matter of duty.

The net result was that, after four months of the "occupation and
exercise cure," the capitalist returned to New York sound in mind and
body, and feeling younger than he had before in years. Complete cures
were effected in the cases of the other patients also, which is the less
remarkable when the circumstance is taken into consideration that only
patients capable of entire recovery are recommended to take the
treatment.

Of course the institution that has been described is only for the
well-to-do, and physicians are endeavoring to bring the "occupation and
exercise cure" within the reach of the poor, and to interest
philanthropists in the establishment of "colony sanatoriums," such as
already exist in different parts of Europe, for those suffering from
functional nervous disorders who are without means. Contrary to the
general opinion, neurasthenia, particularly among women, is not confined
to the moneyed and leisure class; but, owing to the fact that women have
taken up the work of men in offices and trades as well as in many of
the professions, working-women are continually breaking down under
nervous strain, and many, under present conditions, have little chance
for recovery, because they cannot afford the proper treatment. As a
speaker at the last annual meeting of the American Medical Association
declared, "Idiots and epileptics and lunatics are many; but all together
they are less numerous than the victims of nervousness--the people
afflicted with lesser grades of psychasthenic and neurasthenic
inadequacy, who become devoted epicures of their own emotions, and who
claim a large share of the attention of every general practitioner and
of every specialist."

Scientists declare that this premature collapse of nerve force is
increasing to such an extent as to become a positive menace to the
general welfare. The struggle for existence among the conditions of
modern life, especially among those found in the large centers of
industrial and scientific activity, and the steady, persistent work,
with its attendant sorrows, deprivations, and over-anxiety for success,
are among the most prolific causes--causes which are the results of
conditions from which, for the large mass of people, according to a
leading New York alienist, there has been no possibility of escape.

"Especially here in America are people forced into surroundings for
which they have never been fitted," the alienist asserts, "and
especially here are premature demands made upon their nervous systems
before they are mature and properly qualified. The lack of proper
training deprives many of the workers, in all branches, of the best
protection against functional nervous diseases which any person can
have, namely, a well-trained nervous system. This struggle for existence
by the congenital neuropath or the educationally unfit forces many to
the use, and then to the abuse, of stimulants and excitants, and herein
we have another important exciting cause. This early and excessive use
of coffee, tea, alcohol, and tobacco is especially deleterious in its
action upon the nervous system of those very ones who are most prone to
go to excess in their use.

"Therefore, predisposition, aided by the storm and stress of active
competition and abetted by the use of stimulants, must be looked upon as
the main cause for the premature collapse of nerve force which we call
neurasthenia; so it will be found that the majority of neurasthenics are
between twenty-five and fifty years of age, and that their occupations
are those which are attended by worry, undue excitement, uncertainty,
excessive wear and tear, and thus we find mentally active persons more
easily affected than those whose occupation is solely physical. Authors,
actors, school-teachers, governesses, telegraph and telephone operators,
are among those most frequently affected, and the increase of
neurasthenia among women dates from the modern era which has opened to
them new channels of work and has admitted them more generally into the
so-called learned professions. But whatever may be the occupation in
which persons have broken down, it is never the occupation alone which
has been the cause.

"This cannot be too often repeated. The emotional fitness or unfitness
of an individual for his occupation is of the utmost importance as a
causative factor, and overwork alone, without any emotional cause and
without any errors in mode of life, will never act to produce such a
collapse. It is therefore not astonishing that this class of functional
nervous diseases is not confined to the wealthy, and that the rich and
the poor are indiscriminately affected. But certain causes are of
greater influence in the one class, while different ones obtain in the
other. Poverty in itself, with its limitations of proper rest and
recuperation, is a very positive cause. Years of neurological dispensary
work among the poor have convinced me that nervousness, neurasthenia,
hysteria, etc., are quite as prevalent among the indigent as among the
well-to-do."

Physicians agree that the prime requisite in the treatment of these
disorders is the removal of the patient from his or her habitual
surroundings, where recognition of the existence of actual disease is
generally wanting, where the constant admonitions of well-meaning
friends to "brace up" and to "exert your will power" force the sick man
or woman to bodily and mental over-exertion, and where the worries about
a livelihood are always dominant. Such a change alone, however, the
experts say, will help but few, for it is being recognized more and more
that these functional diseases of the nervous system can receive
satisfactory treatment only in institutions, where constant attention
may be had, with expert supervision and trained attendants.

The "occupation and exercise cure" is applicable also to epilepsy, and
is the therapeutic principle of the Craig Colony for Epileptics at
Sonyea, in Livingston County, supported by the State, and that
institution furnishes a general model for the "colony sanatoriums"
suggested for indigent patients suffering from functional nervous
disorders. The Craig Colony was the idea of Dr. Frederick Peterson,
Professor of Psychiatry at Columbia University, and former President of
the New York State Commission of Lunacy and of the New York Neurological
Society, which he based upon the epileptic colony at Beilefeld, Germany,
that was founded in 1867. The Craig Colony was founded in 1894, and
there are now being cared for within its confines more than thirteen
hundred patients, who have turned out this year agricultural products,
with bricks, soap, and brooms, to the value of $60,000. The colony is
named after the late Oscar Craig, of Rochester, who, with William P.
Letchworth, of Buffalo, purchased the two-thousand-acre tract of land on
which it is situated from the Shaker colony at Sonyea and presented it
to the State, Dr. Peterson devoting several months of each year for nine
years to getting the institution into working order. The first patients
were housed in the old Shaker buildings, which were well constructed and
fairly well arranged for the purpose, but as additional applications for
admission have been made new buildings have been erected. To-day there
are eighty buildings in the colony, but a thousand patients are waiting
for admission, eight hundred of whom are in New York City.

Epilepsy, the "falling sickness," is a most difficult malady to treat
even in an institution for that purpose, and it is impossible to treat
it anywhere else. An epileptic in a family is an almost intolerable
burden to its other members, as well as to himself. The temperamental
effect of the disease takes the form in the patient of making frequent
and unjust complaints, and epileptics invariably charge some one with
having injured them while they have been unconscious during an attack.
Then, too, living at home, they are often dangerous to younger members
of a family, and they are fault-finding, exacting, and irritable
generally. The seizures frequently come on without warning, and the
patient drops where he stands, often injuring himself severely. The last
annual report of the Craig Colony records more than four hundred
injuries within the year to patients during seizures which required a
surgeon's attention, the injuries varying from severe bruises to
fractures of the skull.

The object of the Craig Colony is to remove the burden of the epileptic
in the family from the home without subjecting the patient to the
hardship of confinement with the insane. "Very few epileptics suffer
permanent insanity in any form except dementia," says the medical
superintendent of the Colony. "Acute mania and maniac depressive
insanity not infrequently appear as a 'post-convulsive' condition, that
generally subsides within a few hours, or at most a few days. Rarely
the state may persist a month. Melancholia is extremely infrequent.
Delusions of persecution, hallucinations of sight or hearing,
systematized in character, are almost never encountered in epilepsy."

Only from six to fifteen per cent of epileptics are curable, and hence
the work of the Craig Colony is largely palliative of the sufferings of
the patients. Each individual case is studied with the utmost care,
however, and patients are given their choice of available occupations.
The Colony is not a custodial institution. There are no bars on the
windows, no walls or high fences about the farm. The patients are housed
in cottages, men and women in separate buildings some distance apart,
about thirty to each cottage. In charge of each of these families are a
man and his wife, who utilize the services of some of the patients in
the performance of household work, while the others have their duties
outside. Kindness to the unfortunates under their care is impressed upon
every employee of the Colony, and an iron-bound rule forbids them to
strike a patient even in case of assault.

Besides the agricultural work in the Craig Colony, and that in the soap
and broom factories and the brick-yard, the patients are taught
blacksmithing, carpentry, dressmaking, tailoring, painting, plumbing,
shoemaking, laundrying, and sloyd work. It is insisted on that all
patients physically capable shall find employment as a therapeutic
measure. The records show that on Sundays and holidays and on rainy
days, when there is a minimum of physical activity among the patients,
their seizures double and sometimes treble in number. Few of the
patients know how to perform any kind of labor when they enter the
Colony, but many of them learn rapidly. It has been repeatedly
demonstrated that boys from eighteen to twenty years of age can spend
two years in the sloyd shop and leave it fully qualified as
cabinet-makers, and capable of earning a journeyman's wages.

There are about two hundred children in the colony of epileptics at
Sonyea, more than half of whom are girls. As children subject to
epileptic seizures are not received in the public schools of the State,
the only opportunity for any education among these afflicted little ones
whose parents are unable to teach them themselves or provide private
tutors for them is in the schools of the Colony. Some of the children
are comparatively bright scholars, while the attempt to teach others
seems a hopeless task. For instance, it took one girl ninety days to
learn to lay three sticks in the form of a letter A.

Every effort is made to encourage recreation among the patients in the
Craig Colony, both children and adults. The men have a club of 250
members, with billiards, chess, checkers, cards, and magazines and
newspapers. The boys have their baseball and football, and play match
games among themselves or with visiting teams. The women and girls play
croquet, tennis, and other outdoor games. There is a band composed of
patients that gives a concert once a week, and there are theatricals and
dancing, with occasional lectures by visiting celebrities. As the
Colony, with the medical staff, nurses, and other employees, has a
population of 2,000, there is always an audience for any visiting
attraction. The maintenance of the Colony is costing the State $225,000
the present year.

Since the founding of the Craig Colony similar institutions have been
established in Massachusetts, Texas, Michigan, Ohio, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Illinois, and Kansas, and other States are preparing to
follow their example. There are other private sanatoriums throughout the
country similar to the one in Westchester County, where the nervous or
neurasthenic patient who is well-to-do may obtain relaxation and
supervision, but there is no place at all to-day where the man or woman
suffering from curable nervous disorders who is without means can go for
treatment.

       *       *       *       *       *

_(McClure's Magazine)_

Five illustrations: two wash drawings by Andr√© Castaigne showing
mono-rail trains in the future, five half-tone reproductions of photographs
of the car on its trial trip, and one pen-and-ink diagram of the
gyroscopes.


THE BRENNAN MONO-RAIL CAR

BY PERCEVAL GIBBON

It was November 10, 1909--a day that will surely have its place in
history beside that other day, eighty-five years ago, when George
Stephenson drove the first railway locomotive between Stockton and
Darlington. In the great square of the Brennan torpedo factory at
Gillingham, where the fighting-tops of battleships in the adjacent
dockyard poise above the stone coping of the wall, there was a track
laid down in a circle of a quarter of a mile. Switches linked it up with
other lengths of track, a straight stretch down to a muddy cape of the
Medway estuary, and a string of curves and loops coiling among the
stone and iron factory sheds. The strange thing about it was that it was
single--just one line of rail on sleepers tamped into the unstable
"made" ground of the place.

And there was Brennan, his face red with the chill wind sweeping in from
the Nore, his voice plaintive and Irish, discoursing, at slow length, of
revolutions per minute, of "precession," and the like. The journalists
from London, who had come down at his invitation, fidgeted and shivered
in the bitter morning air; the affair did not look in the least like an
epoch in the history of transportation and civilization, till--

"Now, gentlemen," said Brennan, and led the way across the circle of
track.

And then, from its home behind the low, powder-magazine-like sheds,
there rode forth a strange car, the like of which was never seen before.
It was painted the businesslike slatyblue gray of the War Department. It
was merely a flat platform, ten feet wide by forty feet long, with a
steel cab mounted on its forward end, through the windows of which one
could see a young engineer in tweeds standing against a blur of moving
machine-parts.

It ran on the single rail; its four wheels revolved in a line, one
behind another; and it traveled with the level, flexible equilibrium of
a ship moving across a dock. It swung over the sharp curves without
faltering, crossed the switch, and floated--floated is the only word for
the serene and equable quality of its movement--round and round the
quarter-mile circle. A workman boarded it as it passed him, and sat on
the edge with his legs swinging, and its level was unaltered. It was
wonderful beyond words to see. It seemed to abolish the very principle
of gravitation; it contradicted calmly one's most familiar instincts.

Every one knows the sense one gains at times while watching an ingenious
machine at its work--a sense of being in the presence of a living and
conscious thing, with more than the industry, the pertinacity, the
dexterity, of a man. There was a moment, while watching Brennan's car,
when one had to summon an effort of reason to do away with this sense of
life; it answered each movement of the men on board and each inequality
in the makeshift track with an adjustment of balance irresistibly
suggestive of consciousness. It was an illustration of that troublous
theorem which advances that consciousness is no more than the
co-relation of the parts of the brain, and that a machine adapted to its
work is as conscious in its own sphere as a mind is in its sphere.

The car backed round the track, crossed to the straight line, and
halted to take us aboard. There were about forty of us, yet it took up
our unequally distributed weight without disturbance. The young engineer
threw over his lever, and we ran down the line. The movement was as
"sweet" and equable as the movement of a powerful automobile running
slowly on a smooth road; there was an utter absence of those jars and
small lateral shocks that are inseparable from a car running on a double
track. We passed beyond the sheds and slid along a narrow spit of land
thrusting out into the mud-flanked estuary. Men on lighters and a
working-party of bluejackets turned to stare at the incredible machine
with its load. Then back again, three times round the circle, and in and
out among the curves, always with that unchanging stateliness of gait.
As we spun round the circle, she leaned inward like a cyclist against
the centrifugal pull. She needs no banking of the track to keep her on
the rail. A line of rails to travel on, and ground that will carry her
weight--she asks no more. With these and a clear road ahead, she is to
abolish distance and revise the world's schedules of time.

"A hundred and twenty miles an hour," I hear Brennan saying, in that sad
voice of his; "or maybe two hundred. That's a detail."

In the back of the cab were broad unglazed windows, through which one
could watch the tangle of machinery. Dynamos are bolted to the floor,
purring under their shields like comfortable cats; abaft of them a
twenty-horse-power Wolseley petrol-engine supplies motive power for
everything. And above the dynamos, cased in studded leather, swinging a
little in their ordered precession, are the two gyroscopes, the soul of
the machine. To them she owes her equilibrium.

Of all machines in the world, the gyroscope is the simplest, for, in its
essential form, it is no more than a wheel revolving. But a wheel
revolving is the vehicle of many physical principles, and the sum of
them is that which is known as gyroscopic action. It is seen in the
ordinary spinning top, which stands erect in its capacity of a gyroscope
revolving horizontally. The apparatus that holds Brennan's car upright,
and promises to revolutionize transportation, is a top adapted to a new
purpose. It is a gyroscope revolving in a perpendicular plane, a steel
wheel weighing three quarters of a ton and spinning at the rate of three
thousand revolutions to the minute.

Now, the effect of gyroscopic action is to resist any impulse that
tends to move the revolving wheel out of the plane in which it revolves.
This resistance can be felt in a top; it can be felt much more strongly
in the beautiful little gyroscopes of brass and steel that are sold for
the scientific demonstration of the laws governing revolving bodies.
Such a one, only a few inches in size, will develop a surprising
resistance. This resistance increases with the weight of the wheel and
the speed at which it moves, till, with Brennan's gyroscopes of three
quarters of a ton each, whirling in a vacuum at three thousand
revolutions per minute, it would need a weight that would crush the car
into the ground to throw them from their upright plane.

Readers of MCCLURE'S MAGAZINE were made familiar with the working of
Brennan's gyroscope by Mr. Cleveland Moffett's article in the issue of
December, 1907. The occasion of that article was the exhibition of
Brennan's model mono-rail car before the Royal Society and in the
grounds of his residence at Gillingham. For a clear understanding of the
first full-sized car, it may be well to recapitulate a few of the
characteristics of the gyroscope.

When Brennan made his early models, he found that, while the little cars
would remain upright and run along a straight rail, they left the track
at the first curve. The gyroscope governed their direction as well as
their equilibrium. It was the first check in the evolution of the
perfect machine. It was over ten years before he found the answer to the
problem--ten years of making experimental machines and scrapping them,
of filing useless patents, of doubt and persistence. But the answer was
found--in the spinning top.

A spinning top set down so that it stands at an angle to the floor will
right itself; it will rise till it stands upright on the point of equal
friction. Brennan's resource, therefore, was to treat his gyroscope as a
top. He enclosed it in a case, through which its axles projected, and at
each side of the car he built stout brackets reaching forth a few inches
below each end of the axle.

The result is not difficult to deduce. When the car came to a curve, the
centrifugal action tended to throw it outward; the side of the car that
was on the inside of the curve swung up and the bracket touched the axle
of the gyroscope. Forthwith, in the manner of its father, the top, the
gyroscope tried to stand upright on the bracket; all the weight of it
and all its wonderful force were pressed on that side of the car,
holding it down against the tendency to rise and capsize. The thing was
done; the spinning top had come to the rescue of its posterity. It only
remained to fit a double gyroscope, with the wheels revolving in
opposite directions, and, save for engineering details, the mono-rail
car was evolved.

Through the window in the back of the cab I was able to watch them at
then; work--not the actual gyroscopes, but their cases, quivering with
the unimaginable velocity of the great wheels within, turning and
tilting accurately to each shifting weight as the men on board moved
here and there. Above them were the glass oilcups, with the opal-green
engine-oil flushing through them to feed the bearings. Lubrication is a
vital part of the machine. Let that fail, and the axles, grinding and
red-hot, would eat through the white metal of the bearings as a knife
goes through butter. It is a thing that has been foreseen by the
inventor: to the lubricating apparatus is affixed a danger signal that
would instantly warn the engineer.

"But," says Brennan, "if one broke down, the other gyroscope would hold
her up--till ye could run her to a siding, anyway."

"But supposing the electric apparatus failed?" suggests a reporter--with
visions of headlines, perhaps. "Supposing the motor driving the
gyroscopes broke down; what then?"

"They'd run for a couple of days, with the momentum they've got,"
answers the inventor. "And for two or three hours, that 'ud keep her
upright by itself."

On the short track at Gillingham there are no gradients to show what the
car can do in the way of climbing, but here again the inventor is
positive. She will run up a slope as steep as one in six, he says. There
is no reason to doubt him; the five-foot model that he used to exhibit
could climb much steeper inclines, run along a rope stretched six feet
above the ground, or remain at rest upon it while the rope was swung to
and fro. It would do all these things while carrying a man; and, for my
part, I am willing to take Brennan's word.

Louis Brennan himself was by no means the least interesting feature of
the demonstration. He has none of the look of the visionary, this man
who has gone to war with time and space; neither had George Stephenson.
He is short and thick-set, with a full face, a heavy moustache hiding
his mouth, and heavy eyebrows. He is troubled a little with asthma,
which makes him somewhat staccato and breathless in speech, and perhaps
also accentuates the peculiar plaintive quality of his Irish voice.
There is nothing in his appearance to indicate whether he is thirty-five
or fifty-five. As a matter of fact, he is two years over the latter
age, but a man ripe in life, with that persistence and belief in his
work which is to engineers what passion is to a poet.

The technicalities of steel and iron come easily off his tongue; they
are his native speech, in which he expresses himself most intimately.
All his life he has been concerned with machines. He is the inventor of
the Brennan steerable torpedo, whose adoption by the Admiralty made him
rich and rendered possible the long years of study and experiment that
went to the making of the mono-rail car. He has a touch of the rich
man's complacency; it does not go ill with his kindly good humor and his
single-hearted pride in his life work.

It is characteristic, I think, of his honesty of purpose and of the
genius that is his driving force that hitherto he has concerned himself
with scientific invention somewhat to the exclusion of the commercial
aspects of his contrivance. He has had help in money and men from the
British Government, which likewise placed the torpedo factory at his
disposal; and the governments of India and--of all places--Kashmir have
granted him subsidies. Railroad men from all parts of the world have
seen his model; but he has not been ardent in the hunt for customers.
Perhaps that will not be necessary; the mono-rail car should be its own
salesman; but, in the meantime, it is not amiss that a great inventor
should stand aloof from commerce.

But, for all the cheerful matter-of-factness of the man, he, too, has
seen visions. There are times when he talks of the future as he hopes it
will be, as he means it to be, when "transportation is civilization."
Men are to travel then on a single rail, in great cars like halls, two
hundred feet long, thirty to forty feet wide, whirling across continents
at two hundred miles an hour--from New York to San Francisco between
dawn and dawn.

Travel will no longer be uncomfortable. These cars, equipped like a
hotel, will sweep along with the motion of an ice-yacht. They will not
jolt over uneven places, or strain to mount the track at curves; in each
one, the weariless gyroscopes will govern an unchanging equilibrium.
Trustful Kashmir will advance from its remoteness to a place accessible
from anywhere. Streetcar lines will no longer be a perplexity to paving
authorities and anathema to other traffic; a single rail will be flush
with the ground, out of the way of hoofs and tires. Automobiles will run
on two wheels like a bicycle. It is to be a mono-rail world, soothed and
assured by the drone of gyroscopes. By that time the patient ingenuity
of inventors and engineers will have found the means to run the
gyroscopes at a greater speed than is now possible, thus rendering it
feasible to use a smaller wheel. It is a dream based on good, solid
reasoning, backed by a great inventor's careful calculations; H.G. Wells
has given a picture of it in the last of his stories of the future.

Practical railroad men have given to the mono-rail car a sufficiently
warm welcome. They have been impressed chiefly by its suitability to the
conditions of transportation in the great new countries, as, for
instance, on that line of railway that is creeping north from the
Zambesi to open up the copper deposits of northwestern Rhodesia, and on
through Central Africa to its terminus at Cairo. Just such land as this
helped to inspire Brennan. He was a boy when he first saw the endless
plains of Australia, and out of that experience grew his first
speculations about the future of railway travel. Such lands make
positive and clear demands, if ever they are to be exploited for their
full value to humanity. They need railways quickly laid and cheaply
constructed; lines not too exacting in point of curves and gradients;
and, finally, fast travel. It is not difficult to see how valuable the
mono-rail would have been in such an emergency as the last Sudan War,
when the army dragged a line of railway with it down toward Omdurman.
Petrol-driven cars to replace the expensive steam locomotives, easy
rapid transit instead of the laborious crawl through the stifling desert
heat--a complete railway installation, swiftly and cheaply called into
being, instead of a costly and cumbersome makeshift.

The car went back to her garage, or engine-shed, or stable, or whatever
the railway man of the future shall decide to call it. Struts were
pulled into position to hold her up, the motors were switched off, and
the gyroscopes were left to run themselves down in forty-eight hours or
so. When the mono-rail comes into general use, explained Brennan, there
will be docks for the cars, with low brick walls built to slide under
the platforms and take their weight.

While his guests assembled in a store-shed to drink champagne and eat
sandwiches, he produced a big flat book, sumptuously bound, and told us
how his patents were being infringed on in Germany. On that same day
there was an exhibition of a mono-rail car on the Brennan principle
taking place at the Zo√∂logical Gardens in Berlin; the book was its
catalogue. It was full of imaginative pictures of trains fifty years
hence, and thereto was appended sanguine letter-press. While there
sounded in our ears the hum of the gyroscopes from the car housed in the
rear, I translated one paragraph for him. It was to the effect that one
Brennan, an Englishman, had conducted experiments with gyroscopes ten
years ago, but the matter had gone no further.

"There, now," said Brennan.

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Everybody's Magazine_)

A NEW POLITICAL WEDGE

THE WAY ST. LOUIS WOMEN DROVE A NINE-HOUR DAY INTO THE LAW

BY INIS H. WEED

It was the evening before the state primaries--a sweltering
first of August night in the tenement district of St. Louis, where
the factory people eat their suppers and have their beds. Men
in shirt-sleeves and women with babies sat on the steps for a
breath of air, and the streets were a noisy welter of children.

Two of the most enthusiastic girls in the Women's Trade
Union League stopped before the group silhouetted in the gaslight
at No. 32 and handed the men in the group this card:


                           REPUBLICAN VOTERS
                           -----------------
It is the Women and Children that are the Victims of Manufacturers
                   and Manufacturers Associations
                           and it is the
                      WORKING WOMAN AND CHILD
                that demands your protection at the
                  PRIMARIES, TUESDAY, AUGUST 2nd
                             Scratch
                             -------
                            E.J. Troy
Secretary St. Louis Manufacturers Association and run by them on the
Republican Ticket for the Legislature in the 1st District Comprising
WARDS 10, 11, 2,13, and 24. Precincts 14 of the 15th WARD. Precincts 1,
2, 3 of the 23rd WARD. Precincts 1, 2 of the 15th WARD. Precincts 6, 7,
10, 11, 12, 13 of the 14th WARD. Precincts 1, 4, 5 of the 9th Ward


"So yez would be afther havin' me scratch Misther Troy?" Mike Ryan ran
his fingers through his stubby crop with a puzzled air. "Oi'm always fur
plazin' the loidies, but Misther Troy, he's a frind o' mine. Shure, he
shmokes a grand cigar, an' he shakes yer hand that hearty."

So Mike belonged to the long, long glad-hand line. Well, _personal_
arguments were necessary in his case then. That was the way the girls
sized up Mike Ryan.

"But this ticket has something to do with your oldest girl."

"With Briddie?"

"It sure does, Mr. Ryan. Didn't I hear your wife tellin' what with the
hard times an' all, you'd be puttin' Briddie in the mill this winter as
soon as ever she's turned fourteen? Wouldn't you rather they worked her
nine hours a day instead o' ten--such a soft little kid with such a lot
o' growin' to do? There's a lot of us goin' to fight for a Nine-Hour
Bill for the women and children this winter, an' do you think a
manufacturers' representative, like Troy, is goin' to help us? Look at
his record! See how he's fought the employees' interests in the
legislature! That's a part of his job! _He_ won't vote for no Nine-Hour
Bill!"

And the two girls went on to the next tenement.

They were only two of the hundreds of Trade Union girls who were "doing"
the First Electoral District (about one-third of St. Louis) on the eve
of the primaries. They were thorough. They had the whole district
organized on the block system, and they went over each block house by
house.

_A new move, is it not, this carefully organized effort of factory women
to secure justice through the ballot-box?_

How have St. Louis women attained this clear vision that their
industrial future is bound up in politics? It is a three years' story.
Let us go back a little.

St. Louis is essentially a conservative city. First, it was an old
French town; then a Southern town; then a German tradesman's town. With
such strata superimposed one above the other, it could hardly be other
than conservative. In addition, St. Louis was crippled in the war
between the states. She lost her market. This made her slow.

In the 'eighties, this old French-Southern-German city began to recover
from the ruin of her Southern trade. Little by little she took heart,
for the great Southwest was being settled. There was a new field in
which to build up trade. To-day St. Louis is _the_ great wholesale and
jobbing depot, _the_ manufacturing city for that vast stretch of
territory known as the Southwest.

Since 1890, great fortunes have been amassed--most of them, indeed, in
the past ten years. There has been a rapid growth of industry. The old
Southern city has become a soft-coal factory center. A pall of smoke
hangs over the center of the city where the factories roar and pound.
In the midst of this gloom the workfolk are creating rivers of beer,
carloads of shoes and woodenware, millions of garments and bags, and the
thousand and one things necessary to fill the orders of hundreds of
traveling salesmen in the Southwest territory--and in the South, too,
for St. Louis is winning back some of her old-time trade.

And the toil of their lifting hands and flying fingers has wrought a
golden age for the men who control the capital and the tools. The men
who manage have been shaking hands in their clubs for the past decade
and congratulating themselves and each other over their drinks. "Yes,
St. Louis is a grand old business town. Solid! No mushroom real-estate
booms, you know, but a big, steady growth. New plants starting every
month and the old ones growing. Then, when we get our deep waterway,
that's going to be another big shove toward prosperity.

"Nice town to live in, too! Look at our handsome houses and clubs and
public buildings. Never was anything like our World's Fair in the
history of men--never! Look at our parks, too. When we get 'em linked
together with speedways, where'll you find anything prettier?" Thus the
money-makers in this heavy German town.

But what about the employees--the clerks and the factory workers? Have
they been "in" on this "big shove toward prosperity?" Have they found it
a "nice" town to live in?

No, to each count. For the people at the bottom of the ladder--for the
people who tend machines, dig ditches, and stand behind the notion
counter--St. Louis is a smoky town, where people have gray lungs instead
of pink; a town where franchise grabbing and an antiquated system of
taxation have their consequence of more than New York city rents. A town
whose slums, says Lee Frankel, are the worst in the country. A town
where wages are low (in some occupations twenty-five per cent lower than
in New York City); where employment is irregular, the speeding-up
tremendous, the number of women entering industry steadily increasing,
and where the influx of immigrant labor is pulling down the wage scale
and the standard of living.

The average wage of the shoe-workers in the East is $550 per year. In
St. Louis it is $440 if work is steady--and rents are higher than in New
York City.

It must be remembered that this sum is an average, and that thousands of
shoe-workers earn, less than $440, for full-time work. The same is true
of thousands engaged in other kinds of manufacture and in department
stores.

Somehow the town looks different from the two ends of the ladder.

The government of Missouri and St. Louis has been about as little
adapted to the needs of the industrial worker as it well could be. Men
have been concerned not so much with social justice as with government
protection for money-making schemes.

Business opportunity has depended much on _pliable state and municipal
laws_. How the interests fought to keep them pliable; how St. Louis and
Missouri became a world scandal in this steady growth to riches, we all
know.

We know, too, the period of political reform. People thought the killing
trouble in Missouri lay largely with the governmental machinery; and the
optimists' faith in a state primary law, in the initiative and
referendum as panacea, was white and shining. _They did not see that the
underlying problem is industrial_.

After the reform wave had spent itself, the crooked people who had kept
out of jail crept from their holes and went back to their old job of
beating the game. The only essential difference is that their methods
to-day are less raw and crude. They play a more gentlemanly game; but
the people are still robbed of their rights.

Thus it came to pass that when the cheerful optimist went to the
cupboard to get his poor dog a bone, why, lo! the cupboard was bare.

Meantime the dog has taken up the struggle for social justice on his own
account, not singly but in groups and packs. As yet, although a deal of
snuffing, running to and fro, barking, yelping, and fighting has been
done, little has been accomplished; for one reason, because labor has
lacked great organizers in St. Louis.

It has remained for the working women of St. Louis to make the
industrial idea effective and to reach out with united single purpose to
bend the political bow for their protection.

The Women's Trade Union League, whose real general is Cynthelia Isgrig
Knefler, the most dynamic woman in St. Louis, received its first impetus
only three years ago in the idealism of a brilliant young Irish girl,
Hannah Hennessy, who died at Thanksgiving, 1910, a victim of exhausting
work in a garment shop and of her own tireless efforts to organize the
working girls of her city.

Hannah Hennessy was sent by the Garment Workers' Union to the National
Labor Convention of 1907 at Norfolk, Virginia.

There she glimpsed for the first time the inevitable great world march
of women following industry as machinery takes it out of the home and
into the shop--saw these women, blind, unorganized, helpless to cope
with the conditions offered by organized capital. The vision fired this
Irish girl to a pitch of enthusiasm peculiar to the Celtic temperament.
Back she came to St. Louis with the spirit of the Crusaders, her vision
"the eight-hour day, the living wage to guard the home."

For the first time she saw the broken physical future of women who label
three thousand five hundred bottles of beer an hour, and accept their
cuts and gashes from the bursting bottles as inevitable; of women who
put eyelets on a hundred cases of shoes a day, twenty-four pairs to the
case; of women who must weave one thousand yards of hemp cloth a day to
hold their job in a mill where the possible speed of woman and machine
is so nicely calculated that the speediest person in the factory can
weave only twelve hundred and sixty yards a day; where the lint from
this hemp fills the air and is so injurious to eyes and throat that the
company furnishes medical attendance free.

To undertake the huge task of organizing these thousands of St. Louis
women would require not only vision but time and energy. Hannah's return
meant being engulfed in the vast roar made by rows of throbbing,
whirring machines, into one of which she sewed her vitality at dizzy
speed ten hours a day. Vision she had, but training, time, energy--no!

It was at this point that she met Cynthelia Isgrig Knefler, a
leisure-class young woman, who had been gripped by a sense of the
unevenness of the human struggle. Cynthelia Knefler was groping her way
through the maze of settlement activities to an appreciation of their
relative futility in the face of long hours, low wages, and unsanitary
shops.

Then the idealism of these two young women, born on the one hand of hard
experience, on the other of a gentle existence, fused, and burned with a
white light whose power is beginning to touch the lives of the women who
toil and spin for the great Southwest.

Both women possessed fire and eloquence. Hannah's special contribution
was first-hand experience; Mrs. Knefler's the knowledge of economic
conditions necessary to an understanding of our complicated labor
problems. Wise, sane, conservative, Mrs. Knefler not only helped Hannah
to organize branch after branch of the Women's Trade Union League in the
different industries, but set out at once to train strong, intelligent
leaders. She stimulated them to a critical study of labor laws with the
evolution of industry for background.

Night after night for two years Mrs. Knefler and Hannah were out
organizing groups of girls. Mrs. Knefler's friends finally stopped
remonstrating with her. Hannah, utterly self-forgetful despite ten hours
a day in the mills, hurled herself into the new work. Evening after
evening her mother protested anxiously, but Hannah, heedless of her own
interest, would eat her supper and hurry across the city to help groups
of new girls--American, Russian, Roumanian--a confused mass, to find
themselves and pull together.

One June morning in 1910 the papers announced that the Manufacturers'
Association and the Business Men's League had decided on E.J. Troy as
their candidate to the State Legislature for the First District. His
candidacy was also backed by the Republican machine. The papers went on
to say that E.J. Troy was one of "our ablest and most popular fellow
townsmen," that he had grown up in his district, had a host of friends,
and might be expected to carry the primaries by a big majority.

That evening at the weekly dinner of the officers of the Women's Trade
Union League at the Settlement, Mrs. Knefler hurried in: "Girls, have
you seen the morning papers? Do you know that we've got E.J. Troy to
contend with again?"

At the same moment in dashed Hannah Hennessy by another door, calling
out, "Girls, they're goin' to put Troy on the carpet again!"

To both speeches came half a dozen excited replies that that's just what
they were talking about!

Over the potatoes and meat and bread-pudding the situation was discussed
in detail.

"Yes, 'twas him, all right, that thought up most of those tricky moves
when we was tryin' to get our Nine-Hour Bill before," reflected a wiry,
quick-motioned girl during a second's pause.

"Don't it just make you boil," began another, "when you think how he
riled 'em up at every four corners in Missouri! He had every old country
storekeeper standin' on end about that Nine-Hour Bill. He had 'em
puttin' on their specs and callin' to mother to come and listen to this
information the manufacturers had sent him:--how the labor unions was
tryin' to get a Nine-Hour Bill for women passed; how it would keep their
youngest girl, Bessie, from helping in the store when the farmers drove
in of a Saturday night; and how it was a blow at American freedom."

"E.J. Troy's got to be squenched at the primaries," said a third,
quietly and decisively.

"But how?" asked a more timid officer.

Bing! Mrs. Knefler got into action. There never was a woman for whom a
difficult situation offered a more bracing tonic quality. The business
meeting that followed fairly bristled with plans.

The girls' first move was to go before the Central Labor Body and ask
them to indorse their objections to E.J. Troy. Definite action beyond
indorsement the girls did not ask or expect. This much they got.

One day a little later, when Mrs. Knefler's campaign was beginning to
take form, a representative of E.J. Troy called Mrs. Knefler on the
telephone. The voice was bland, smooth, and very friendly. Wouldn't
she--that is--ah--er--wouldn't her organization confer with Mr. E.J.
Troy? He felt sure they would come to a pleasant and mutually helpful
understanding.

Mrs. Knefler explained to the mouthpiece (take it either way) that it
would be quite useless; that the stand of the League was taken on Mr.
Troy's previous record and on the "interests" he represented; that while
they had nothing against him in his private capacity, as a public
servant they must oppose him. All this in Mrs. Knefler's suavest
fashion. She feels intensely, but she never loses her self-possession.
That's why she is such a formidable antagonist.

It was the last week in June--they had just a month before the primaries
in which to rouse public opinion. The newspapers must help, of course.

Mrs. Knefler went to the editors. They were polite, they admitted the
justice of her stand, but they were evasive. Mrs. Knefler opened her
paper the next morning after she had made the rounds, to find not a
single word about the danger to the working woman's interests.

What could the papers do? Weren't they in the hands of the "big cinch,"
as a certain combination of business men in St. Louis is known?
Naturally they refused to print a line. You never step on your own toe,
do you, or hit yourself in the face--if you can help it?

One must admit that things looked bad for the League. How were girls who
raced at machines all day, who had neither money nor the voice of the
press, to rouse this sluggish, corrupt city to the menace of sending to
the legislature men like E.J. Troy, pledged body and soul to the
manufacturers? How could they waken the public to woman's bitter
necessity for shorter hours? The case looked hopeless, but Mrs. Knefler
merely set her teeth, and got busy--decidedly busy.

She planned a campaign that no other St. Louis woman in her class would
have had the courage to tackle. Mrs. Knefler is a member of the club
that is the St. Louis clubwomen's "holy of holies." They have a
club-house that just drips art, and they steep themselves in
self-culture. As a group their consciousness of the city's industrial
problems is still nebulous. The high light in which Mrs. Knefler's work
must inevitably stand out is intensified by this background of
self-culture women, with a few--only a few--rash daughters shivering
around preparatory to taking their first cold plunge in the suffrage
pool.

In such an atmosphere Cynthelia Knefler planned and carried out the
biggest, the most modern and strategic campaign for the working woman
ever waged outside a suffrage state. It was done simply because her
heart was filled with the need of the thousands of helpless, unorganized
girls for protection from the greed of organized capital.

There are moments when love gives vision and raises us head and
shoulders above our group. So it was with Cynthelia Knefler, brought up
in this conservative city, educated in a prunes-and-prisms girls'
school, steeped in the Southern idea that no "lady" would ever let her
picture or her opinions get into the newspapers, and that making public
speeches was quite unthinkable!

The press was silent, but at least Mrs. Knefler could speak to the labor
unions. She and two other women appealed to every labor union in St.
Louis with a speech against E.J. Troy. They fought him--not as a man,
but as a representative of the "big interests." Mrs. Knefler made
seventy-six speeches in that one month before the primaries. That meant
hurrying from hall to hall on hot summer nights and making two speeches,
and sometimes three and four, while her friends were wearing white
muslin and sitting on the gallery, to get the cool of the evening.

Mrs. Knefler's mind was working like a trip-hammer that month; seeking
ways and means for rousing the busy, unthinking, conglomerate mass of
people to the real issue. Money in the League was scarce. There are no
rich members. But out of their wages and out of raffles and
entertainments the League had a small reserve. Part of this they used to
print sixty thousand cards. So that when you went in to get a shave your
glance was caught, as the barber turned your head, by this red ticket
"Scratch E.J. Troy." When you stopped in for a loaf of bread, a red
ticket behind the glass of the case advised you to "Scratch E.J. Troy."
When you went in for a drink, there leaped into sight dozens of little
red tickets: "Scratch E.J. Troy."

There are always some men, though, who are moved only by the big, noisy
things of life. Only Schneider's band sounds like music to them; only
"Twenty Buckets of Blood, or Dead Man's Gulch" appeals to them as
literature; and the only speaker is the man who rips out Old Glory and
defies forked lightning. In a political campaign the little red ticket
is lost on that kind of man. Mrs. Knefler understood this. So one hot
July day huge posters in high, wood-block letters screamed from
billboards and the walls of saloons and barber shops and labor halls:
"Union men and friends, Scratch E.J. Troy."

All this printing and bill-posting was expensive for working girls. They
came back at the Central Labor body again. "Your sympathy is great, but
your funds are better," they said.

"You've tackled too big a job," the Labor leaders told the girls, with a
benevolent air. "He's the candy around this town--E.J. Troy is. It would
take a mint of money to beat E.J. Troy."

However, the Central body instructed the legislative committee of five
to give the girls every help, and they did good service. But the Central
Body didn't instruct the Committee to go down very far into the
treasury.

July was wearing on. The League hurled itself upon the press once more.
Surely after so much speech-making and bill-posting the editors would
accord them some recognition merely as news. Silence--absolute silence
in the next day's papers, and the next.

How did they accomplish the next move? That is one of the secrets. Their
money was gone, the silence of the press had crushed them with an
overwhelming sense of helplessness, but nevertheless they turned the
trick. They reached the upper and middle class readers of the South Side
District, Troy's district, which the papers were determined to keep as
much in ignorance as possible. All one night, silent, swift-moving men
whipped the paste across the billboards of that section and slapped on
huge posters, so that when Papa Smith and young Mr. Jones and Banker
Green came out of their comfortable houses next morning on their way to
business, they neglected their papers to find out why they should
"scratch E.J. Troy."

The day of the primaries was almost come. Now to reach the dull fellows
who hadn't seen the cards and the huge posters, who use their eyes only
to avoid obstacles. One night, as the factory whistles blew the signal
of dismissal, the men in the lines of operators who filed out of shop
and mills found themselves mechanically taking and examining this ticket
handed them by League girls, who had gone off their job a bit early and
had their wages docked in order to work for the larger good.

The Committee of the Central Body was now openly active in their behalf.
Men as well as women were passing out the tickets.

Then came the eve of the election. Busy pairs of girls who had already
done ten hours' work were going over E.J. Troy's district, with its
sections of rich and poor and well-to-do. Throbbing feet that had
carried the body's weight ten hot, fatiguing hours hurried up and down
the blocks, climbed flight after flight of stairs, and stood at door
after door.

"Say, kid, ain't it the limit that a woman can't vote on her own
business?" said one girl too another after they had finished the one
hundred and forty-fifth family and tried to explain their stake in the
election to a bigoted "head of the house."


On the morning of the primaries Mrs. Schurz, as she took the coffee off
the stove, remonstrated with her oldest daughter, Minna. "Vat, Minna,
you ain't goin' to stay out of de mill today and lose your pay?

"Yes, I be, _Mutter_," retorted Minna, with a tightening of the lips and
a light in her eyre. "I'm goin' to the polls to hand out cards to the
voters. I'm goin'. I don't care if I lose my job even."

"Oh, Minna, dat is bad, and me wid four _kinder_ to eat de food. Where
is de _fleisch_ and de _brot_ widout your wages?" Mrs. Schurz's heavy
face wore the anxious despondence so common to the mothers of the poor.

The girl hesitated, then tightened her lips once more. "I've got to take
the risk, _Mutter_. It'll come out right--it's got to. Do you want the
rest of the children workin' ten hours a day too? Look at me! I ain't
got no looks any more. I'm too dead tired to go out of a Saturday night.
I can't give nobody a good time any more. I guess there won't be no
weddin' bells for mine--ever. But the kids"--pointing to the inside
bedroom, where the younger girls were still asleep--"the kids is a-goin'
to keep their looks."

So at six o'clock Minna joined the relays of working girls who--many of
them, like Minna, at personal risk and sacrifice--handed out cards all
day to each man who entered. Thus the men were reminded at the last
moment of the working woman's stake in the election. "Scratch E.J. Troy"
was before their eyes as they crossed their tickets.

Every moment of the day there were alert girls to make this final quiet
appeal for justice. They were serious, dignified. There was no jeering,
no mirth on the part of the men at the novelty of this campaign--nothing
to make any woman self-conscious.

The girls were quiet enough outwardly, but the inner drama was keyed
high. Had all their speech-making, placarding, bill-posting and the
canvassing of factories, blocks, and primaries--had all their little
savings, their risk and personal sacrifice accomplished anything? That
was what the girls asked themselves. The thermometer of their hope rose
and fell with the rumors of the day. The fathers of the Central Labor
Body patted them on the head benevolently and tried to ease their fall,
if they were to fall, by saying that anyway it would be something to
make Troy run third on his ticket.

Seven o'clock, and the girls were leaving the primaries in twos and
threes, tired but excitedly discussing the situation. Between hope and
despondency the comment varied on the streets, at the supper-tables, and
in the eager, waiting groups of girls on tenement steps and stairs.

At last came the authentic returns. E.J. Troy ran _3,338 votes behind
his ticket. With a silent press and practically no money, the working
women had defeated one of the most popular men in St. Louis._

A man pledged to the interests of labor legislation won his place. That
made the outlook better for the Women's Nine-Hour Bill, and thousands of
working girls tumbled into bed, tired, but with new hope.

Every newspaper in St. Louis failed to comment on the victory. The
slaves who sit at the editorial desk said they couldn't--they weren't
"let." _So the most hopeful feature in St. Louis politics has never been
commented on by the American press._

As for Hannah Hennessy--she had been too ill to share in the active
work of the campaign, but her influence was everywhere--a vital force, a
continual inspiration.

Week by week her cheeks grew thinner, her cough more rasping. But after
the campaign against Troy was over, she turned with the same intensity
of interest to the National Convention of the American Federation of
Labor which was to meet there in November. For a year she had been
making plans, eager to make this convention a landmark in the history of
women's labor. But in November she was in bed by the little grate fire
in the family sitting-room. And when convention week came with its
meetings a scant three blocks from her home, she could be there in
spirit only; she waited restlessly for the girls to slip in after the
daily sessions and live them over again for her.

On Thanksgiving Day, between the exhausting strain of high-tension work
and the zeal of the young reformer, her beautiful life and brilliant
fire were burned out. The committee for the prevention of tuberculosis
added her case to their statistics, and the League girls bore her into
the lighted church.

In the winter of 1910-11 the leaders of all the labor and social forces
of St. Louis, all the organizations for various forms of uplift, united
under an able secretary and began their custom of lunching together once
a week to discuss the pending social legislation. They played a good
game. First, there was the educational effect of their previous
legislative campaign to build on. Then there was all the economy and
impetus gained from consolidation. They knew the rules of the game
better, too. Their plans were more carefully laid and executed.

With a more wary and sophisticated eye on the Manufacturers' Association
and a finger in the buttonhole of every legislator, the socially awake
of St. Louis have secured _more humane child labor legislation, and the
Nine-Hour Day for women and children with no exception in favor of
shop-keepers_.

Knowing the sickening fate of industrial legislation in certain other
states when tried before judges whose social vision is fifty years
behind the times, the winners of this new bill began to wait tensely
enough for its testing. So far, however, the Women's Nine-Hour law has
not been contested. It has also been exceptionally well enforced,
considering that there are only four factory inspectors for all the
myriad shops and mills of this manufacturing city of the Southwest, and
only seven factory inspectors for the whole state of Missouri.

Meanwhile St. Louis's new political wedge, the Women's Trade Union
League, continues to be a perfectly good political wedge. When there is
legislation wanted, all kinds of organizations invariably call upon this
league of the working women, whose purpose is a wider social justice.

St. Louis is another American city where the working women are
discovering that they can do things if they only think so.

       *       *       *       *       *

(_The Delineator_)

Illustrated by two pen-and-ink sketches made by a staff artist.

THE JOB LADY

GIVES THE YOUNG WAGE-EARNER A FAIR WORKING CHANCE

BY MARY E. TITZEL

The Jones School, the oldest public school building in Chicago, is at
Harrison Street and Plymouth Court. When it was new, it was surrounded
by "brown-stone fronts," and boys and girls who to-day are among the
city's most influential citizens learned their A-B-C's within its walls.
Now, the office-buildings and printing-houses and cheap hotels and
burlesque shows that mark the noisy, grimy district south of the "loop"
crowd in upon it; and only an occasional shabby brown-stone front
survives in the neighborhood as a tenement house. But in the Jones
School, the process of making influential citizens is still going on.
For there the "Job Lady" has her office, her sanctum.

Job Lady is a generic term that includes Miss Anne Davis, director of
the Bureau of Vocational Supervision, and her four assistants. The
Bureau--which is the newest department of Chicago's school system--is
really an employment agency, but one that is different from any other
employment agency in the United States. It is concerned solely with a
much-neglected class of wage-earners--children from fourteen to sixteen
years of age; and its chief purpose is, not to find positions for its
"patrons," but to keep them in school.

It was founded as a result of the discovery that there were not nearly
enough jobs in Chicago to go around among the twelve or fifteen thousand
children under sixteen years of age who left school each year to go to
work; also that, though a statute of the State required a child either
to work or to go to school, there were about twenty-three thousand
youngsters in the city who were doing neither. The law had made no
provision for keeping track of the children once they had left school.
No one knew what had become of them. So Miss Davis, acting as special
investigator for the School of Civics and Philanthropy and the Chicago
Women's Club, set to work to find out.

She discovered--and she can show you statistics to prove it--that
"bummin'" around, looking aimlessly for work, brought many a boy and
girl, unable to withstand the temptations of the street, into the
Juvenile Court. And she found, as other statistics bear witness, that
the fate of the children who found jobs was scarcely better than that of
their idle brothers and sisters. Undirected, they took the first
positions that offered, with the result that most of them were engaged
in "blind-alley" occupations, unskilled industries that offered little,
if any, chance for advancement and that gave no training for the future.
The pay was poor; it averaged two dollars a week. Working conditions
were frequently unhealthful. Moral influences of shop and factory and
office were often bad. For the most part, the industries that employed
children were seasonal; and many boys and girls were forced into long
periods of inactivity between positions. This state of affairs, combined
with a natural tendency to vary the monotony of life by shifting, on the
slightest pretext, from one job to another, was making of many children
that bane of modern industry, the "casual" laborer.

The Bureau--started informally in the course of initial investigations
and kept alive through the grace of the Women's Club, until the Board of
Education was ready to adopt it--has been able to do much in
amelioration of the lot of the fourteen-to-sixteen-year-old worker. But
no statistics it can produce are as telling as the sight of the Bureau
in operation. Sit with your eyes and ears open, in a corner of the
office in the Jones School and you will make the acquaintance of one of
the humanest employment agencies in the world; also you will learn more
about such grave subjects as the needs of our educational system and the
underlying causes of poverty than you can learn out of fat treatises in
a year.

"Why do you want to leave school?" That is the first question the Job
Lady asks of each new applicant who comes to the Bureau for work.
Perhaps the child has heard that question before; for in those schools
from which the greatest numbers of children go out at the age of
fourteen, Miss Davis and her assistants hold office hours and interview
each boy or girl who shows signs of restlessness. They give informal
talks to the pupils of the sixth and seventh grades about the
opportunities open to boys and girls under sixteen; they discuss the
special training offered by the schools and show the advisability of
remaining in school as long as possible; they try to find an opportunity
of talking over the future with each member of the graduating class.

But even when the way has been paved for it, the question, "Why do you
want to leave school?" brings to light the most trivial of reasons. In
very few cases is it economic necessity that drives a child to work.

"I ain't int'rusted," explained one boy to Miss Davis. "I jest sits."

The Job Lady is often able to convince even the sitters that school is,
after all, the best place for boys and girls under sixteen. She
persuaded between twenty-five and thirty per cent. of the children that
applied at the Bureau last year to return to school. Sometimes all she
had to do was to give the child a plain statement of the facts in the
case--of the poor work and poor pay and lack of opportunity in the
industries open to the fourteen-year-old worker. Often she found it
necessary only to explain what the school had to offer. One boy was sent
to Miss Davis by a teacher who had advised him to go to work, although
he had just completed the seventh grade, because he had "too much
energy" for school! He was a bright boy--one capable of making something
of himself, if the two important, formative years that must pass before
he was sixteen were not wasted; so he was transferred from his school to
one where vocational work was part of the curriculum--where he could
find an outlet for his superfluous energy in working with his hands. Now
he is doing high-school work creditably; and he has stopped talking
about leaving school.

But it isn't always the whim of the child that prompts him to cut short
his education. Sometimes he is driven into the industrial world by the
ignorance or greed of his parents. Miss Davis tells of one little girl
who was sacrificed to the great god Labor because the four dollars she
brought home weekly helped to pay the instalments on a piano, and of a
boy who was taken from eighth grade just before graduation because his
father had bought some property and needed a little extra money.
Frequently boys and girls are put to work because of the impression
that schools have nothing of practical value to offer.

Still, even the most miserly and most stubborn and most ignorant of
parents can sometimes be made to see the wisdom of keeping a child in
school until he is sixteen. They are won to the Job Lady's point of view
by a statement of the increased opportunity open to the child who is
sixteen. Or they are brought to see that the schools are for _all_
children, and that work, on the contrary, is very bad for some children.

But often all the Job Lady's efforts fail. The child is incurably sick
of school, the parent remains obdurate. Or, perhaps, there is a very
real need of what little the son or daughter can earn. Often some one
can be found who will donate books, or a scholarship ranging from
car-fare to a few dollars a week. Over four hundred dollars is being
given out in scholarships each month, and every scholarship shows good
returns. But often no scholarship is forthcoming; and there is nothing
for the Job Lady to do but find a position for the small applicant.

Then begins the often difficult process of fitting the child to some
available job. The process starts, really, with fitting the job to the
child, and that is as it should be. The Job Lady always tries to place
the boys and girls that come to her office where there will be some
chance for them to learn something. But jobs with a "future" are few for
the fourteen-year-old worker. The trades will not receive apprentices
under the age of sixteen; business houses and the higher-grade factories
won't bother with youngsters, because they are too unreliable; as one
man put it, with unconscious irony, too "childish." So the Job Lady must
be content to send the boys out as office and errand boys or to find
employment for the girls in binderies and novelty shops. But she
investigates every position before a child is sent to fill it; and if it
is found to be not up to standard in wages or working conditions, it is
crossed off the Bureau's list.

The Job Lady has established a minimum wage of four dollars a week. No
children go out from the Bureau to work for less than that sum,
excepting those who are placed in the part-time schools of some printing
establishments, or in dressmaking shops, where they will be learning a
useful trade. This informal minimum-wage law results in a raising of the
standard of payment in a shop.

In such manner, the Bureau makes over many a job to fit the worker. But
the fitting process works both ways. The Job Lady knows that it is
discouraging, often demoralizing, for a child to be turned away, just
because he is not the "right person" for a place. So she tries to make
sure that he _is_ the right person. That she succeeds very often, the
employers who have learned to rely on the Bureau will testify.

"If you haven't a boy for me now," one man said to Miss Davis, "I'll
wait until you get one. It will save time in the end, for you always
send just the boy I want."

The secret of finding the right boy lies, first of all, in discovering
what he wants to do; and, next, in judging whether or not he can do it.
Very often, he has not the least idea of what he wants to do. He has
learned many things in school, but little or nothing of the industrial
world in which he must live. To many boys and girls, especially to those
from the poorest families, an "office job" is the acme of desire. It
means to them, pitifully enough, a respectability they have never been
quite able to encompass. As a result, perhaps, of our slow-changing
educational ideals, they scorn the trades.

Into the trades, however, Miss Davis finds it possible to steer many a
boy who is obviously unfitted for the career of lawyer, bank clerk, or,
vaguely, "business man." And she is able to place others in the coveted
office jobs, with their time-honored requirement: "only the neat,
honest, intelligent boy need apply."

Often, given the honesty and intelligence, she must manufacture a child
to fit the description. Sometimes all that is necessary is a hint about
soap and water and a clean collar. Sometimes the big cupboard in her
office must yield up a half-worn suit or a pair of shoes that some
luckier boy has outgrown. Occasionally, hers is the delicate task of
suggesting to a prematurely sophisticated little girl that some
employers have an unreasonable prejudice against rouge and earrings; or
that even the poorest people can wash their underwear. Manners
frequently come in for attention.

When the boys or girls are placed, the Bureau, unlike most employment
agencies, does not wash its hands of them. Its work has only begun. Each
child is asked to report concerning his progress from time to time; and
if he does not show up, a vocational supervisor keeps track of him by
visits to home or office, or by letters, written quarterly. The Job Lady
is able to observe by this method, whether or not the work is suitable
for the child, or whether it offers him the best available chance; and
she is often able to check the habit of "shifting" in its incipient
stages. She is continually arbitrating and making adjustments, always
ready to listen to childish woes and to allay them when she can.

Not long ago, I went to a conference on Vocational Guidance. There I
heard, from the mouths of various men, what hope the work being done by
the Bureau held for the future. One showed how it had infused new blood
into the veins of an anemic educational system, how it was making the
schools a more efficient preparation for life--the life of factory and
shop and office--than they ever had been before.

Another man pointed out that the Bureau, through the schools, would
strike at one of the deep roots of poverty--incompetency. More people
are poor for lack of proper equipment to earn a living and proper
direction in choosing a vocation, he said, than for any other one
reason.

A third man saw in the Vocational Bureau a means of keeping a control
over employing interests. "You treat our children well, and you pay them
well," the schools of the future, he declared, would be able to say to
the employer, as the Bureau was already saying, "or we won't permit our
children to work for you." A fourth had a vision of what the Bureau and
the new education it heralded could do toward educating the men and
women of the future to a knowledge of their rights as workers.

And then there came a man with a plea. "All of these things," he said,
"the Bureau can accomplish--must accomplish. But let us not forget, in
our pursuance of great ends, that it is the essential _humanness_ of the
Bureau that has made it what it is."

Here was the final, immeasurable measure of its success. It counts, of
course, that the Job Lady helps along big causes, drives at the roots of
big ills; but, somehow it counts more that an anxious-faced youngster I
saw at the Bureau should have brought his woes to her. His employer had
given him a problem to solve--and he couldn't do it. He was afraid he'd
lose his job. He had never been to the Bureau before, but "a boy you got
a job for said you'd help me out," he explained--and he was sent off
happy, the problem solved.

It counts too, that Tillie, who had once found work through the Bureau,
but was now keeping house for her father, should turn to the Bureau for
aid. Her father had been sick and couldn't afford to buy her anything
new to wear. "My dress is so clumsy," she wrote, "that the boys laugh at
me when I go out in the street." She was confident that the Job Lady
would help her--and her confidence was not misplaced. It counts that
the Jameses and Henrys and Johns and Marys and Sadies come, brimming
over with joy, to tell the Job Lady of a "raise" or of a bit of
approbation from an employer. All the funny, grateful, pathetic letters
that pour in count unspeakably!

To hundreds of boys and girls and parents the Job Lady has proved a
friend. There has been no nonsense about the matter. She has not
sentimentalized over her work; she has not made it smack of charity.
Indeed, there is no charity about it. The boys and girls and parents who
come to the Job Lady are, for the most part, just average boys and girls
and parents, as little paupers as millionaires. They are the people who
are generally lost sight of in a democracy, where one must usually be
well-to-do enough to, buy assistance, or poor enough to accept it as
alms, if he is to have any aid at all in solving the problems of life.

It is a great thing for the schools, through the Bureau, to give to
these average men and women and children practical aid in adjusting
their lives to the conditions under which they live and work, and to do
it with a sympathy and an understanding--a humanness that warms the
soul.

       *       *       *       *       *

_(Kansas City Star)_

Two illustrations with the captions:
  1. "Tom Sawyer and Becky Thatcher," an Illustration in
     the "Adventures of Tom Sawyer" (Harpers), which met the
     Author's Approval.

  2. Mrs. Laura Frazer, the Original "Becky Thatcher," Pouring
     Tea at Mark Twain's Boyhood Home in Hannibal, Mo.,
     on the Anniversary of the Author's Birth.

MARK TWAIN'S FIRST SWEETHEART, BECKY THATCHER, TELLS OF THEIR CHILDHOOD
COURTSHIP

To Mrs. Laura Frazer of Hannibal, Mo., Mark Twain's immortal "Adventures
of Tom Sawyer" is a rosary, and the book's plot is the cord of fiction
on which beads of truth are strung. In the sunset of her life she tells
them over, and if here and there among the roseate chaplet is a bead
gray in coloring, time has softened the hues of all so they blend
exquisitely. This bead recalls a happy afternoon on the broad
Mississippi with the boys and girls of seventy years ago; the next
brings up a picture of a schoolroom where a score of little heads bob
over their books and slates, and a third visualizes a wonderful picnic
excursion to the woods with a feast of fried chicken and pie and cake.

For Mrs. Frazer is the original of Becky Thatcher, the childhood
sweetheart of Tom Sawyer, and the original of Tom Sawyer, of course, was
Mark Twain himself.

"Yes, I was the Becky Thatcher of Mr. Clemens's book," Mrs. Frazer said
the other day, as she sat in the big second floor front parlor of the
old time mansion in Hannibal, which is now the Home for the Friendless.
Mrs. Frazer is the matron of the home.

"Of course I suspected it when I first read the 'Adventures of Tom
Sawyer,'" she went on. "There were so many incidents which I recalled as
happening to Sam Clemens and myself that I felt he had drawn a picture
of his memory of me in the character of Judge Thatcher's little
daughter. But I never confided my belief to anyone. I felt that it would
be a presumption to take the honor to myself.

"There were other women who had no such scruples--some of them right
here in Hannibal--and they attempted to gain a little reflected
notoriety by asserting that they were the prototypes of the character.
When Albert Bigelow Paine, Mr. Clemens's biographer, gathered the
material for his life of the author, he found no fewer than twenty-five
women, in Missouri and elsewhere, each of whom declared she was Becky
Thatcher, but he settled the controversy for all time on Mr. Clemens's
authority when the biography was published. In it you will find that
Becky Thatcher was Laura Hawkins, which was my maiden name.

"We were boy and girl sweethearts, Sam Clemens and I," Mrs. Frazer said
with a gentle little laugh.

She is elderly, of course, since it was seventy years ago that her
friendship with Mark Twain began, and her hair is gray. But her heart is
young, and she finds in her work of mothering the twenty-five boys and
girls in her charge the secret of defying age. On this particular
afternoon she wore black and white striped silk, the effect of which was
a soft gray to match her hair, and her placid face was lighted with
smiles of reminiscence.

"Children are wholly unartificial, you know," she explained. "They do
not learn to conceal their feelings until they begin to grow up. The
courtship of childhood, therefore, is a matter of preference and of
comradeship. I liked Sam better than the other boys, and he liked me
better than the other girls, and that was all there was to it."

If you had seen this lady of Old Missouri as she told of her childhood
romance you would have recalled instinctively Mark Twain's description:

    A lovely little blue eyed creature with yellow hair plaited into two
    long tails, white summer frock and embroidered pantalettes. * * * He
    worshipped this new angel with furtive eye until he saw that she had
    discovered him; then he pretended he did not know she was present,
    and began to "show off" in all sorts of absurd boyish ways, in order
    to win her admiration.

And you would have found it easy to conceive that this refined, gentle
countenance once was apple cheeked and rosy, that the serene gray eyes
once sparkled as blue as the Father of Waters on a sunny day and that
the frosted hair was as golden as the sunshine.

"I must have been 6 or 7 years old when we moved to Hannibal," Mrs.
Frazer said. "My father had owned a big mill and a store and a
plantation worked by many negro slaves further inland, but he found the
task of managing all too heavy for him, and so he bought a home in
Hannibal and was preparing to move to it when he died. My mother left
the mill and the plantation in the hands of my grown brothers--I was one
of ten children, by the way--and came to Hannibal. Our house stood at
the corner of Hill and Main streets, and just a few doors west, on Hill
Street, lived the Clemens family.

"I think I must have liked Sam Clemens the very first time I saw him. He
was different from the other boys. I didn't know then, of course, what
it was that made him different, but afterward, when my knowledge of the
world and its people grew, I realized that it was his natural
refinement. He played hookey from school, he cared nothing at all for
his books and he was guilty of all sorts of mischievous pranks, just as
Tom Sawyer is in the book, but I never heard a coarse word from him in
all our childhood acquaintance.

"Hannibal was a little town which hugged the steamboat landing in those
days. If you will go down through the old part of the city now you will
find it much as it was when I was a child, for the quaint old
weatherbeaten buildings still stand, proving how thoroughly the pioneers
did their work. We went to school, we had picnics, we explored the big
cave--they call it the Mark Twain Cave now, you know."

"Were you lost in the cave, as Tom Sawyer and Becky Thatcher were?"
Mrs. Frazer was asked.

"No; that is a part of the fiction of the book," she answered. "As a
matter of fact, some older persons always went with us. Usually my older
sister and Sam Clemens's older sister, who were great friends, were
along to see that we didn't get lost among the winding passages where
our candles lighted up the great stalagmites and stalactites, and where
water was dripping from the stone roof overhead, just as Mr. Clemens has
described it."

And then she proceeded to divorce the memory of Mark Twain from "the
little red schoolhouse" forever.

"In those days we had only private schools," Mrs. Frazer said. "If there
were public schools I never heard of them. The first school I went to
was taught by Mr. Cross, who had canvassed the town and obtained perhaps
twenty-five private pupils at a stated price for the tuition of each. I
do not know how much Mr. Cross charged, but when I was older I remember
that a young woman teacher opened a school after getting twenty-five
pupils at $25 each for the year's tuition. I shall never forget that Mr.
Cross did not belie his name, however, or that Sam Clemens wrote a bit
of doggerel about him."

She quoted it this way:

  Cross by name and Cross by nature,
  Cross hopped out of an Irish potato.

"The schoolhouse was a 2-story frame building with a gallery across the
entire front," she resumed. "After a year together in that school Sam
and I went to the school taught by Mrs. Horr. It was then he used to
write notes to me and bring apples to school and put them on my desk.
And once, as a punishment for some prank, he had to sit with the girls
and occupied a vacant seat by me. He didn't seem to mind the penalty at
all," Mrs. Frazer added with another laugh, "so I don't know whether it
was effective as a punishment or not.

"We hadn't reached the dancing age then, but we went to many 'play
parties' together and romped through 'Going to Jerusalem,' 'King William
was King George's Son' and 'Green Grow the Rushes--O.'

"Judge Clemens, Sam's father, died and left the family in straitened
circumstances, and Sam's schooling ended there. He began work in the
printing office to help out, and when he was 17 or 18 he left Hannibal
to go to work in St. Louis. He never returned to live, but he visited
here often in the years that followed."

Mrs. Frazer's own story formed the next chapter of her narrative. A
young physician, Doctor Frazer of Madisonville, which was a little
inland village in Ralls County, adjoining, came often to Hannibal and
courted pretty Laura Hawkins. When she was 20 they were married and went
to live in the new house Doctor Frazer had built for his bride at
Madisonville. There they reared two sons until they required better
school facilities, when they went to Rensselaer, also in Ralls County,
but nearer Hannibal. They lived in Rensselaer until Doctor Frazer's
death, when the mother and younger son moved to the General Canby farm.
This son's marriage led to Mrs. Frazer's return to Hannibal twenty-two
years ago. She was offered the position of matron at the Home for the
Friendless, and for twenty-two years she has managed it. The boys and
girls who have gone out from it in nearly every case have become useful
men and women as a result of her guidance at the critical period of
their life, for the girls remain in the home until they are 14 and the
boys until they are 12. The old mansion which houses the score or more
of children always there is to be abandoned in the spring for a new and
modern building, a gift from a wealthy citizen to the private charity
which has conducted the institution so long without aid from city,
county or state.

It was given to Mrs. Frazer and Mark Twain to renew their youthful
friendship after a lapse of half a century. In 1908 Mrs. Frazer made a
trip East, accepting an invitation to visit Albert Bigelow Paine at
Redding, Conn. Mr. Paine had visited Hannibal two years before in a
search for material for his biography of Mark Twain and had made Mrs.
Frazer's acquaintance then. He mentioned the approaching visit to the
great humorist and Mark Twain promptly sat down and wrote Mrs. Frazer
that she must be a guest also at Stormfield, his Redding estate. So it
came about that the one-time little Laura Hawkins found herself lifting
the knocker at the beautiful country home of Mark Twain in the
Connecticut hills.

"The door was opened by Clara Clemens, Mr. Clemens's daughter," Mrs.
Frazer said, "and she threw her arms about me and cried:

    'I know you, for I've seen your picture, and father has told me
    about you. You are Becky Thatcher, and I'm happy to see you.'

"And that," Mrs. Frazer said, "was the first time I really knew I was
the original of the character, although I had suspected it for thirty
years. Clara Clemens, you know, even then was a famous contralto, and
Ossip Gabrilowitsch, whose wife she is now, was 'waiting' on her at the
time.

"It was a wonderful visit," she went on. "Mr. Clemens took me over
Stormfield. It must have been a tract of three hundred acres. We went
through the fields, which were not fields at all, since they were not
cultivated, and across a rustic bridge over a little rushing brook which
boiled and bubbled among the rocks in the bed of a great ravine, and we
sat down under a rustic arbor and talked of the old days in Hannibal
when he was a little boy and I a little girl, before he went out into
the world to win fame and before I lived my own happy married life. Mr.
Clemens had that rare faculty of loyalty to his friends which made the
lapse of fifty years merely an interim. It was as if the half century
had rolled away and we were there looking on the boy and girl we had
been.

"Mr. Clemens had won worldwide fame; he had been a welcome guest in the
palaces of Old World rulers and lionized in the great cities of his own
country. He had been made a Doctor of Literature by the University of
Oxford, the highest honor of the greatest university in the world, and
yet there at Stormfield to me he seemed to be Sam Clemens of old
Hannibal, rather than the foremost man in the American world of letters.

"That, I believe, is my most treasured memory of Sam Clemens," Mrs.
Frazer ended. "I love to think of him as the curly-headed, rollicking,
clean minded little boy I played with as a child, but I like better
still to think of him as he was in his last days, when all that fame and
fortune had showered on him did not, even momentarily, make him waver in
his loyalty to the friends of his youth."

In Hannibal stands the quaint little 2-story house flush with the
sidewalk which Samuel Langhorne Clemens's father built in 1844, after he
had moved to the old river town from Florida, Mo., where the great story
teller was born. Restored, it houses many reminders of the author and is
maintained as a memorial to Mark Twain. There, November 30, the
eighty-second anniversary of the birth of Clemens, the people of
Hannibal and persons from many cities widely scattered over America will
go to pay tribute to his memory.

And there they will see Becky Thatcher in the flesh, silkengowned,
gray-haired and grown old, but Becky Thatcher just the same, seated in a
chair which once was Mark Twain's and pouring tea at a table on which
the author once wrote. And if the aroma of the cup she hands out to each
visitor doesn't waft before his mind a vision of a curly-headed boy and
a little girl with golden long-tails at play on the wharf of old
Hannibal while the ancient packets ply up and down the rolling blue
Mississippi, there is nothing whatever in the white magic of
association.

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Milwaukee Journal_)

FOUR MEN OF HUMBLE BIRTH HOLD WORLD DESTINY IN THEIR HANDS

BY WILLIAM G. SHEPHERD

WASHINGTON--Out of a dingy law office in Virginia, out of a cobbler's
shop in Wales, out of a village doctor's office in France and from a
farm on the island of Sicily came the four men who, in the grand old
palace at Versailles, will soon put the quietus on the divine right of
kings.

In 1856, three days after Christmas, a boy named Thomas was born in the
plain home of a Presbyterian parson in Staunton, Va. When this boy was 4
years old, there was born in Palermo, on the island of Sicily, 4,000
miles away, a black-eyed Sicilian boy. Into the town of Palermo, on that
July day, came Garibaldi, in triumph, and the farmer-folk parents of the
boy, in honor of the occasion, named their son Victor, after the new
Italian king, whom Garibaldi had helped to seat.

Three years later still, when Thomas was playing the games of 7-year-old
boys down in Virginia, and when Victor, at 3, spent most of his time
romping on the little farm in Sicily, there was born in the heart of the
foggy, grimy town of Manchester, in England, a boy named David. His home
was the ugliest of the homes of all the three. It was of red brick, two
stories high, with small windows, facing a busy stone sidewalk. Its
rooms were small and little adorned, and not much hope of greatness
could ever have sprung from that dingy place.

There was one other boy to make up the quartet. His name was George. He
was a young medical student in Paris twenty-two years old when David was
born in England. He thought all governments ought to be republics, and,
by the time he was 25, he came over to the United States to study the
American republic, and, if possible, to make a living over here as a
doctor. He had been born in a little village in France, in a doctor's
household.

While George was in New York, almost starving for lack of patients, and
later, while he taught French in a girls' school in Stamford, Conn.,
little Thomas, down in Virginia, at the age of 10 years, had buckled
down to his studies, with the hope of being a lawyer; Victor, at 6, was
studying in a school in far-away Palermo, and David, at 3, fatherless by
this time, was getting ready for life in the home of his uncle, a
village shoemaker, in a little town of Wales. The only city-born boy of
the four, he was taken by fate, when his father died, to the simplicity
of village life and saved, perhaps, from the sidewalks.

The years whirled on. George married an American girl and went back to
France, to write and teach and doctor. Thomas went to a university to
study law. David, seven years younger, spent his evenings and spare time
in his uncle's shoe shop or in the village blacksmith shop, listening to
his elders talk over the affairs of the world.

Victor, with law as his vision, crossed the famous old straits of
Messina from his island home and went to Naples to study in the law
school there.

In the '80s things began to happen. Down in Virginia, Thomas was
admitted to the bar. In old Wales, David, who, by this time, had learned
to speak English, was admitted to practice law in 1884, and, in 1885,
the black-eyed, hot-blooded Sicilian Victor received the documents that
entitled him to practice at the Italian bar.

George, in France, by this time had dropped medicine. Bolshevism had
arisen there in the form of the Commune, and he had fought it so
desperately that he had been sentenced to death. He hated kings, and he
also hated the autocracy of the mob. He fled from Paris.

Soon they will sit at a peace table together, the first peace table in
all human history from which divine-right kings are barred. The future
and the welfare of the world lie in their four pairs of hands. Their
full names are: Georges Clemenceau, premier of France; David Lloyd
George, prime minister of England; Victor Emanuel Orlando, premier of
Italy, and Thomas Woodrow Wilson, president of the United States.

       *       *       *       *       *

_(Saturday Evening Post)_

Three half-tone reproductions of wash-drawings by a staff artist.

THE CONFESSIONS OF A COLLEGE PROFESSOR'S WIFE

A college professor--as may be proved by any number of novels and
plays--is a quaint, pedantic person, with spectacles and a beard, but
without any passions--except for books. He takes delight in large fat
words, but is utterly indifferent to such things as clothes and
women--except the dowdy one he married when too young to know better....
It is always so interesting to see ourselves as authors see us.

Even more entertaining to us, however, is the shockingly inconsistent
attitude toward academic life maintained by practical people who know
all about real life--meaning the making and spending of money.

One evening soon after I became a college professor's wife I enjoyed the
inestimable privilege of sitting next to one of America's safest and
sanest business men at a dinner party given in his honor by one of the
trustees of the university.

When he began to inform me, with that interesting air of originality
which often accompanies the platitudes of our best citizens, that
college professors were "mere visionary idealists--all academic
theories; no practical knowledge of the world"--and so on, as usual--I
made bold to interrupt:

"Why, in the name of common sense, then, do you send your own sons to
them to be prepared for it! Is such a policy safe? Is it sane? Is it
practical?" And I am afraid I laughed in the great man's face.

He only blinked and said "Humph!" in a thoroughly businesslike manner;
but throughout the rest of the evening he viewed me askance, as though I
had become a dangerous theorist too--by marriage. So I turned my back on
him and wondered why such a large and brilliant dinner was given for
such a dull and uninteresting Philistine!

This shows, by the way, how young and ignorant I was. The mystery was
explained next day, when it was intimated to me that I had made what is
sometimes called, even in refined college circles, a break. Young
professors' wives were not expected to trifle with visitors of such
eminent solvency; but I had frequently heard the materialistic
tendencies of the age condemned in public, and had not been warned in
private that we were all supposed to do our best to work this
materialist for a million, with which to keep up the fight against
materialism.

In the cloistered seclusion of our universities, dedicated to high
ideals, more deference is shown to the masters of high finance than to
the masters of other arts--let me add not because Mammon is worshiped,
but because he is needed for building cloisters.

The search for truth would be far more congenial than the search for
wealth; but, so long as our old-fashioned institutions remain, like
old-fashioned females, dependent for their very existence on the bounty
of personal favor, devious methods must be employed for coaxing and
wheedling money out of those who control it--and therefore the truth.

I was a slender bride and had a fresh, becoming trousseau. He was a
heavy-jowled banker and had many millions. I was supposed to ply what
feminine arts I could command for the highly moral purpose of obtaining
his dollars, to be used in destroying his ideals.

Well, that was the first and last time I was ever so employed. Despite
the conscientious flattery of the others he gruntingly refused to give a
penny. And--who knows--perhaps I was in part responsible for the loss of
a million! A dreadful preface to my career as a college professor's
wife.

However, before pursuing my personal confessions, I must not overlook
the most common and comic characteristic of the college professor we all
know and love in fiction. I refer to his picturesque absent-mindedness.
I had almost forgotten that; possibly I have become absent-minded by
marriage too! Is not the dear old fellow always absent-minded on the
stage? Invariably and most deliriously! Just how he manages to remain on
the Faculty when absent-minded is never explained on the program; and it
often perplexes us who are behind the scenes.

I tell my husband that, in our case, I, as the dowdy and devoted wife,
am supposed to interrupt his dreams--they always have dreams--remove his
untidy dressing gown--they always wear dressing gowns--and dispatch him
to the classroom with a kiss and a coat; but how about that great and
growing proportion of his colleagues who, for reasons to be stated, are
wifeless and presumably helpless?

Being only a woman, I cannot explain how bachelors retain their
positions; but I shall venture to assert that no business in the
world--not even the army and navy--is conducted on a more ruthless and
inexorable schedule than the business of teaching.

My two brothers drift into their office at any time between nine and ten
in the morning and yet control a fairly successful commercial
enterprise; whereas, if my husband arrived at his eight-o'clock
classroom only one minute late there would be no class there to teach.
For it is an unwritten law among our engaging young friends the
undergraduates that when the "prof" is not on hand before the bell stops
ringing they can "cut"--thus avoiding what they were sent to college for
and achieving one of the pleasantest triumphs of a university course.

My confessions! Dear me! What have I, a college professor's wife, to
confess? At least three things:

    1--That I love my husband so well that I wish I had never married
    him.

    2--That I have been such a good wife that he does not know he ought
    never to have had one.

    3--That if I had to do it all over again I would do the same thing
    all over again! This is indeed a confession, though whether it be of
    weakness of will or strength of faith you may decide if you read the
    rest.

The first time I saw the man who became my husband was at the Casino in
Newport. And what was a poor professor doing at Newport? He was not a
professor--he was a prince; a proud prince of the most royal realm of
sport. Carl, as some of you might recall if that were his real name, had
been the intercollegiate tennis champion a few years before, and now,
with the kings of the court, had come to try his luck in the annual
national tournament. He lasted until the finals this time and then was
put out. That was as high as he ever got in the game.

Alas for the romance of love at first sight! He paid not the slightest
attention to me, though he sat beside me for ten minutes; for, despite
his defeat, he was as enthusiastically absorbed in the runner-up and the
dashing defender of the title as--well, as the splendid sportsman I have
since found him to be in disappointments far more grim.

As for me, I fear I hardly noticed him either, except to remark that he
was very good-looking; for this was my first visit to Newport--the last
too--and the pageantry of wealth and fashion was bewilderingly
interesting to me. I was quite young then. I am older now. But such
unintellectual exhibitions might, I fancy, still interest me--a
shocking confession for a college professor's wife!

I did not see Carl again for two years, and then it was in another kind
of pageant, amid pomp and circumstance of such a different sort; and,
instead of white flannel trousers, he now wore a black silk gown. It had
large flowing sleeves and a hood of loud colors hanging down behind; and
he was blandly marching along in the academic procession at the
inaugural ceremonies of the new president of the university.

I wonder why it is that when the stronger sex wishes to appear
particularly dignified and impressive, as on the bench or in the pulpit,
it likes to don female attire! No matter whether suffragists or
antis--they all do it. Now some of these paraders seemed as embarrassed
by their skirts as the weaker sex would be without them; but the way
Carl wore his new honors and his new doctor's hood attracted my
attention and held it. He seemed quite aware of the ridiculous aspect of
an awkward squad of pedagogues paraded like chorus girls before an
audience invited to watch the display; but, also, he actually enjoyed
the comedy of it--and that is a distinction when you are an actor in the
comedy! His quietly derisive strut altogether fascinated me. "Hurrah!
Aren't we fine!" he seemed to say.

As the long, self-conscious procession passed where I sat, smiling and
unnoticed, he suddenly looked up. His veiled twinkle happened to meet my
gaze. It passed over me, instantly returned and rested on ray eyes for
almost a second. Such a wonderful second for little me!... Not a gleam
of recollection. He had quite forgotten that our names had once been
pronounced to each other; but in that flashing instant he recognized, as
I did, that we two knew each other better than anyone else in the whole
assemblage.

The nicest smile in the world said as plainly as words, and all for me
alone: "Hurrah! You see it too!" Then, with that deliciously derisive
strut, he passed on, while something within me said: "There he is!--at
last! He is the one for you!" And I glowed and was glad.

Carl informed me afterward that he had a similar sensation, and that all
through the long platitudinous exercises my face was a great solace to
him.

"Whenever they became particularly tiresome," he said, "I looked at
you--and bore up."

I was not unaware that he was observing me; nor was I surprised when,
at the end of the exhausting ordeal, he broke through the crowd--with
oh, such dear impetuosity!--and asked my uncle to present him, while I,
trembling at his approach, looked in the other direction, for I felt the
crimson in my cheeks--I who had been out three seasons! Then I turned
and raised my eyes to his, and he, too, colored deeply as he took my
hand.

We saw no comedy in what followed.

There was plenty of comedy, only we were too romantic to see it. At the
time it seemed entirely tragic to me that my people, though of the sort
classified as cultured and refined, deploring the materialistic tendency
of the age, violently objected to my caring for this wonderful being,
who brilliantly embodied all they admired in baccalaureate sermons and
extolled in Sunday-school.

It was not despite but because of that very thing that they opposed the
match! If only he had not so ably curbed his materialistic tendencies
they would have been delighted with this well-bred young man, for his
was an even older family than ours, meaning one having money long enough
to breed contempt for making it. Instead of a fortune, however, merely a
tradition of _noblesse oblige_ had come down to him, like an unwieldy
heirloom. He had waved aside a promising opening in his cousin's
bond-house on leaving college and invested five important years, as well
as his small patrimony, in hard work at the leading universities abroad
in order to secure a thorough working capital for the worst-paid
profession in the world.

"If there were only some future in the teaching business!" as one of my
elder brothers said; "but I've looked into the proposition. Why, even a
full professor seldom gets more than four thousand--in most cases less.
And it will be years before your young man is a full professor."

"I can wait," I said.

"But a girl like you could never stand that kind of life. You aren't
fitted for it. You weren't brought up to be a poor man's wife."

"Plenty of tune to learn while waiting," I returned gayly enough, but
heartsick at the thought of the long wait.

Carl, however, quite agreed with my brothers and wanted impetuously to
start afresh in pursuit of the career in Wall Street he had forsworn,
willing and eager--the darling!--to throw away ambition, change his
inherited tastes, abandon his cultivated talents, and forget the five
years he had "squandered in riotous learning," as he put it!

However, I was not willing--for his sake. He would regret it later.
They always do. Besides, like Carl, I had certain unuttered ideals about
serving the world in those days. We still have. Only now we better
understand the world. Make no mistake about this. Men are just as noble
as they used to be. Plenty of them are willing to sacrifice
themselves--but not us. That is why so few of the sort most needed go in
for teaching and preaching in these so-called materialistic days.

What was the actual, material result of my lover's having taken
seriously the advice ladled out to him by college presidents and other
evil companions of his innocent youth, who had besought him not to seek
material gain?

At the time we found each other he was twenty-seven years of age and had
just begun his career--an instructor in the economics department, with a
thousand-dollar salary. That is not why he was called an economist; but
can you blame my brothers for doing their best to break the
engagement?... I do not--now. It was not their fault if Carl actually
practiced what they merely preached. Should Carl be blamed? No; for he
seriously intended never to marry at all--until he met me. Should I be
blamed? Possibly; but I did my best to break the engagement too--and
incidentally both our hearts--by going abroad and staying abroad until
Carl--bless him!--came over after me.

I am not blaming anybody. I am merely telling why so few men in
university work, or, for that matter, in most of the professions
nowadays, can support wives until after the natural mating time is past.
By that time their true mates have usually wed other men--men who can
support them--not the men they really love, but the men they tell
themselves they love! For, if marriage is woman's only true career, it
is hardly true to one's family or oneself not to follow it before it is
too late--especially when denied training for any other--even though she
may be equally lacking in practical training for the only career open to
her.

This sounds like a confession of personal failure due to the typical
unpreparedness for marriage of the modern American girl. I do not think
anyone could call our marriage a personal failure, though socially it
may be. During the long period of our engagement I became almost as well
prepared for my lifework as Carl was for his. Instead of just waiting in
sweet, sighing idleness I took courses in domestic science, studied
dietetics, mastered double-entry and learned to sew. I also began
reading up on economics. The latter amused the family, for they thought
the higher education of women quite unwomanly and had refused to let me
go to college.

It amused Carl too, until I convinced him that I was really interested
in the subject, not just in him; then he began sending me boxes of books
instead of boxes of candy, which made the family laugh and call me
strong-minded. I did not care what they called me. I was too busy making
up for the time and money wasted on my disadvantageous advantages, which
may have made me more attractive to men, but had not fitted me to be the
wife of any man, rich or poor.

All that my accomplishments and those of my sisters actually
accomplished, as I see it now, was to kill my dear father; for, though
he made a large income as a lawyer, he had an even larger family and
died a poor man, like so many prominent members of the bar.

I shall not dwell on the ordeal of a long engagement. It is often made
to sound romantic in fiction, but in realistic life such an unnatural
relationship is a refined atrocity--often an injurious one--except to
pseudo-human beings so unreal and unromantic that they should never be
married or engaged at all. I nearly died; and as for Carl--well,
unrequited affection may be good for some men, but requited affection in
such circumstances cannot be good for any man--if you grant that
marriage is!

A high-strung, ambitious fellow like Carl needed no incentive to make
him work hard or to keep him out of mischief, any more than he needed a
prize to make him do his best at tennis or keep him from cheating in the
score. What an ignoble view of these matters most good people accept! In
point of fact he had been able to do more work and to play better tennis
before receiving this long handicap--in short, would have been in a
position to marry sooner if he had not been engaged to marry! This may
sound strange, but that is merely because the truth is so seldom told
about anything that concerns the most important relationship in life.

Nevertheless, despite what he was pleased to call his inspiration, he
won his assistant professorship at an earlier age than the average, and
we were married on fifteen hundred a year.

Oh, what a happy year! I am bound to say the family were very nice about
it. Everyone was nice about it. And when we came back from our wedding
journey the other professors' wives overwhelmed me with kindness and
with calls--and with teas and dinners and receptions in our honor. Carl
had been a very popular bachelor and his friends were pleased to treat
me quite as if I were worthy of him. This was generous, but disquieting.
I was afraid they would soon see through me and pity poor Carl.

I had supposed, like most outsiders, that the women of a university town
would be dreadfully intellectual and modern--and I was rather in awe of
them at first, being aware of my own magnificent limitations; but, for
the most part, these charming new friends of mine, especially the
wealthier members of the set I was thrown with, seemed guilelessly
ignorant in respect of the interesting period of civilization in which
they happened to live--almost as ignorant as I was and as most "nice
people" are everywhere.

Books sufficiently old, art sufficiently classic, views sufficiently
venerable to be respectable--these interested them, as did foreign
travel and modern languages; but ideas that were modern could not be
nice because they were new, though they might be nice in time--after
they became stale. College culture, I soon discovered, does not care
about what is happening to the world, but what used to happen to it.

"You see, my dear," Carl explained, with that quiet, casual manner so
puzzling to pious devotees of "cultureine"--and even to me at first,
though I adored and soon adopted it! "--universities don't lead
thought--they follow it. In Europe institutions of learning may
be--indeed, they frequently are--hotbeds of radicalism; in America our
colleges are merely featherbeds for conservatism to die in respectably."
Then he added: "But what could you expect? You see, we are still
intellectually _nouveaux_ over here, and therefore self-consciously
correct and imitative, like the _nouveaux riches_. So long as you have a
broad _a_ you need never worry about a narrow mind."

As for the men, I had pictured the privilege of sitting at their feet
and learning many interesting things about the universe. Perhaps they
were too tired to have their feet encumbered by ignorant young women;
for when I ventured to ask questions about their subject their answer
was--not always--but in so many cases a solemn owllike "yes-and-no" that
I soon learned my place. They did not expect or want a woman to know
anything and preferred light banter and persiflage. I like that, too,
when it is well done; but I was accustomed to men who did it better.

I preferred the society of their wives. I do not expect any member of
the complacent sex to believe this statement--unless I add that the men
did not fancy my society, which would not be strictly true; but, even if
not so intellectual as I had feared, the women of our town were far more
charming than I had hoped, and when you cannot have both cleverness and
kindness the latter makes a more agreeable atmosphere for a permanent
home. I still consider them the loveliest women in the world.

In short my only regret about being married was that we had wasted so
much of the glory of youth apart. Youth is the time for love, but not
for marriage! Some of our friends among the instructors marry on a
thousand a year, even in these days of the high cost of living; and I
should have been so willing to live as certain of them do--renting
lodgings from a respectable artisan's wife and doing my own cooking on
her stove after she had done hers.

Carl gave me no encouragement, however! Perhaps it was just as well; for
when first engaged I did not know how to cook, though I was a good
dancer and could play Liszt's Polonaise in E flat with but few mistakes.

As it turned out we began our wedded life quite luxuriously. We had a
whole house to ourselves--and sometimes even a maid! In those days there
were no flats in our town and certain small but shrewd local capitalists
had built rows of tiny frame dwellings which they leased to assistant
professors, assistant plumbers, and other respectable people of the same
financial status, at rates which enabled them--the owners, not the
tenants--to support charity and religion.

They were all alike--I refer to the houses now, not to all landlords
necessarily--with a steep stoop in front and a drying yard for Monday
mornings in the rear, the kind you see on the factory edges of great
cities--except that ours were cleaner and were occupied by nicer people.

One of our next-door neighbors was a rising young butcher with his bride
and the house on the other side of us was occupied by a postman, his
progeny, and the piercing notes of his whistle--presumably a cast-off
one--on which all of his numerous children, irrespective of sex or age,
were ambitiously learning their father's calling, as was made clear
through the thin dividing wall, which supplied visual privacy but did
not prevent our knowing when they took their baths or in what terms they
objected to doing so. It became a matter of interesting speculation to
us what Willie would say the next Saturday night; and if we had
quarreled they, in turn, could have--and would have--told what it was
all about.

"Not every economist," Carl remarked whimsically, "can learn at first
hand how the proletariat lives."

I, too, was learning at first hand much about my own profession. My
original research in domestic science was sound in theory, but I soon
discovered that my dietetic program was too expensive in practice.
Instead of good cuts of beef I had to select second or third quality
from the rising young butcher, who, by the way, has since risen to the
dignity of a touring car. Instead of poultry we had pork, for this was
before pork also rose.

My courses in bookkeeping, however, proved quite practical; and I may
say that I was a good purchasing agent and general manager from the
beginning of our partnership, instead of becoming one later through
bitter experience, like so many young wives brought up to be ladies, not
general houseworkers.

Frequently I had a maid, commonly called along our row the "gurrul"--and
quite frequently I had none; for we could afford only young beginners,
who, as soon as I had trained them well, left me for other mistresses
who could afford to pay them well.

"Oh, we should not accuse the poor creatures of ingratitude," I told
Carl one day. "Not every economist can learn at first hand the law of
supply and demand."

If, however, as my fashionable aunt in town remarked, we were
picturesquely impecunious--which, to that soft lady, probably meant
that, we had to worry along without motor cars--we were just as
desperately happy as we were poor; for we had each other at least. Every
other deprivation seemed comparatively easy or amusing.

Nor were we the only ones who had each other--and therefore poverty.
Scholarship meant sacrifice, but all agreed that it was the ideal life.

To be sure, some members of the Faculty--or their wives--had independent
means and could better afford the ideal life. They were considered noble
for choosing it. Some of the alumni who attended the great games and the
graduating exercises were enormously wealthy, and gave the interest of
their incomes--sometimes a whole handful of bonds at a time--to the
support of the ideal life.

Was there any law compelling them to give their money to their Alma
Mater? No--just as there was none compelling men like Carl to give their
lives and sacrifice their wives. These men of wealth made even greater
sacrifices. They could have kept in comfort a dozen wives apiece--modest
ones--on what they voluntarily preferred to turn over to the dear old
college. Professors, being impractical and visionary, cannot always see
these things in their true proportions.

We, moreover, in return for our interest in education, did we not
shamelessly accept monthly checks from the university treasurer's
office? It was quite materialistic in us. Whereas these disinterested
donors, instead of receiving checks, gave them, which is more blessed.
And were they not checks of a denomination far larger than those we
selfishly cashed for ourselves? Invariably. Therefore our princely
benefactors were regarded not only as nobler but as the Nobility.

Indeed, the social stratification of my new home, where the excellent
principles of high thinking and plain living were highly recommended for
all who could not reverse the precept, struck me, a neophyte, as for all
the world like that of a cathedral town in England, except that these
visiting patrons of religion and learning were treated with a reverence
and respect found only in America. Surely it must have amused them, had
they not been so used to it; for they were quite the simplest, kindest,
sweetest overrich people I had ever met in my own country--and they
often took pains to tell us broad-mindedly that there were better things
than money. Their tactful attempts to hide their awful affluence were
quite appealing--occasionally rather comic. Like similarly conscious
efforts to cover evident indigence, it was so palpable and so
unnecessary.

"There, there!" I always wanted to say--until I, too, became accustomed
to it. "It's all right. You can't help it."

It was dear of them all the same, however, and I would not seem
ungrateful for their kind consideration. After all, how different from
the purse-proud arrogance of wealth seen in our best--selling--fiction,
though seldom elsewhere.

For the most part they were true gentlefolk, with the low voices and
simple manners of several generations of breeding; and I liked them, for
the most part, very much--especially certain old friends of our parents,
who, I learned later, were willing to show their true friendship in more
ways than Carl and I could permit.

One is frequently informed that the great compensation for underpaying
the college professor is in the leisure to live--_otium cum dignitate_
as returning old grads call it when they can remember their Latin,
though as most of them cannot they call it a snap.

Carl, by the way, happened to be the secretary of his class, and his
popularity with dear old classmates became a nuisance in our tiny home.
I remember one well-known bachelor of arts who answered to the name of
Spud, a rather vulgar little man. Comfortably seated in Carl's study one
morning, with a cigar in his mouth, Spud began:

"My, what a snap! A couple of hours' work a day and three solid months'
vacation! Why, just see, here you are loafing early in the morning! You
ought to come up to the city! Humph! I'd show you what real work means."

Now my husband had been writing until two o'clock the night before, so
that he had not yet made preparation for his next hour. It was so early
indeed that I had not yet made the beds. Besides, I had heard all about
our snap before and it was getting on my nerves.

"Carl would enjoy nothing better than seeing you work," I put in when
the dear classmate finished; "but unfortunately he cannot spare the
time."

Spud saw the point and left; but Carl, instead of giving me the thanks I
deserved, gave me the first scolding of our married life! Now isn't that
just like a husband?

Of course it can be proved by the annual catalogue that the average
member of the Faculty has only about twelve or fourteen hours of
classroom work a week--the worst-paid instructor more; the highest-paid
professor less. What a university teacher gives to his students in the
classroom, however, is or ought to be but a rendering of what he
acquires outside, as when my distinguished father tried one of his
well-prepared cases in court. Every new class, moreover, is a different
proposition, as I once heard my brother say of his customers.

That is where the art of teaching comes in and where Carl excelled. He
could make even the "dismal science," as Carlyle called economics,
interesting, as was proved by the large numbers of men who elected his
courses, despite the fact that he made them work hard to pass. Nor does
this take into account original research and the writing of books like
Carl's scholarly work on The History of Property, on which he had been
slaving for three solid summers and hundreds of nights during termtime;
not to speak of attending committee meetings constantly, and the furnace
even more constantly. The latter, like making beds, is not mentioned in
the official catalogue. I suppose such details would not become one's
dignity.

As in every other occupation, some members of the Faculty do as little
work as the law requires; but most of them are an extremely busy lot,
even though they may, when it suits their schedule better, take exercise
in the morning instead of the afternoon--an astonishing state of affairs
that always scandalizes the so-called tired business man.

As for Carl, I was seeing so little of him except at mealtimes that I
became rather piqued at first, being a bride. I felt sure he did not
love me any more!

"Do you really think you have a right to devote so much time to outside
work?" I asked one evening when I was washing the dishes and he was
starting off for the university library to write on his great book.--It
was the indirect womanly method of saying: "Oh, please devote just a
little more time to me!"--"You ought to rest and be fresh for your
classroom work," I added.

Being a man he did not see it.

"The way to advance in the teaching profession," he answered, with his
veiled twinkle, "is to neglect it. It doesn't matter how poorly you
teach, so long as you write dull books for other professors to read.
That's why it is called scholarship--because you slight your scholars."

"Oh, I'm sick of all this talk about scholarship!" I cried. "What does
it mean anyway?"

"Scholarship, my dear," said Carl, "means finding out all there is to
know about something nobody else cares about, and then telling it in
such a way that nobody else can find out. If you are understood you are
popular; if you are popular you are no scholar. And if you're no
scholar, how can you become a full professor? Now, my child, it is all
clear to you."

And, dismissing me and the subject with a good-night kiss, he brushed
his last year's hat and hurried off, taking the latchkey.

So much for _otium_.

"But where does the dignity come in?" I asked Carl one day when he was
sharpening his lawnmower and thus neglecting his lawn tennis; for, like
a Freshman, I still had much to learn about quaint old college customs.

"Why, in being called p'fessor by the tradesmen," said Carl. "Also in
renting a doctor's hood for academic pee-rades at three dollars a
pee-rade, instead of buying a new hat for the rest of the year. Great
thing--dignity!"

He chuckled and began to cut the grass furiously, reminding me of a
thoroughbred hunter I once saw harnessed to a plow.

"P'fessors of pugilism and dancing," he went on gravely, "haven't a bit
more dignity than we have. They merely have more money. Just think!
There isn't a butcher or grocer in this town who doesn't doff his hat to
me when he whizzes by in his motor--even those whose bills I haven't
paid. It's great to have dignity. I don't believe there's another place
in the world where he who rides makes obeisance to him who walks. Much
better than getting as high wages as a trustee's chauffeur! A salary is
so much more dignified than wages."

He stopped to mop his brow, looking perfectly dignified.

"And yet," he added, egged on by my laughter, for I always loved his
quiet irony--it was never directed at individuals, but at the ideas and
traditions they blandly and blindly followed--

"And yet carping critics of the greatest nation on earth try to make out
that art and intellectuality are not properly recognized in the States.
Pessimists! Look at our picture galleries, filled with old masters from
abroad! Think how that helps American artists! Look at our colleges,
crowded with buildings more costly than Oxford's! Think how that
encourages American teachers! Simply because an occasional foreign
professor gets higher pay--bah! There are better things than money. For
example, this!"

And he bent to his mower again, with much the same derisively dignified
strut as on that memorable day long ago when I came and saw and was
conquered by it--only then he wore black silk sleeves and now white
shirtsleeves.

And so much for dignity.

I soon saw that if I were to be a help and not a hindrance to the man I
loved I should have to depart from what I had been carefully trained to
regard as woman's only true sphere. Do not be alarmed! I had no thought
of leaving home or husband. It is simply that the home, in the
industrial sense, is leaving the house--seventy-five per cent of it
social scientists say, has gone already--so that nowadays a wife must go
out after it or else find some new-fashioned productive substitute if
she really intends to be an old-fashioned helpmate to her husband.

It was not a feminist theory but a financial condition that confronted
us. My done-over trousseau would not last forever, nor would Carl's
present intellectual wardrobe, which was becoming threadbare. Travel
abroad and foreign study are just as necessary for an American scholar
as foreign buying is for an American dealer in trousseaus.

I thought of many plans; but in a college town a woman's opportunities
are so limited. We are not paid enough to be ladies, though we are
required to dress and act like them--do not forget that point. And yet,
when willing to stop being a lady, what could one do?

Finally I thought of dropping entirely out of the social, religious and
charitable activities of the town, investing in a typewriter and
subscribing to a correspondence-school course in stenography. I could at
least help Carl prepare his lectures and relieve him of the burden of
letter writing, thus giving him more time for book reviewing and other
potboiling jobs, which were not only delaying his own book but making
him burn the candle at both ends in the strenuous effort to make both
ends meet.

I knew Carl would object, but I had not expected such an outburst of
profane rage as followed my announcement. The poor boy was dreadfully
tired, and for months, like the thoroughbred he was, he had repressed
his true feelings under a quiet, quizzical smile.

"My heavens! What next?" he cried, jumping up and pacing the floor.
"Haven't you already given up everything you were accustomed to--every
innocent pleasure you deserve--every wholesome diversion you actually
need in this God-forsaken, monotonous hole? Haven't I already dragged
you down--you, a lovely, fine-grained, highly evolved woman--down to the
position of a servant in my house? And now, on top of all this--No, by
God! I won't have it! I tell you I won't have it!"

It may be a shocking confession, but I loved him for that wicked oath.
He looked so splendid--all fire and furious determination, as when he
used to rush up to the net in the deciding game of a tennis match, cool
and quick as lightning.

"You are right, Carl dear," I said, kissing his profane lips; for I had
learned long since never to argue with him. "I am too good to be a mere
household drudge. It's an economic waste of superior ability. That's why
I am going to be your secretary and save you time and money enough to
get and keep a competent maid."

"But I tell you--"

"I know, dear; but what are we going to do about it? We can't go on this
way. They've got us down--are we going to let them keep us down? Look
into the future! Look at poor old Professor Culberson. Look at half of
the older members of the Faculty! They have ceased to grow; their
usefulness is over; they are all gone to seed--because they hadn't the
courage or the cash to develop anything but their characters!"

Carl looked thoughtful. He had gained an idea for his book and, like a
true scholar, forgot for the moment our personal situation.

"Really, you know," he mused, "does it pay Society to reward its
individuals in inverse ratio to their usefulness?" He took out his
pocket notebook and wrote: "Society itself suffers for rewarding that
low order of cunning called business sense with the ultimate control of
all other useful talents." He closed his notebook and smiled.

"And yet they call the present economic order safe and sane! And all of
us who throw the searchlight of truth on it--dangerous theorists! Can
you beat it?"

"Well," I rejoined, not being a scholar, "there's nothing dangerous
about my theory. Instead of your stenographer becoming your wife, your
wife becomes your stenographer--far safer and saner than the usual
order. Men are much more apt to fall in love with lively little
typewriters than with fat, flabby wives."

Though it was merely to make a poor joke out of a not objectionable
necessity, my plan, as it turned out, was far wiser than I realized.

First, I surreptitiously card-catalogued the notes and references for
Carl's "epoch-making book," as one of the sweet, vague wives of the
Faculty always called her husband's volumes, which she never read. Then
I learned to take down his lectures, to look up data in the library, to
verify quotations, and even lent a hand in the book reviewing.

Soon I began to feel more than a mere consumer's interest--a producer's
interest--in Carl's work. And then a wonderful thing happened: My
husband began to see--just in time, I believe--that a wife could be more
than a passive and more or less desirable appendage to a man's life--an
active and intelligent partner in it. And he looked at me with a new and
wondering respect, which was rather amusing, but very dear.

He had made the astonishing discovery that his wife had a mind!

Years of piano practice had helped to make my fingers nimble for the
typewriter, and for this advantage I was duly grateful to the family's
old-fashioned ideals, though I fear they did not appreciate my
gratitude. Once, when visiting them during the holidays, I was
laughingly boasting, before some guests invited to meet me at luncheon,
about my part in the writing of Carl's History of Property, which had
been dedicated to me and was now making a sensation in the economic
world, though our guests in the social world had never heard of it.

Suddenly I saw a curious, uncomfortable look come over the faces of the
family. Then I stopped and remembered that nowadays wives--nice wives,
that is--are not supposed to be helpmates to their husbands except in
name; quite as spinsters no longer spin. They can help him spend. At
that they are truly better halves, but to help him earn is not nice. To
our guests it could mean only one thing--namely, that my husband could
not afford a secretary. Well, he could not. What of it?

For a moment I had the disquieting sensation of having paraded my
poverty--a form of vulgarity that Carl and I detest as heartily as a
display of wealth.

The family considerately informed me afterward, however, that they
thought me brave to sacrifice myself so cheerfully. Dear me! I was not
being brave. I was not being cheerful. I was being happy. There is no
sacrifice in working for the man you love. And if you can do it with
him--why, I conceitedly thought it quite a distinction. Few women have
the ability or enterprise to attain it!

One of my sisters who, like me, had failed to "marry well" valeted for
her husband; but somehow that seemed to be all right. For my part I
never could see why it is more womanly to do menial work for a man than
intellectual work with him. I have done both and ought to know.... Can
it be merely because the one is done strictly in the home or because no
one can see you do it? Or is it merely because it is unskilled labor?

It is all right for the superior sex to do skilled labor, but a true
womanly woman must do only unskilled labor, and a fine lady none at
all--so clothed as to prevent it and so displayed as to prove it, thus
advertising to the world that the man who pays for her can also pay for
secretaries and all sorts of expensive things. Is that the old idea?

If so I am afraid most college professors' wives should give up the
old-fashioned expensive pose of ladyhood and join the new womanhood!

Well, as it turned out, we were enabled to spend our sabbatical year
abroad--just in time to give Carl a new lease of life mentally and me
physically; for both of us were on the verge of breaking down before we
left.

Such a wonderful year! Revisiting his old haunts; attending lectures
together in the German and French universities; working side by side in
the great libraries; and meeting the great men of his profession at
dinner! Then, between whiles, we had the best art and music thrown in!
Ah, those are the only real luxuries we miss and long for! Indeed, to
us, they are not really luxuries. Beauty is a necessity to some persons,
like exercise; though others can get along perfectly well without it
and, therefore, wonder why we cannot too.

Carl's book had already been discovered over there--that is perhaps the
only reason it was discovered later over here--and every one was so kind
about it. We felt quite important and used to wink at each other across
the table. "Our" book, Carl always called it, like a dear. His work was
my work now--his ambitions, my ambitions; not just emotionally or
inspirationally, but intellectually, collaboratively. And that made our
emotional interest in each other the keener and more satisfying. We had
fallen completely in love with each other. For the first time we two
were really one. Previously we had been merely pronounced so by a
clergyman who read it out of a book.

Oh, the glory of loving some one more than oneself! And oh, the
blessedness of toiling together for something greater and more important
than either! That is what makes it possible for the other thing to
endure--not merely for a few mad, glad years, followed by drab duty and
dull regret, but for a happy lifetime of useful vigor. That, and not
leisure or dignity, is the great compensation for the professorial life.

What a joy it was to me during that rosy-sweet early period of our union
to watch Carl, like a proud mother, as he grew and exfoliated--like a
plant that has been kept in a cellar and now in congenial soil and
sunshine is showing at last its full potentialities. Through me my boy
was attaining the full stature of a man; and I, his proud mate, was
jealously glad that even his dear dead mother could not have brought
that to pass.

His wit became less caustic; his manner more genial. People who once
irritated now interested him. Some who used to fear him now liked him.
And as for the undergraduates who had hero-worshiped this former tennis
champion, they now shyly turned to him for counsel and advice. He was
more of a man of the world than most of his colleagues and treated the
boys as though they were men of the world too--for instance, he never
referred to them as boys.

"I wouldn't be a damned fool if I were you," I once overheard him say to
a certain young man who was suffering from an attack of what Carl called
misdirected energy.

More than one he took in hand this way; and, though I used to call
it--to tease him--his man-to-man manner, I saw that it was effective. I,
too, grew fond of these frank, ingenuous youths. We used to have them at
our house when we could spare an evening--often when we could not.

None of this work, it may be mentioned, is referred to in the annual
catalogue or provided for in the annual budget; and yet it is often the
most vital and lasting service a teacher renders his students--especially
when their silly parents provide them with more pocket money than the
professor's entire income for the support of himself, his family, his
scholarship and his dignity.

"Your husband is not a professor," one of them confided shyly to
me--"he's a human being!"

After the success of our book we were called to another college--a full
professorship at three thousand a year! Carl loved his Alma Mater with a
passion I sometimes failed to understand; but he could not afford to
remain faithful to her forever on vague promises of future favor. He
went to the president and said so plainly, hating the indignity of it
and loathing the whole system that made such methods necessary.

The president would gladly have raised all the salaries if he had had
the means. He could not meet the competitor's price, but he begged Carl
to stay, offering the full title--meaning empty--of professor and a
minimum wage of twenty-five hundred dollars, with the promise of full
pay when the funds could be raised.

Now we had demonstrated that, even on the Faculty of an Eastern college,
two persons could live on fifteen hundred. Therefore, with twenty-five
hundred, we could not only exist but work efficiently. So we did not
have to go.

       *       *       *       *       *

I look back on those days as the happiest period of our life together.
That is why I have lingered over them. Congenial work, bright prospects,
perfect health, the affection of friends, the respect of rivals--what
more could any woman want for her husband or herself?

Only one thing. And now that, too, was to be ours! However, with
children came trouble, for which--bless their little hearts!--they are
not responsible. Were we? I wonder! Had we a right to have children? Had
we a right not to have children? It has been estimated by a member of
the mathematical department that, at the present salary rate, each of
the college professors of America is entitled to just two-fifths of a
child.

Does this pay? Should only the financially fit be allowed to survive--to
reproduce their species? Should or should not those who may be fittest
physically, intellectually and morally also be entitled to the privilege
and responsibility of taking their natural part in determining the
character of America's future generations, for the evolution of the race
and the glory of God?

I wonder!

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Boston Transcript_)

A PARADISE FOR A PENNY

MADDENED BY THE CATALOGUES OF PEACE-TIME, ONE LOVER OF GARDENS YET
MANAGED TO BUILD A LITTLE EDEN, AND TELLS HOW HE DID IT FOR A SONG

By WALTER PRICHARD EATON

War-time economy (which is a much pleasanter and doubtless a more
patriotically approved phrase than war-time poverty) is not without its
compensations, even to the gardener. At first I did not think so.
Confronted by a vast array of new and empty borders and rock steps and
natural-laid stone, flanking a wall fountain, and other features of a
new garden ambitiously planned before the President was so inconsiderate
as to declare war without consulting me, and confronted, too, by an
empty purse--pardon me, I mean by the voluntarily imposed necessity for
economy--I sat me down amid my catalogues, like Niobe amid her children,
and wept. (Maybe it wasn't amid her children Niobe wept, but for them;
anyhow I remember her as a symbol of lachrymosity.) Dear, alluring,
immoral catalogues, sweet sirens for a man's undoing! How you sang to me
of sedums, and whispered of peonies and irises--yea, even of German
irises! How you spoke in soft, seductive accents of wonderful lilacs,
and exquisite spireas, and sweet syringas, murmurous with bees! How you
told of tulips and narcissuses, and a thousand lovely things for beds
and borders and rock work--at so much a dozen, so very much a dozen,
and a dozen so very few! I did not resort to cotton in my ears, but to
tears and profanity.

Then two things happened. I got a letter from a Boston architect who had
passed by and seen my unfinished place; and I took a walk up a back road
where the Massachusetts Highway Commissioners hadn't sent a gang of
workmen through to "improve" it. The architect said, "Keep your place
simple. It cries for it. That's always the hardest thing to do--but the
best." And the back-country roadside said, "Look at me; I didn't come
from any catalogue; no nursery grew me; I'm really and truly 'perfectly
hardy'; I didn't cost a cent--and can you beat me at any price? I'm a
hundred per cent American, too."

I looked, and I admitted, with a blush of shame for ever doubting, that
I certainly could not beat it. But, I suddenly realized, I could steal
it!

I have been stealing it ever since, and having an enormously enjoyable
time in the bargain.

Of course, stealing is a relative term, like anything else connected
with morality. What would be stealing in the immediate neighborhood of a
city is not even what the old South County oyster fisherman once
described as "jest pilferin' 'round," out here on the edges of the
wilderness. I go out with the trailer hitched to the back of my Ford,
half a mile in any direction, and I pass roadsides where, if there are
any farmer owners of the fields on the other side of the fence, these
owners are only too glad to have a few of the massed, invading plants or
bushes thinned out. But far more often there is not even a fence, or if
there is, it has heavy woods or a swamp or a wild pasture beyond it. I
could go after plants every day for six months and nobody would ever
detect where I took them. My only rule--self-imposed--is never to take a
single specimen, or even one of a small group, and always to take where
thinning is useful, and where the land or the roadside is wild and
neglected, and no human being can possibly be injured. Most often,
indeed, I simply go up the mountain along, or into, my own woods.

I am not going to attempt any botanical or cultural description of what
I am now attempting. That will have to wait, anyhow, till I know a
little more about it myself! But I want to indicate, in a general way,
some of the effects which are perfectly possible, I believe, here in a
Massachusetts garden, without importing a single plant, or even sowing a
seed or purchasing any stock from a nursery.

Take the matter of asters, for instance. Hitherto my garden, up here in
the mountains where the frosts come early and we cannot have anemone,
japonica, or chrysanthemums, has generally been a melancholy spectacle
after the middle of September. Yet it is just at this time that our
roadsides and woodland borders are the most beautiful. The answer isn't
alone asters, but very largely. And nothing, I have discovered, is much
easier to transplant than a New England aster, the showiest of the
family. Within the confines of my own farm or its bordering woods are at
least seven varieties of asters, and there are more within half a mile.
They range in color from the deepest purple and lilac, through shades of
blue, to white, and vary in height from the six feet my New Englands
have attained in rich garden soil, to one foot. Moreover, by a little
care, they can be so massed and alternated in a long border (such a
border I have), as to pass in under heavy shade and out again into full
sun, from a damp place to a dry place, and yet all be blooming at their
best. With what other flower can you do that? And what other flower, at
whatever price per dozen, will give you such abundance of beauty without
a fear of frosts? I recently dug up a load of asters in bud, on a rainy
day, and already they are in full bloom in their new garden places,
without so much as a wilted leaf.

Adjoining my farm is an abandoned marble quarry. In that quarry, or,
rather, in the rank grass bordering it, grow thousands of Solidago
rigida, the big, flat-topped goldenrod. This is the only station for it
in Berkshire County. As the ledges from this quarry come over into my
pastures, and doubtless the goldenrod would have come too, had it not
been for the sheep, what could be more fitting than for me to make this
glorious yellow flower a part of my garden scheme? Surely if anything
belongs in my peculiar soil and landscape it does. It transplants
easily, and under cultivation reaches a large size and holds its bloom a
long time. Massed with the asters it is superb, and I get it by going
through the bars with a shovel and a wheelbarrow.

But a garden of goldenrod and asters would be somewhat dull from May to
mid-August, and somewhat monotonous thereafter. I have no intention, of
course, of barring out from my garden the stock perennials, and, indeed,
I have already salvaged from my old place or grown from seed the
indispensable phloxes, foxgloves, larkspur, hollyhocks, sweet william,
climbing roses, platycodons and the like. But let me merely mention a
few of the wild things I have brought in from the immediate
neighborhood, and see if they do not promise, when naturally planted
where the borders wind under trees, or grouped to the grass in front of
asters, ferns, goldenrod and the shrubs I shall mention later, a kind of
beauty and interest not to be secured by the usual garden methods.

There are painted trilliums, yellow and pink lady's slippers, Orchis
spectabilis, hepaticas, bloodroot, violets, jack-in-the-pulpit, masses
of baneberries, solomon's seal, true and false; smooth false foxglove,
five-flowered and closed gentians, meadow lilies (Canadensis) and wood
lilies (Philadelphicum), the former especially being here so common that
I can go out and dig up the bulbs by the score, taking only one or two
from any one spot. These are but a few of the flowers, blooming from
early spring to late fall, in the borders, and I have forgotten to
mention the little bunch berries from my own woods as an edging plant.

Let me turn now for a moment to the hedge and shrubbery screen which
must intervene between my west border and the highway, and which is the
crux of the garden. The hedge is already started with hemlocks from the
mountain side, put in last spring. I must admit nursery in-grown
evergreens are easier to handle, and make a better and quicker growth.
But I am out now to see how far I can get with absolutely native
material. Between the hedge and the border, where at first I dreamed of
lilacs and the like, I now visualize as filling up with the kind of
growth which lines our roads, and which is no less beautiful and much
more fitting. From my own woods will come in spring (the only safe time
to move them) masses of mountain laurel and azalea. From my own pasture
fence-line will come red osier, dogwood, with its white blooms, its blue
berries, its winter stem-coloring, and elderberry. From my own woods
have already come several four-foot maple-leaved vibernums, which,
though moved in June, throve and have made a fine new growth. There will
be, also, a shadbush or two and certainly some hobble bushes, with here
and there a young pine and small, slender canoe birch. Here and there
will be a clump of flowering raspberry. I shall not scorn spireas, and I
must have at least one big white syringa to scent the twilight; but the
great mass of my screen will be exactly what nature would plant there if
she were left alone--minus the choke cherries. You always have to
exercise a little supervision over nature!

A feature of my garden is to be rock work and a little, thin stream of a
brooklet flowing away from a wall fountain. I read in my catalogues of
marvellous Alpine plants, and I dreamed of irises by my brook. I shall
have some of both too. Why not? The war has got to end one of these
days. But meanwhile, why be too down-hearted? On the cliffs above my
pasture are masses of moss, holding, as a pincushion holds a breastpin,
little early saxifrage plants. From the crannies frail hair bells dangle
forth. There are clumps of purple cliffbrase and other tiny, exquisite
ferns. On a gravel bank beside the State road are thousands of viper's
bugloss plants; on a ledge nearby is an entire nursery of Sedum acre
(the small yellow stone crop). Columbines grow like a weed in my mowing,
and so do Quaker ladies, which, in England, are highly esteemed in the
rock garden. The Greens Committee at the nearby golf club will certainly
let me dig up some of the gay pinks which are a pest in one of the high,
gravelly bunkers. And these are only a fraction of the native material
available for my rock work and bank. Many of them are already in and
thriving.

As for the little brook, any pond edge or brookside nearby has
arrowheads, forget-me-nots, cardinal flowers, blue flag, clumps of
beautiful grasses, monkey flowers, jewel-weed and the like. There are
cowslips, too, and blue vervain, and white violets. If I want a clump of
something tall, Joe-pye-weed is not to be disdained. No, I do not
anticipate any trouble about my brookside. It will not look at all as I
thought a year ago it was going to look. It will not look like an
illustration in some "garden beautiful" magazine. It will look
like--like a brook! I am tremendously excited now at the prospect of
seeing it look like a brook, a little, lazy, trickling Yankee brook. If
I ever let it look like anything else, I believe I shall deserve to have
my spring dry up.

Probably I shall have moments of, for me, comparative affluence in the
years to come, when I shall once more listen to the siren song of
catalogues, and order Japanese irises, Darwin tulips, hybrid lilacs, and
so on. But by that time, I feel sure, my native plants and shrubs will
have got such a start, and made such a luxuriant, natural tangle, that
they will assimilate the aliens and teach them their proper place in a
New England garden. At any rate, till the war is over, I am 100 per cent
Berkshire County!

       *       *       *       *       *

WANTED: A HOME ASSISTANT

(_Pictorial Review_)

One illustration made by a staff artist, with the caption, "The New Home
Assistant is Trained for Her Work."

WANTED: A HOME ASSISTANT

BUSINESS HOURS AND WAGES ARE HELPING WOMEN TO SOLVE THE SERVANT PROBLEM

BY LOUISE F. NELLIS

WANTED: A HOME ASSISTANT--Eight hours a day; six days a week. Sleep and
eat at home. Pay, twelve dollars a week.

Whenever this notice appears in the Help Wanted column of a city
newspaper, fifty to one hundred answers are received in the first
twenty-four hours!

"Why," we hear some one say, "that seems impossible! When I advertised
for a maid at forty dollars a month with board and lodging provided, not
a soul answered. Why are so many responses received to the other
advertisement?"

Let us look more closely at the first notice.

Wanted: A Home Assistant! How pleasant and dignified it sounds; nothing
about a general houseworker or maid or servant, just Home Assistant! We
can almost draw a picture of the kind of young woman who might be called
by such a title. She comes, quiet, dignified, and interested in our home
and its problems. She may have been in an office but has never really
liked office work and has always longed for home surroundings and home
duties.

I remember one case I was told of--a little stenographer. She had gladly
assumed her new duties as Home Assistant, and had wept on the first
Christmas Day with the family because it was the only Christmas she had
spent in years in a home atmosphere. Or perhaps the applicant for the
new kind of work in the home may have been employed in a department
store and found the continuous standing on her feet too wearing. She
welcomes the frequent change of occupation in her new position. Or she
may be married with a little home of her own, but with the desire to add
to the family income. We call these Home Assistants, Miss Smith or Mrs.
Jones, and they preserve their own individuality and self-respect.

"Well, I would call my housemaid anything if I could only get one,"
says one young married woman. "There must be more to this new plan than
calling them Home Assistants and addressing them as Miss."

Let us read further in the advertisement: "Eight hours a day; six days a
week." One full day and one half day off each week, making a total of
forty-four hours weekly which is the standard working week in most
industrial occupations. At least two free Sundays a month should be
given and a convenient week-day substituted for the other two Sundays.
If Saturday is not the best half day to give, another afternoon may be
arranged with the Home Assistant.

"Impossible," I can hear Mrs. Reader say, "I couldn't get along with
eight hours' work a day, forty-four hours a week." No! Well, possibly
you have had to get along without any maid at all, or you may have had
some one in your kitchen who is incompetent and slovenly, whom you dare
not discharge for fear you can not replace her. Would you rather not
have a good interested worker for eight hours a day than none at all?
During that time the Home Assistant works steadily and specialization is
done away with. She is there to do your work and she does whatever may
be called for. If she is asked to take care of the baby for a few hours,
she does it willingly, as part of her duties; or if she is called upon
to do some ironing left in the basket, she assumes that it is part of
her work, and doesn't say, "No, Madam, I wasn't hired to do that," at
the same time putting on her hat and leaving as under the old system.

The new plan seems expensive? "Twelve dollars a week is more than I have
paid my domestic helper," Mrs. Reader says. But consider this more
carefully. You pay from thirty-five to fifty dollars a month with all
the worker's food and lodging provided. This is at the rate of eight to
eleven dollars a week for wages. Food and room cost at least five
dollars a week, and most estimates are higher. The old type of
houseworker has cost us more than we have realized. The new system
compares favorably in expense with the old.

"I am perfectly certain it wouldn't be practical not to feed my helper,"
Mrs. Reader says. Under the old system of a twelve to fourteen-hour
working day, it would not be feasible, but if she is on the eight-hour
basis, the worker can bring a box-luncheon with her, or she can go
outside to a restaurant just as she would if she were in an office or
factory. The time spent in eating is not included in her day's work.
Think of the relief to the house-keeper who can order what her family
likes to eat without having to say, "Oh, I can't have that; Mary
wouldn't eat it you know."

"I can't afford a Home Assistant or a maid at the present wages," some
one says. "But I do wish I had some one who could get and serve dinner
every night. I am so tired by evening that cooking is the last straw."

Try looking for a Home Assistant for four hours a day to relieve you of
just this work. You would have to pay about a dollar a day or six
dollars a week for such service and it would be worth it.

How does the Home Assistant plan work in households where two or more
helpers are kept? The more complicated homes run several shifts of
workers, coming in at different hours and covering every need of the
day. One woman I talked to told me that she studied out her problem in
this way! She did every bit of the work in her house for a while in
order to find out how long each job took. She found, for instance, that
it took twenty-five minutes to clean one bathroom, ten minutes to brush
down and dust a flight of stairs, thirty minutes to do the dinner
dishes, and so on through all the work. She made out a time-card which
showed that twenty-two hours of work a day was needed for her home. She
knew how much money she could spend and she proceeded to divide the work
and money among several assistants coming in on different shifts. Her
household now runs like clockwork. One of the splendid things about this
new system is its great flexibility and the fact that it can be adapted
to any household.

Thoughtful and intelligent planning such as this woman gave to her
problems is necessary for the greatest success of the plan. The old
haphazard methods must go. The housekeeper who has been in the habit of
coming into her kitchen about half past five and saying, "Oh, Mary, what
can we have for dinner? I have just come back from down-town; I did
expect to be home sooner," will not get the most out of her Home
Assistant. Work must be scheduled and planned ahead, the home must be
run on business methods if the system is to succeed. I heard this
explained to a group of women not long ago. After the talk, one of them
said, "Well, in business houses and factories there is a foreman who
runs the shop and oversees the workers. It wouldn't work in homes
because we haven't any foreman." She had entirely overlooked her job as
forewoman of her own establishment!

"Suppose I have company for dinner and the Home Assistant isn't through
her work when her eight hours are up, what happens?" some one asks. All
overtime work is paid for at the rate of one and one-half times the
hourly rate. If you are paying your assistant twelve dollars for a
forty-four-hour week, you are giving her twenty-eight cents an hour. One
and one half times this amounts to forty-two cents an hour, which she
receives for extra work just as she would in the business world.

"Will these girls from offices and stores do their work well? They have
had no training for housework unless they have happened to do some in
their own homes," some one wisely remarks. The lack of systematic
preparation has always been one of the troubles with our domestic
helpers. It is true that the new type of girl trained in business to be
punctual and alert, and to use her mind, adapts herself very quickly to
her work, but the trained worker in any field has an advantage. With
this in mind the Central Branch of the Young Women's Christian
Association in New York City has started a training-school for Home
Assistants. The course provides demonstrations on the preparation of
breakfasts, lunches, and dinners, and talks on the following:
House-cleaning, Laundry, Care of Children, Shopping, Planning work,
Deportment, Efficiency, and Duty to Employer. This course gives a girl a
general knowledge of her duties and what is even more important she
acquires the right mental attitude toward her work. The girls are given
an examination and those who successfully pass it are given a
certificate and placed as Trained Home Assistants at fifteen dollars a
week.

The National Association would like to see these training-schools
turning out this type of worker for the homes all over the country. This
is a constructive piece of work for women to undertake. Housewives'
Leagues have interested themselves in this in various centers, and the
Y.W.C.A. will help wherever it can. There are always home economics
graduates in every town who could help give the course, and there are
excellent housekeepers who excel in some branch who could give a talk or
two.

The course would be worth a great deal in results to any community. The
United States Employment Bureaus are also taking a hand in this, and,
with the co√∂peration of the High Schools, are placing girls as trained
assistants on the new basis. I have talked with many women who are not
only using this plan to-day but have been for several years.

It has been more than six years ago since Mrs. Helene Barker's book
"Wanted a Young Woman to Do Housework" was published.

This gave the working plan to the idea. Women in Boston, Providence,
New York, Cleveland, and in many other cities have become so
enthusiastic over their success in running their homes with the Home
Assistants that a number are giving their time to lecturing and talking
to groups of women about it.

Let me give two concrete illustrations of the practical application of
housework on a business basis.

Mrs. A. lives in a small city in the Middle West. Her household consists
of herself, her husband, and her twelve year old son. She had had the
usual string of impossible maids or none at all until she tried the new
system. Through a girls' club in a factory in the city, she secured a
young woman to work for her at factory hours and wages. Her assistant
came at seven-thirty in the morning. By having the breakfast cereal
prepared the night before, breakfast could be served promptly at eight,
a plan which was necessary in order that the boy get to school on time.
Each morning's work was written out and hung up in the kitchen so that
the assistant wasted no time in waiting to know what she had to do.
Lunch was at twelve-fifteen, and at one o'clock the Home Assistant went
home.

She came back on regular duty at five-thirty to prepare and serve the
dinner. Except for times when there were guests for dinner she was
through her work by eight. When she worked overtime, there was the extra
pay to compensate. Mrs. A. paid her thirteen dollars a week and felt
that she saved money by the new plan. The assistant was off duty every
other Sunday, and on alternate weeks was given all day Tuesday off
instead of Sunday. Tuesday was the day the heavy washing was done and
the laundress was there to help with any work which Mrs. A. did not feel
equal to doing. Even though there are times in the day when she is
alone, Mrs. A. says she would not go back to the old system for
anything.

Mrs. B. lives in a city apartment. There are four grown people in the
family. She formerly kept two maids, a cook-laundress, and a
waitress-chambermaid. She often had a great deal of trouble finding a
cook who would do the washing. As her apartment had only one maid's
room, she had to give one of the guestrooms to the second maid. She paid
these girls forty dollars apiece and provided them with room and board.
Her apartment cost her one hundred and fifteen dollars a month for seven
rooms, two of which were occupied by maids.

Mrs. B. decided to put her household on the new business basis last
Fall. She moved into a five-room apartment which cost her ninety
dollars, but she had larger rooms and a newer building with more
up-to-date improvements than she had had before. She saved twenty-five
dollars a month on rent plus eighty dollars wages and about thirty
dollars on her former maids' food. All together she had one hundred and
thirty-five dollars which could be used for Home Assistants. This is the
way the money was spent:

  A laundress once a week................................ $2.60
  Home Assistant, on duty from 7.30 A.M. to 2 P.M........ 10.00
  Home Assistant, on duty from 12 M. to 9 P.M............ 15.00
                                                          _____
      Week...............................................$27.60

On this schedule the work was done better than ever before. There was no
longer any grievance about the washing. Mrs. B. had some one
continuously on duty. The morning assistant was allowed a half hour at
noon to eat her luncheon which she brought with her. As Mrs. B.
entertained a great deal, especially at luncheon, she arranged to have
the schedule of the two assistants overlap at this time of day. The
morning worker, it will be noted, was employed for only six hours. The
afternoon worker was a trained assistant and, therefore, received
fifteen dollars a week. She had an hour off, between three-thirty and
four-thirty and was on duty again in time to serve tea or afternoon
refreshments. If there were a number of extra people for dinner, the
assistant was expected to stay until nine and there was never any
complaining about too much company. Mrs. B. has a better apartment and
saves money every month besides!

       *       *       *       *       *

(_New York Sun_)

SIX YEARS OF TEA ROOMS

BUSINESS CAREER OF A WOMAN COLLEGE GRADUATE

"For the last three years I have cleared $5,000 a year on my tea rooms,"
declared a young woman who six years ago was graduated with distinction
at one of the leading colleges of the country.

"I attained my twenty-third birthday a month after I received my
diploma. On that day I took stock of the capital with which I was to
step into the world and earn my own living. My stock taking showed
perfect health, my college education and $300, my share of my father's
estate after the expenses of my college course had been paid.

"In spite of the protests of many of my friends I decided to become a
business woman instead of entering one of the professions. I believed
that a well conducted tea room in a college town where there was nothing
of the kind would pay well, and I proceeded to open a place.

"After renting a suitable room I invested $100 in furnishings. Besides
having a paid announcement in the college and town papers I had a
thousand leaflets printed and distributed.

"Though I couldn't afford music I did have my rooms decorated profusely
with flowers on the afternoon of my opening. As it was early in the
autumn the flowers were inexpensive and made a brave show. My only
assistant was a young Irish woman whom I had engaged for one month as
waitress, with the understanding that if my venture succeeded I would
engage her permanently.

"We paid expenses that first afternoon, and by the end of the week the
business had increased to such an extent that I might have engaged a
second waitress had not so many of my friends persisted in shaking their
heads and saying the novelty would soon wear off. During the second week
my little Irish girl and I had so much to do that on several occasions
our college boy patrons felt themselves constrained to offer their
services as waiters, while more than one of the young professors after a
long wait left the room with the remark that they would go elsewhere.

"Of course it was well enough to laugh as we all knew there was no
'elsewhere,' but when I recalled how ready people are to crowd into a
field that has proved successful, I determined no longer to heed the
shaking heads of my friends. The third week found me not only with a
second assistant but with a card posted in a conspicuous place
announcing that at the beginning of the next week I would enlarge my
quarters in such a way as to accommodate more than twice as many guests.

"Having proved to my own satisfaction that my venture was and would be
successful, I didn't hesitate to go into debt to the extent of $150.
This was not only to repair and freshen up the new room but also to
equip it with more expensive furnishing than I had felt myself justified
in buying for the first.

"Knowing how every little thing that happens is talked about in a
college town, I was sure the difference in the furnishings of the rooms
would prove a good advertisement. I counted on it to draw custom, but
not just in the way it did.

"Before I realized just what was happening I was receiving letters from
college boys who, after proclaiming themselves among my very first
customers, demanded to know why they were discriminated against. I had
noticed that everybody appeared to prefer the new room and that on
several occasions when persons telephoning for reservations had been
unable to get the promise of a table in there, they had said they would
wait and come at another time. What I had not noticed was that only men
coming alone or with other men, and girls coming with other girls, would
accept seats in the first room.

"I learned from the letters of 'my very first patrons' that no gentleman
would take a girl to have tea in a second class tea room. They were not
only hitting at the cheaper furnishings of my first room but also at the
waiter whom I had employed, because I felt the need of a man's help in
doing heavy work. The girl in her fresh apron and cap was more
attractive than the man, and because he happened to serve in the first
room he also was second class.

"No, I couldn't afford to buy new furniture for that room, so I did the
only thing I could think of. I mixed the furniture in such a way as to
make the two rooms look practically alike. I hired another girl and
relegated the man to the kitchen except in case of emergency.

"Although my custom fell off in summer to a bare sprinkling of guests
afternoons and evenings and to almost no one at lunch, I kept the same
number of employees and had them put up preserves, jams, syrups, and
pickles for use the coming season. I knew it would not only be an
economical plan but also a great drawing card, especially with certain
of the professors, to be able to say that everything served was made on
the place and under my own supervision.

"My second winter proved so successful that I determined to buy a home
for my business so that I might have things exactly as I wished. I was
able to pay the first instalment, $2,500, on the purchase price and
still have enough in bank to make alterations and buy the necessary
furnishings.

"The move was made during the summer, and when I opened up in the autumn
I had such crowds afternoons and evenings that I had to put extra tables
in the halls until I could get a room on the second floor ready. At
present I have two entire floors and often have so many waiting that it
is next to impossible to pass through the entrance hall.

"Three summers ago I opened a second tea room at a seashore resort on
the New England coast. I heard of the place through a classmate whose
family owned a cottage down there. She described it as deadly dull,
because there was nothing to do but bathe and boat unless you were the
happy possessor of an automobile or a horse.

"I was so much interested in her description of the place that I went
down one warm day in April and looked things over. I found a stretch of
about three miles of beach lined with well appearing and handsome
cottages and not a single place of amusement. The village behind the
beach is a lovely old place, with twenty or more handsome old homes
surrounded by grand trees. There are two or three small stores, a post
office, two liveries and the railroad station half a mile away.

"Before I left that afternoon I had paid the first month's rent on the
best of the only two cottages to be rented on the beach. Of course it
needed considerable fixing up and that had to be done at my own expense,
but as I was getting it at a rental of $200 for the season I was not
worried at the outlay. The cottages told me enough of the character of
the people who summered on that beach to make me sure that I would get
good interest on all the money spent.

"Immediately after commencement I shut up my college tea rooms, leaving
only the kitchen and storeroom open and in charge of an experienced
woman with instructions to get more help when putting up preserves and
pickles made it necessary. Then I moved.

"The two first days on the beach my tea room didn't have a visitor.
People strolled by and stared at the sign, but nobody came in to try my
tea. The third day I had a call from my landlord, who informed me that
he had been misled into letting me have his cottage, and offering to
return the amount paid for the first month's rent, he very politely
requested me to move out.

"After considerable talking I discovered that the cottagers didn't like
the way my waitresses dressed. They were too stylish and my rooms
appeared from the outside to be so brilliantly lighted that they thought
I intended to sell liquor.

"I didn't accept the offered rent, neither did I agree to move out, but
I did assure my landlord that I would go the very day anything really
objectionable happened on my premises. I told him of my success in the
college town and then invited him to bring his family the following
afternoon to try my tea.

"Well, they came, they saw, and I conquered. That evening all the tables
on my piazza were filled and there was a slight sprinkling indoors. A
few days later the classmate who had told me of the place came down for
the summer and my troubles were at an end.

"The secret of my success is hard work and catering to the taste of my
patrons. Had I opened either a cheap or a showy place in the college
town, I would not have gained the good will of the faculty or the
patronage of the best class of students. If my prices had been too high
or the refreshments served not up to the notch, the result would not
have been so satisfactory.

"Knowing one college town pretty well, I knew just about what was needed
in the student's life; that is, an attractive looking place, eminently
respectable, where you can take your best girl and get good things to
eat well served at a reasonable cost.

"The needs of the beach were pretty much the same. People can't stay in
the water all the time, neither can they spin around the country or go
to an unlighted village at night in their carriages and automobiles. My
tea room offers a recreation, without being a dissipation.

"Another point about which many people question me is the effect of my
being a business woman on my social standing. I haven't noticed any
slights. I receive many more invitations than it is possible for me to
accept. I go with the same set of girls that I did while I was in
college.

"Two of my classmates are lawyers, more than one is a doctor, and three
have gone on the stage. I know that my earnings are far more than any of
theirs, and I am sure they do not enjoy their business any more than I
do. If I had to begin again I would do exactly as I have done, with one
exception--I would lay out the whole of my $300 in furnishing that first
tea room instead of keeping $75 as a nest egg in bank."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Country Gentleman_)

Two illustrations:
  1. Half-tone reproducing photograph of dressed chickens with
     the caption, "There is this rule you must observe: Pick your
     chickens clean."
  2. Reproduction in type of shipping label.

BY PARCEL POST

ONE MAN'S WAY OF SERVING THE DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKET

By A. L. SARRAN

If you live within a hundred and fifty miles of a city, if you possess
ordinary common sense and have the ability to write a readable and
understandable letter, you may, from September to April of each year,
when other farmers and their wives are consuming instead of producing,
earn from fifty to a hundred and fifty dollars net profit each month.
You may do this by fattening and dressing chickens for city folks, and
by supplying regularly fresh country sausage, hams, lard and eggs.

This is not an idle theory. Last September I began with one customer;
today--this was written the end of March--I have nearly 500 customers to
whom I am supplying farm products by parcel post.

Instead of selling my chickens to the huckster or to the local poultry
house for twelve cents a pound, I am selling them to the consumer in the
city for twenty cents a pound, live weight, plus the cost of boxing and
postage. Not only that, I am buying chickens from my neighbors at a
premium of one to two cents over the huckster's prices, "milk feeding"
them, and selling them to my city customers at a profit of six to seven
cents a pound.

I buy young hogs from my neighbors at market prices and make them into
extra good country sausage that nets me twenty-five cents a pound in the
city, and into hams for which I get twenty-five cents a pound,
delivered. The only pork product on which I do not make an excellent
profit is lard. I get fifteen cents a pound for it, delivered to the
city customer, and it costs me almost that much to render and pack it.

At this writing storekeepers and egg buyers in my county are paying the
farmer seventeen cents for his eggs. I am getting twenty-five cents a
dozen for eggs in thirty-dozen eases and twenty-nine cents a dozen in
two-dozen boxes. My prices to the city man are based upon the Water
Street, Chicago, quotation for "firsts," which, at this writing, is
nineteen cents. If this price goes up I go up; if it goes down I go
down.

I got my customers by newspaper advertising--almost exclusively. It is a
comforting belief that one satisfied customer will get you another, and
that that customer will get you another, and so on, but it has not so
worked out in my experience. Out of all my customers less than twelve
have become customers through the influence of friends.

My experience has taught me another thing: That direct advertising does
not pay. By direct advertising I mean the mailing of letters and
circulars to a list of names in the hope of selling something to persons
whose names are on that list.

I tried it three times--once to a list of names I bought from a dealer
in such lists; once to a list that I myself compiled from the society
columns of two Chicago dailies; and once to a classified list that I
secured from a directory.

The results in these cases were about the same. The net cost of each new
customer that I secured by circulars and letters was $2.19. The net cost
of each new customer that I secured by newspaper advertising was
fifty-four cents.

Not every city newspaper will get such results. In my case I selected
that paper in Chicago which in my judgment went into the greatest number
of prosperous homes, and whose pages were kept clean of quack and
swindling advertisements. I used only the Sunday issues, because I
believe the Sunday issues are most thoroughly read.

The farmer will want to use, and properly so, the classified columns of
the paper for his advertising. But he should patronize only that paper
whose columns provide a classification especially for farm and food
products.

I spent twelve dollars for advertising in one clean Chicago daily with a
good circulation, and got three orders. The trouble was that my
advertisement went into a column headed "Business Personals," along with
a lot of manicure and massage advertising.

He on the farm who proposes to compete with the shipper, commission man
and retailer for the city man's trade should devote his efforts to
producing food of a better quality than the city man is accustomed to
get via the shipper-commission-man-retailer route. Wherefore I proposed
to give the city man the fattest, tenderest, juiciest, cleanest,
freshest chicken he could get--and charge him a profitable price in so
doing.

When I wrote my advertisements I did not stint myself for space. An
advertisement that tells no reason why the reader should buy from the
advertiser is, in my opinion, a poor advertisement. Therefore, I told my
story in full to the readers of the Sunday paper, although it cost me
six cents a word to do it. Here is a sample of my advertising:

    I send young, milk-fed chickens, ready for the cook, direct to you
    from the farm. These chickens are fattened in wire-bottomed,
    sanitary coops, thus insuring absolute cleanliness, on a ration of
    meal, middlings and milk. The chicken you get from me is fresh; it
    is killed AFTER your order is received; is dressed, drawn, cooled
    out for 24 hours in dry air, wrapped in waxed paper and delivered to
    you on the morning of the third day after your order is mailed; it
    is fat, tender and sweet. The ordinary chicken that is fattened on
    unspeakable filth in the farmer's barnyard, and finds its way to
    your table via the huckster-shipper-commission-man-retailer route
    cannot compare with one of mine. Send me your check--no stamps--for
    $1.15 and I will send you a five-pound--live-weight--roasting
    chicken for a sample. If it does not please you I'll give your money
    back. Add 62 cents to that check and I'll mail you in a separate box
    a two-pound package of the most delicious fresh-ground sausage meat
    you ever ate. Made from the selected meats of young hogs only; not
    highly seasoned. These sausage cakes make a breakfast fit for a
    President. Money back if you don't like them.

    A. L. SARRAN.

Notice that I told why the reader should buy one of my chickens rather
than a chicken of whose antecedents he knew nothing. That it paid to
spend six cents a word to tell him so is proved by the fact that this
particular advertisement brought me, in four days, twenty-three orders,
each accompanied by a check. I repeated my advertisements in Sunday
issues, stopping only when I had as many customers as I could take care
of.

Getting a customer and keeping him are two different propositions. A
customer's first order is sent because of the representation made in the
advertisement that he read. His second and his subsequent orders depend
upon how you satisfy him and continue to satisfy him.

My rule is to select, weigh, dress, draw, handle, wrap and box the
chicken with the same scrupulous care that I would exercise if the
customer were actually present and watching me.

I have another rule: The customer is always right. If he complains I
satisfy him, immediately and cheerfully. It is better to lose a chicken
than to lose a customer.

I am now about to make a statement with which many of my readers will
not agree. It is more than true; it is so important that the success of
a mail-order business in dressed chickens depends upon a realization of
it. It is this: _A majority of farmers and their wives do not know what
constitutes a fat chicken._

I make this statement because of the experience I have had with country
folks in buying their chickens for my feeding coops. If they really
consider to be fat the chickens which they have assured me were fat,
then they do not know fat chickens. A chicken can be fat to a degree
without being so fat as he can or should be made for the purpose of
marketing.

There is a flavor about a well-fattened, milk-fed chicken that no other
chicken has. Every interstice of his flesh is juicy and oily. No part of
him is tough, stringy muscle, as is the case if he is "farm-fattened"
while being allowed to range where he will.

If you think your chicken is a fat one, pick it up and rub the ball of
your thumb across its backbone about an inch behind the base of the
wings. If the backbone is felt clearly and distinctly the chicken is not
fat.

I fatten my chickens in coops the floors of which are made of heavy wire
having one-inch mesh; underneath the wire is a droppings pan, which is
emptied every day. My coops are built in tiers and long sections. I have
ninety of them, each one accommodating nine chickens. I have enough
portable feeding coops with wire bottoms and droppings pans underneath
to enable me to feed, in all, about one thousand chickens at one time.

Chickens should be fed from ten to fourteen days in the coops. I give no
feed whatever to the chicken the first day he is in the coop, but I keep
a supply of sour milk in the trough for him. I feed my chickens three
times a day.

At seven A.M. I give them a fairly thick batter of meal, middlings or
oat flour, about half and half, and sour milk. I feed them only what
they will clean up in the course of half an hour. At noon I feed them
again only what they will clean up in half an hour. This feed is the
same as the morning feed except that it is thinner. About four o'clock I
give them a trough full of the same feed, but so thick it will barely
pour out from the bucket into the trough.

The next morning the troughs are emptied--if anything remains in
them--into the big kettle where the feed is mixed for the morning
feeding. The idea is this: More fat and flesh are made at night than in
the daytime; therefore see that no chicken goes to bed with an empty
crop.

About the eighth to tenth day force the feeding--see to it that the
chicken gets all it will eat three times a day.

By keeping an accurate account of the costs of meal, milk, and so on, I
find that I can put a pound of fat on a coop-fed chicken for seven
cents. When one considers that this same pound brings twenty cents, and
that milk feeding in coops raises the per pound value of the chicken
from twelve to twenty cents, one must admit that feeding chickens is
more profitable than feeding cattle.

Do not feed your chicken anything for twenty-four hours before killing
it. Do not worry about loss in weight. The only weight it will lose will
be the weight of the feed in its crop and gizzard, and the offal in its
intestines--and you are going to lose that anyway when you dress and
draw it. If you will keep the bird off feed for twenty-four hours you
will find that it will draw much more easily and cleanly.

Hang the chicken up by the feet and kill it by bleeding it away back in
the mouth. Let it bleed to death. Grasp the chicken's head in your left
hand, the back of its head against the palm of your hand. Do not hold it
by the neck, but grasp it by the bony part of its head and jaws. Reach
into the throat with a three-inch, narrow, sharp knife and cut toward
the top and front of the head.

You will sever the big cross vein that connects the two "jugular" veins
in the neck, and the blood will pour out of the mouth. If you know how
to dry-pick you will not need to be told anything by me; if you do not
know it will do you no good to have me tell you, because I do not
believe a person can learn to dry-pick chickens by following printed
instructions. At any rate, I could not. I never learned until I hired a
professional picker to come out from town to teach me.

So far as I can judge, it makes no difference to the consumer in the
city whether the chicken is scalded or dry-picked. There is this to be
said for the scalded chicken--that it is a more cleanly picked chicken
than the dry-picked one. The pin feathers are more easily removed when
the chicken is scalded.

On the other hand, there are those feed-specializing,
accurate-to-the-ten-thousandth-part-of-an-inch experts, who say that the
dry-picked chicken keeps better than the scalded one. If the weather is
warmer than, say, seventy-five degrees, it might; under that, there is
no difference.

I do the most of my selling in Chicago, and my place is a hundred and
fifty miles south of that city; if a scalded chicken will keep when I am
selling it that far away it will keep for almost anyone, because none of
you is going to sell many chickens at any point more than a hundred and
fifty miles from your place.

There is this caution to be observed in scalding a chicken: Do not have
the water too hot. I had trouble on this score, and as a result my
chickens were dark and did not present an appetizing appearance. Finally
I bought a candy thermometer--one that registered up to 400 degrees. By
experimenting I found that 180 degrees was the point at which a chicken
scalded to pick the easiest, but that a chicken scalded at 165 degrees
presented a better appearance after being picked and cooled. Whichever
method you use, observe this rule: Pick your chicken clean.

After my chicken has cooled out enough so the flesh will cut easily, I
draw it. I chop off the head close up, draw back the skin of the neck a
couple of inches, and then cut off the neck. The flap of skin thus left
serves to cover the bloody and unsightly stub of the neck. Next I open
up the chicken from behind and below the vent and pull out the
gizzard--if the chicken has been kept off feed for twenty-four hours the
empty crop will come with it--intestines and liver. I remove the gall
bladder from the liver, open and clean the gizzard, and replace it and
the liver in the chicken.

Then I cut a slit across the chicken just back of the keel of the breast
bone. I cut the feet off at the knee joint and slip the drumstick
through this slit. Then I lay the chicken up to cool out overnight. The
next morning it may be wrapped and boxed, and is then ready for mailing.

Wrapping and boxing must not be slighted. The clean, sanitary appearance
of the chicken when it is unpacked in the kitchen of your customer goes
a long way toward prejudicing that customer in your favor. I buy thirty
pounds of waxed paper, twenty-four by thirty-six inches, and have the
paper house cut it in two. This gives me 1000 sheets, each eighteen by
twenty-four inches, for the price of a ream of the full size--at this
time about five dollars, or a half cent a sheet.

Each chicken is wrapped in one sheet of this waxed paper, and is then
packed in a corrugated paper box made especially for sending chickens by
parcel post.

I buy three sizes of these boxes. One size, which costs me four cents
each, will hold one four-pound chicken when dressed and drawn. The next
size, costing five cents each, will hold two very small chickens, or one
large chicken. The third size, costing six cents each, will hold two
large chickens, three medium-sized ones, or four small ones.

Do not use makeshifts, such as old shoe boxes. In the first place, your
shipment is not properly protected by such a box; in the second place,
your postmaster is likely to refuse to accept it for mailing, as he
would be justified in doing; and in the third place, your customer
receives his chicken in a box that has been used for he wonders what,
and has been in he wonders what places.

It is for this reason that I never ask a customer to return a box to me.
I do not want to use a box a second time. If I were a city man, getting
my chickens by mail, I should want them sent to me in a brand-new box,
made for the special purpose of sending chickens by mail--and I'd want
them in no other box. Then I'd feel sure of them.

The cost of shipping by parcel post is low. I live ten miles from my
county seat, and the postage required to send a five-pound, live-weight
chicken, dressed and boxed, from my place to town is eight cents. The
postage required to send that same five-pound chicken from here to
Chicago, one hundred and fifty miles, is eight cents. The express
company charges twenty-six cents for the same service, and does not
deliver so quickly.

But parcel-post delivery was not always so admirably done in Chicago.
When I began shipping up there last September it was no uncommon thing
for my packages to be so delayed that many chickens would spoil.

I recall the "straw that broke the camel's back." I mailed twenty-six
chickens one day--and in due course I received thirteen letters, each
advising me of the same mournful event. The chicken had spoiled because
of delay in delivery. My wife wanted to quit. I didn't. I made good the
losses to the customers and prepared a label, a copy of which I
forwarded to the Third Assistant Postmaster General at Washington,
asking his permission to use it, and telling him of the vexatious and
expensive delays in delivering my packages in Chicago.

In due time I received the desired permission, and ordered the labels
printed. The scheme worked. Every time a package was not delivered on
schedule time the customer notified me, and I made complaint to the
postmaster at Chicago.

Gradually the service improved until now I have no trouble at all. If I
were to ship two packages today to the same address in Chicago, sending
one by parcel post and the other by express, I believe the parcel-post
package would be delivered first. At any rate, it has been done for me.

The weakness in the parcel-post delivery lies in the fact that
perishable products--such as dressed chickens--cannot be handled in warm
weather. I think that if the Post Office Department would cut some of
its red tape and permit the shipment of air-tight packages in air-tight
conveyors this particular problem could be solved.

You will, of course, have more or less correspondence with your
customers. By all means use your own letterheads, but do not let your
printer embellish them with cuts of roosters, chickens, pigs, or the
like. Not that we are ashamed of them; far be it from such. You do not,
however, need to have a sheet of paper littered up with pictures of
imaginary animals in order to convince your customer that you are
selling the meats of that animal. I like a plainly printed letterhead
that carries my name, my address and my business. That's all.

By all means keep books on your farm-to-table venture, if you undertake
it. Set down on one side of the page what you pay for boxes, labels,
postage, and so on, including what you pay yourself for chickens at your
huckster's prices. On the other side of the page set down what your city
customer pays you. Add up the pages, do a simple sum in subtraction, and
you will know just how much you have made.

If I kept only twenty-five hens I should sell my eggs and my chickens
direct to the city consumer. When the farmer learns to sell direct
instead of letting the huckster, the poultry house, the commission man,
the dresser and the retailer stand between him and the consumer, then
poultry raising will become really profitable.

There are too many folks who sell their eggs and "take it out in trade."

       *       *       *       *

_(Saturday Evening Post)_

One large illustration, a wash drawing, made by a staff artist.

SALES WITHOUT SALESMANSHIP

BY JAMES H. COLLINS

"Say, you're a funny salesman!" exclaimed the business man. "Here I make
up my own mind that I need two motor trucks and decide to buy 'em from
your company. Then I send for a salesman. You come down and spend a week
looking into my horse delivery, and now you tell me to keep my horses.
What kind of a salesman do you call yourself anyway?"

"What made you think you needed motor trucks?" was the counterquestion
of the serious, thick-spectacled young chap.

"Everyone else seems to be turning to gasoline delivery. I want to be up
to date."

"Your delivery problem lies outside the gasoline field," said the
salesman. "Your drivers make an average of ninety stops each trip. They
climb stairs and wait for receipts. Their rigs are standing at the curb
more than half the time. Nothing in gasoline equipment can compete with
the horse and wagon under such conditions. If you had loads of several
tons to be kept moving steadily I'd be glad to sell you two trucks."

"Suppose I wanted to buy them anyway?"

"We could not accept your order."

"But you'd make your commission and the company its profit."

"Yes; but you'd make a loss, and within a year your experience would
react unfavorably upon us."

So no sale was effected. Facts learned during his investigation of this
business man's delivery problem led the salesman to make suggestions
that eliminated waste and increased the effectiveness of his horse rigs.

About a year later, however, this business man sent for the salesman
again. He contemplated motorized hauling for another company of which he
was the president. After two days' study the salesman reported that
motor trucks were practicable and that he needed about five of them.

"All right--fill out the contract," directed the business man.

"Don't you want to know how these trucks are going to make you money?"
asked the salesman.

"No; if you say I need five trucks, then I know that's just what I
need!"

A new kind of salesmanship is being developed in many lines of
business--and particularly in the rebuilding of sales organizations made
necessary by the ending of the war and return to peace production.
"Study your goods," was the salesman's axiom yesterday. "Study your
customer's problem," is the viewpoint to-day; and it is transforming the
salesman and sales methods.

Indeed, the word salesman tends to disappear under this new viewpoint,
for the organization which was once charged largely with disposing of
goods may now be so intimately involved in technical studies of the
customers' problems that selling is a secondary part of its work. The
Sales Department is being renamed, and known as the Advisory Department
or the Research Staff; while the salesman himself becomes a Technical
Counsel or Engineering Adviser.

Camouflage? No; simply better expression of broader functions.

As a salesman, probably he gave much attention to the approach and
argument with which he gained his customer's attention and confidence.
But, with his new viewpoint and method of attack, perhaps the first step
is asking permission to study the customer's transportation needs, or
accounting routine, or power plant--or whatever section of the latter's
business is involved.

The experience of the thick-spectacled motor-truck salesman was typical.
Originally he sold passenger cars. Then came the war, with factory
facilities centered on munitions and motor trucks. There being no more
passenger cars to sell, they switched him over into the motor-truck
section. There he floundered for a while, trying to develop sales
arguments along the old lines. But the old arguments did not seem to
fit, somehow.

It might have been possible to demonstrate the superior construction of
his motor truck; but competitors would meet point with point, and
customers were not interested in technicalities anyway. He tried service
as an argument; but that was largely a promise of what motor trucks
would do for people after they bought them, and competitors could always
promise just as much, and a little more.

Company reputation? His company had a fine one--but motor-truck
purchasers wanted to know the cost of moving freight. Price? No argument
at all, because only one other concern made motor trucks calling for so
great an initial investment.

So Thick-Specs, being naturally serious and solid, began to dig into
motor trucks from the standpoint of the customer. He got permission to
investigate delivery outfits in many lines. Selling a five-ton motor
truck to many a business man was often equivalent to letting Johnny play
with a loaded machine gun. Such a vehicle combined the potentiality of
moving from fifty to seventy-five tons of freight daily, according to
routing and the number of hours employed; but it involved a daily
expense of twenty-five dollars.

The purchaser could lose money in two ways at swift ratios, and perhaps
unsuspectingly: He might not use his full hauling capacity each day or
would use it only half the year, during his busy season. Or he might
underestimate costs by overlooking such items as interest and
depreciation.

Thick-Specs' first actual sale was not a motor truck at all, but a
motorcycle, made by another company. Within three months, however, this
motorcycle added two big trucks to a fleet of one dozen operated by a
wholesale firm. That concern had good trucks, and kept them in a
well-equipped garage, where maintenance was good. But at least once
daily there would be a road breakdown. Usually this is a minor matter,
but it ties up the truck while its puzzled driver tries to locate the
trouble.

When a motorcycle was bought for the garage, drivers were forbidden to
tamper with machinery on the road--they telephoned in to the
superintendent. By answering each call on his own motorcycle--about an
hour daily--the repairman kept equipment in such good shape that
valuable extra service was secured from the fleet each day.

The salesman-adviser did not originate this scheme himself, but
discovered it in another concern's motor-truck organization; in fact,
this is the advantage the salesman-adviser enjoys--acquaintance with a
wide range of methods and the knack of carrying a good wrinkle from one
business to another. He brings the outside point of view; and, because
modern business runs toward narrow specialization, the outside point of
view is pretty nearly always welcome, provided it is honest and
sensible.

In another case he had to dig and invent to meet a peculiar situation.

There was a coal company working under a handicap in household
deliveries. Where a residence stood back from the sidewalk coal had
often to be carried from the motor truck in baskets. This kept the truck
waiting nearly an hour. A motor truck's time is worth several dollars
hourly. If the coal could have been dumped on the sidewalk and carried
in later, releasing the truck, that would have saved expense and made
more deliveries possible.

A city ordinance prohibited dumping coal on the sidewalk except by
permit. Coal men had never tried to have that ordinance changed. But the
salesman-adviser went straight to the city authorities and, by figures
showing the expense and waste involved, secured a modification, so that
his customer, the coal company, got a blanket permit for dumping coal
and gave bonds as an assurance against abuse of the privilege. Then a
little old last year's runabout was bought and followed the coal trucks
with a crew to carry the coal indoors, clearing sidewalks quickly.

This salesman-adviser's philosophy was as simple as it was sound.
Confidence is the big factor in selling, he reasoned. Your customer will
have confidence in you if he feels that you are square and also knows
what you are talking about. By diligent study of gasoline hauling
problems in various lines of business he gained practical knowledge and
after that had only to apply his knowledge from the customer's side of
the problem.

"Put it another way," he said: "Suppose you had a factory and expected
to run it only one year. There would not be time to get returns on a
costly machine showing economies over a five-year period; but if you
intended to run your factory on a five-year basis, then that machine
might be highly profitable.

"In sales work it was just the same; if you were selling for this year's
profit alone, you'd close every sale regardless of your customer's
welfare. Let the purchaser beware! But if you meant to sell on the
five-year basis, then confidence is the big investment, and the most
profitable sale very often one you refuse to make for immediate
results."

He had a fine following when the draft reached him; and during the eight
months he spent in an Army uniform he utilized his knowledge of gasoline
transportation as an expert in Uncle Sam's motor service. Upon being
discharged he returned to his job and his customers, and to-day the
concern with which he is connected is taking steps to put all its
motor-truck salesmen on this advisory basis.

War shot its sales force to pieces--the Army and the Navy reached out
for men and tied up production facilities; so there was nothing to sell.
But war also gave a clean slate for planning a new sales force.

As old salesmen return and new men are taken on for sales instruction,
this concern trains them--not with the old sales manual, by standard
approach and systematic sales argument, but by sending them out into the
field to study gasoline hauling problems. They secure permission to
investigate trucking methods of contractors, department stores,
wholesale merchants, coal dealers, truck owners hauling interstate
freight, mills, factories and other lines of business. They investigate
the kinds and quantities of stuff to be moved, the territory and roads
covered, the drivers, the garage facilities. They ride behind typical
loads and check up running time, delays, breakdowns, gasoline and oil
consumption.

Engineering teaches people to think in curves. This youngster had to
make a curve of the grocer's trucking before he could visualize it
himself. His curve included factors like increase in stuff that had been
hauled during the past three years and additions to the motor equipment.
When you have a healthy curve showing any business activity, the logical
thing to do, after bringing it right down to date, is to let it run out
into the future at its own angle. This was done with the grocery curve,
and its future extension indicated that not more than three months later
the grocery house would need about four more five-ton motor trucks.

Closer investigation of facts behind the curve revealed an unusual
growth in sugar hauling, due to the increase in supply and removal of
consumer war restrictions. And that grocery concern bought additional
trucks for sugar within two months. With the insight made possible by
such a curve a salesman might safely have ordered the trucks without his
customer's knowledge and driven them up to his door the day the curve
showed they were needed.

"Here are the trucks you wanted to haul that sugar."

"Good work! Drive 'em in!"

What has been found to be sound sales policy in the motor truck business
applies to many other lines. Yesterday the salesman of technical
apparatus sought the customer with a catalogue and a smile--and a large
ignorance of the technical problems. To-day that kind of selling is
under suspicion, because purchasers of technical equipment have been led
to buy on superficial selling points and left to work out for themselves
complex technicalities that belong to the manufacturer of the equipment.

In the West during recent years a large number of pumps of a certain
type have been sold for irrigating purposes. Purchasers bought from the
catalogue-and-smile type of salesman, hooked their pumps up to a power
plant--and found that they lifted only about half the number of gallons
a minute promised in the catalogue. Manufacturers honestly believed
those pumps would do the work indicated in their ratings. They had not
allowed for variations in capacity where pumps were installed under many
different conditions and run by different men. The situation called for
investigation at the customer's end; when it was discovered that these
pumps ought to be rated with an allowance for loss of capacity a half to
two-thirds of the power, due to friction and lost power.

It might have been dangerous for the salesman to show up again in an
irrigation district where a lot of his pumps were "acting up," armed
only with his catalogue and smile. But when an engineer appeared from
the pump company to help customers out of their difficulties, he won
confidence immediately and made additional sales because people felt
that he knew what he was talking about.

The superintendent of a big machinery concern found that his expense for
cutting oils was constantly rising. Salesmen had followed salesmen,
recommending magic brands of the stuff; yet each new barrel of oil
seemed to do less work than the last--and cost more in dollars.

One day a new kind of visitor showed up and sent in the card of a large
oil company. He was not a salesman, but an investigator of oil problems.
The superintendent took him through the plant. He studied the work being
done by screw-cutting machines, lathes and other equipment operated with
cutting oil. Where salesmen had recommended brands without technical
knowledge of either the work to be done or the composition of the oil,
this stranger wrote specifications that cut down the percentage of
costly lard oil used on some work; and he eliminated it altogether on
others.

Moreover, he pointed out sheer losses of oil by picking up a handful of
metal cuttings from a box, letting them drip, measuring the oil that
accumulated and recommending a simple device for reclaiming that oil
before the waste metal was sold.

This new viewpoint in selling is developing in so many lines that to
enumerate them would be to make a national directory of business
concerns manufacturing milling machinery, office devices, manufacturing
and structural materials, equipment for the farm and the mine.

People who purchase such products have been accustomed to meeting two
different representatives of manufacturers: First, the salesman skilled
in selling, but deficient in technical knowledge.

"This chap is here to see how much he can get out of me," said the
prospective consumer to himself; and he was on his guard to see that the
visitor got as little as possible, either in the way of orders or
information.

The other representative came from the mechanical department to see how
present equipment was running, or perhaps to "shoot trouble." He was
long on technical knowledge, but probably dumb when it came to
salesmanship.

"This fellow is here to help me out of my troubles," said the customer.
"I'll see how much I can get out of him."

Presently manufacturers of equipment woke up to the fact that their
mechanical men--inspectors and trouble shooters--had a basis of
confidence which the salesman pure and simple was rapidly losing.
Moreover, the technical man gained a knowledge of the customer's
requirements that furnished the best foundation for selling new
equipment.

The salesman discovered the technical man and went to him for tips on
new equipment needed by customers whose plants he had visited. The
technical man also discovered the salesman, for it was plain enough that
equipment well sold--skillfully adjusted to the customer's needs--gave
the least margin for trouble shooting.

So there has been a meeting of minds; and to-day the salesman studies
the technicalities, and the technical man is learning salesmanship, and
their boss is standing behind them both with a new policy. This is the
policy of performance, not promises--service before sales. Under that
policy the very terms salesmanship and sales department are beginning to
disappear, to be replaced by new nomenclature, which more accurately
indicates what a manufacturer's representative can do for the customer,
and gives him access to the latter on the basis of confidence and good
will.

       *       *       *       *       *

_(Munsey's Magazine)_

THE ACCIDENT THAT GAVE US WOOD-PULP PAPER

HOW A MIGHTY MODERN INDUSTRY OWED ITS BEGINNING TO GOTTFRIED KELLER AND
A WASP

BY PARKE F. HANLEY

On the day when President Wilson was inaugurated to his second term,
this country had its fiftieth anniversary of the introduction of
wood-pulp. Were it not for a series of lucky chances that developed into
opportunity, this wood-pulp anniversary might have remained for our
children's children.

Have you ever given thought to the accidentalism of many great
discoveries? The element of haphazard is generally combined with a
series of coincidences. Looking back over the developments that led to
gigantic contributions to our civilization, one cannot fail to be struck
by the coordination of events. Apparently there always has been a
conspiracy of natural forces to compel men of thought and
resourcefulness to add another asset to progress.

Your earliest school readers have been full of these--for instance, Watt
and his steam-kettle, Franklin and his kite. Now the youngsters are
reading that the Wrights derived a fundamental principle of
aviation--the warping-tip--from the flight of crows. With the awe comes
a disquieting thought. How far back should we be were it not for these
fortuitous circumstances?

Among all the great things that have been given to the world in the last
three-quarters of a century, few measure beside the wood-pulp industry.
With its related trades and sciences, it is comprised within the ten
great activities of mankind. In manufacture and distribution, it employs
an army matching in size the Russian battle hordes. Its figures of
investment and production are comparable to the debts of the great war.

Yet it remained for a wasp and Gottfried Keller to bring us out of the
era of rag paper. Together, they saved us from a retardation of
universal thought. Therefore, let us consider the agents.

First, the wasp. She was one of a family of several hundreds, born in
the Hartz Mountains in the year 1839. When death claimed most of her
relatives at the end of the season allotted as the life of a wasp, this
survivor, a queen wasp, became the foundress of a family of her own.
She built her nest of selected wood-fibers, softened them to a pulp with
her saliva, and kneaded them into cells for her larv√¶. Her family came
forth in due course, and their young wings bore them out into the world.
The nest, having served its purpose, was abandoned to the sun and the
rain.

Maeterlinck, who attributes emotions to plants and souls to bees, might
wrap a drama of destiny about this insect. She would command a leading
place in a cast which included the butterfly that gave silk to the
world, the mosquito that helped to prove the germ theory of disease, and
the caterpillar that loosed the apple which revealed the law of
gravitation to Sir Isaac Newton.

As to Keller, he was a simple German, by trade a paper-maker and by
avocation a scientist of sorts. One day in 1840--and this marks the
beginning of the accidents--returning home from his mill, he trod upon
the abandoned nest. Had not the tiny dwelling been deserted, he probably
would have cherished nothing but bitter reflections about the
irascibility of wasps. As it was, he stooped to see the ruin he had
wrought.

The crushed nest lay soft in his hand, soft and pliable, and yet tough
in texture. It was as soft as his own rag-made paper. It was not paper,
and yet it was very much like paper. Crumbling It in his fingers, he
decided that its material was wood-pulp.

Keller was puzzled to know how so minute a creature had welded wood into
a paperlike nest. His state of mind passed to interest, thence to
speculation, and finally to investigation. He carried his problem and
its possibilities to his friend, Heinrich Voelter, a master mechanic.
Together they began experiments. They decided to emulate the wasp. They
would have to granulate the wood as she had done. The insect had
apparently used spruce; they used spruce under an ordinary grindstone.
Hot water served as a substitute for the wasp's salivary juices.

Their first attempts gave them a pulp astonishingly similar to that
resulting from the choicest rags. They carried the pulp through to
manufacture, with a small proportion of rags added--and they had paper.
It was good paper, paper that had strength. They found that it possessed
an unlooked-for advantage in its quick absorption of printing-ink.

Have you followed the chain of accidents, coincidences, and fortunate
circumstances? Suppose the wasp had not left her nest in Keller's path.
What if he had been in haste, or had been driven off by the queen's
yellow-jacketed soldiers? What if he had no curiosity, if he had not
been a paper-maker, if he had not enjoyed acquaintance with Voelter?
Wood-pulp might never have been found.

Leaving Gottfried Keller and Voelter in their hour of success, we find,
sixteen years afterward, two other Germans, Albrecht and Rudolf
Pagenstecher, brothers, in the export trade in New York. They were
pioneering in another field. They were shipping petroleum to Europe for
those rising young business men, John D. and William Rockefeller. They
were seeking commodities for import when their cousin, Alberto
Pagenstecher, arrived from the fatherland with an interesting bit of
news.

"A few weeks ago, in a paper-mill in the Hartz, I found them using a new
process," he said. "They are making paper out of wood. It serves.
Germany is printing its newspapers on wood-pulp paper."

To his cousins it seemed preposterous that wood could be so converted,
but Alberto was convincing. He showed them Voelter's patent grants and
pictures of the grinders. The Pagenstechers went to Germany, and when
they returned they brought two of the grinders--crude affairs devised
for the simple purpose of pressing wood upon a stone. They also brought
with them several German mechanics.

A printer in New York, named Strang, had already secured the United
States rights of the new process. He was engaged in the manufacture of
calendered paper, and, therefore, had no occasion to use wood-pulp; so
he was willing to surrender the patents in exchange for a small
interest.

The Pagenstechers wanted water-power for their grinders, and they
located their first mill beside Stockbridge Bowl, in Curtisville, now
Interlaken, Massachusetts. On an outlay of eleven thousand dollars their
mill was built and their machinery installed. Two or three trials, with
cotton waste added to the ground wood, gave them their paper. Their
first product was completed on the 5th of March, 1867.

It was a matter of greater difficulty to dispose of the stock. The trade
fought against the innovation. Finally Wellington Smith, of the near-by
town of Lee, Massachusetts, was persuaded to try it. Rag-paper had been
selling at twenty-four cents a pound. Smith's mill still exhibits the
first invoice with the Pagenstechers, which shows the purchase of
wood-paper at eleven cents.

The paper was hauled to Lee in the dead of night, for Smith's
subordinates wished to spare him from the laughter of his fellow
millmen. It was sold, and proved successful, and the Pagenstechers were
rushed with orders. They built a second mill in Luzeme, New York, but
abandoned it soon afterward for the greater water-power to be obtained
at Palmer's Falls, where now stands the second largest mill in the
United States.

Manufacturers tumbled over themselves to get the benefit of the new
process. The originators in this country held the patent rights until
1884, letting them out on royalties until that time. With each new plant
the price of paper fell, until at one period it sold at one and a half
cents a pound.

Trial had proved that spruce was the only suitable wood for the pulp.
Until 1891 rags were combined in about one-quarter proportion. Then it
was found that other coniferous woods might be used to replace the rags,
after being submitted to what is called the sulfite process. In this
treatment small cubes of wood, placed in a vat, have their resinous
properties extracted, and the wood is disintegrated. A combination of
ground and sulfite wood makes the paper now used for news-print.

As has been told, the primary advantage of the wood-pulp paper was its
immediate absorption of ink. This made possible much greater speed in
printing, and led in turn to the development of the great modern
newspaper and magazine presses, fed by huge rolls of paper, which they
print on both sides simultaneously. These wonderful machines have now
reached the double-octuple stage--monsters capable of turning out no
less than five thousand eight-page newspapers in a single minute, or
three hundred thousand in an hour.

With the evolution from the flat-bed to the web or rotary presses there
came further development in typesetting-machines--the linotype, the
monotype, and others. With paper and presses brought to such
simplification, newspapers have sprouted in every town, almost every
village, and the total number of American periodicals is counted by tens
of thousands. There are magazines that have a circulation of more than a
million copies weekly. The leading daily newspapers in New York print
anywhere from one hundred thousand copies to four times as many, and
they can put extra editions on the streets at fifteen-minute intervals.

The aggregate circulation of daily newspapers in the United States is
close to forty million copies. Weekly newspapers and periodicals reach
fifty millions, and monthly publications mount almost to one hundred
millions; and all this would be impossible without wood-pulp paper.

The annual production of wood-pulp in the United States and Canada is
estimated by Albrecht Pagenstecher, the survivor of the innovators, to
be worth nearly five hundred millions of dollars. Take into
consideration the hundreds of thousands employed in the mills, the men
who cut and bring in the raw product, the countless number in the
printing, publishing, and distributing trades. Then hark back to the
accident that put the wasp's nest under the toe of Gottfried Keller!

       *       *       *       *       *

(_Providence Journal_)

One zinc-etching illustration reproducing an old wood-cut of the ship,
with the caption, "The Savannah, First Steamship That Crossed the
Ocean."

CENTENNIAL OF THE FIRST STEAMSHIP TO CROSS THE ATLANTIC

(7-column head)

One hundred years ago this week there was launched at New York the ship
Savannah, which may be called the father of the scores of steamers that
are now carrying our soldiers and supplies from the New World to the Old
World.

The Savannah was the first ship equipped with steam power to cross the
Atlantic ocean. It made the trip in 25 days, using both sails and
engine, and the arrival of the strange craft at Liverpool was the cause
of unusual stir among our English cousins. Like every step from the
beaten path the idea of steam travel between the New World and the Old
World was looked upon with much scepticism and it was not until about 20
years later that regular, or nearly regular, steamer service was
established.

The launching of the Savannah took place on Aug. 22, 1818. It was not
accompanied by the ceremony that is accorded many of the boats upon
similar occasions to-day. As a matter of fact, it is probable that only
a few persons knew that the craft was intended for a transatlantic trip.
The keel of the boat was laid with the idea of building a sailing ship,
and the craft was practically completed before Capt. Moses Rogers, the
originator of the venture, induced Scarborough & Isaacs, ship merchants
of Savannah, to buy her and fit her with a steam engine for service
between Savannah and Liverpool.

The ship, which was built by Francis Fickett, was 100 feet long, 28 feet
broad and 14 feet deep. It had three masts which, of course, were of far
greater importance in making progress toward its destination than was
the steam engine.

Capt. Rogers had gained a reputation for great courage and skill in
sailing. He had already had the honor of navigating the sea with a
steamer, taking the New Jersey from New York to the Chesapeake in 1816,
a voyage which was then thought to be one of great danger for such a
vessel.

It was natural, then, that he was especially ambitious to go down in
history as the first master of a steam ship to cross the ocean. As soon
as the vessel had been purchased by the Savannah ship merchants, the
work of installing the engine was begun. This was built by Stephen Vail
of Speedwell, N.J., and the boiler by David Dod of Elizabeth, N. J.

The paddle-wheels were made of iron and were "detachable," so that the
sections could be removed and laid on the deck. This was done when it
was desired to proceed under canvas exclusively and was also a
precaution in rough weather.

In short, the Savannah was an auxiliary steamer, a combination of steam
and sail that later became well known in shipping. This is much like the
early development of the gasoline marine engine, which was an auxiliary
to the sail, a combination that is still used.

Capt. Rogers took the boat from New York to Savannah in eight days and
15 hours, using steam on this trip for 41¬Ω hours. On May 26, 1819,
under Capt. Rogers, the Savannah set sail from her home port for
Liverpool and made the trip in 25 days.

As long as the trip took, the voyage was considerably shorter than the
average for the sailing ship in 1819, and this reduction in time was
accomplished in spite of the fact that the Savannah ran into much
unfavorable weather. Capt. Rogers used steam on 18 of the 25 days and
doubtless would have resorted to engine power more of the time except
for the fact that at one stage of the voyage the fuel was exhausted.

It was natural that the arrival of the steamer in English waters should
not have been looked upon with any great favor by the Englishmen. In
addition to the jeers of the sceptical, the presence of vessels was
accompanied by suspicion on the part of the naval authorities, and the
merchants were not favorably impressed.

When the Savannah approached the English coast with her single stack
giving forth volumes of dense black smoke, it was thought by those on
shore that she was a ship on fire, and British men-of-war and revenue
cutters set out to aid her. When the truth was known, consternation
reigned among the English officers. They were astonished at the way the
craft steamed away from them after they had rushed to assist what they
thought was a ship in distress.

The reception of the Savannah at Liverpool was not particularly cordial.
Some of the newspapers even suggested that "this steam operation may, in
some manner, be connected with the ambitious views of the United
States."

A close watch was kept on the boat while she lay in British waters, and
her departure was welcome. In the second volume of "Memoranda of a
Residence at the Court of St. James," Richard Rush, then American
Minister in London, includes a complete log of the Savannah. Dispatch
No. 76 from Minister Rush reports the arrival of the ship and the
comment that was caused by its presence as follows:

    London, July 3,1819.

    Sir--On the 20th of last month arrived at Liverpool from the United
    States the steamship Savannah, Capt. Rogers, being the first vessel
    of that description that ever crossed the sea, and having excited
    equal admiration and astonishment as she entered port under the
    power of her steam.

    She is a fine ship of 320 tons burden and exhibits in her
    construction, no less than she has done in her navigation across the
    Atlantic, a signal trophy of American enterprise and skill upon the
    ocean.

    I learn from Capt. Rogers, who has come to London and been with me,
    that she worked with great ease and safety on the voyage, and used
    her steam full 18 days.

    Her engine acts horizontally and is equal to a 72 horsepower. Her
    wheels, which are of iron, are on the sides, and removable at
    pleasure. The fuel laid in was 1500 bushels of coal, which got
    exhausted on her entrance into the Irish Channel.

    The captain assures me that the weather in general was extremely
    unfavorable, or he would have made a much shorter passage; besides
    that, he was five days delayed in the channel for want of coal. I
    have the honor to be, etc., RICHARD RUSH.

To have made the first voyage across the Atlantic Ocean under steam was
a great accomplishment and brought no little credit to Capt. Rogers and
the United States. Pioneers in many ventures, the American people had
added another honor to their record. And this was even more of a credit
because in those early days skilled workmen were comparatively few on
these shores and the machine shops had not reached a stage of efficiency
that came a short time later.

There were, of course, in 1819 men who had developed into mechanics and
there were shops of some account, as the steamboat for short trips had
been in existence for some years. But the whole enterprise of planning a
steam voyage in which the boat should be headed due east was
characteristic of the boldness and bravery of the Americans.

The Savannah did not return to the States directly from England. It
steamed from Liverpool to St. Petersburg and brought forth further
comment from the Old World. She proved that the marine steam engine and
side-wheels were practicable for deep-sea navigation. The idea of
transatlantic travel under steam had been born and it was only necessary
to develop the idea to "shorten the distance" between the two
continents.

This pioneer voyage, however, was then looked upon more as a novelty
than as the inception of a new method of long-distance travel. The trip
had failed to demonstrate that steam was an entirely adequate substitute
for the mast and sail in regular service.

Since the Savannah was primarily a sailing vessel, the loss of steam
power by the crippling of the engine would not be serious, as she could
continue on her way with paddle-wheels removed and under full sail.

It was 19 years later that the idea of employing vessels propelled by
steam in trade between the United States and England came under the
serious consideration of merchants and ship builders. In the interval
the marine boiler and the engines had been improved until they had
passed the stage of experiment, and coasting voyages had become common
on both sides of the Atlantic.

The beginning of real transatlantic steam voyages was made by the Sirius
and the Great Western. The latter boat had been built especially for
trips across the ocean and the former was taken from the Cork and London
line. The Sirius started from Liverpool on April 4, 1838, and the Great
Western four days later. They arrived in New York within 24 hours of
each other, the Sirius at 10 p.m. on April 22 and the Great Western at 3
o'clock the following afternoon. Neither of the vessels carried much
sail.

These boats gave more or less irregular service until withdrawn because
of their failure to pay expenses. In 1839 the Cunard Company was formed
and the paddle steamers Britannia, Arcadia, Columbia, and Caledonia were
put into service.

From that time on the steamer developed with great rapidity, the value
of which was never more demonstrated than at the present time. It will
always be remembered, however, that this Capt. Rogers with his crude
little Savannah was the man whose bold enterprise gave birth to the idea
of transatlantic travel under steam.

       *       *       *       *       *

(A syndicate Sunday magazine section of the _Harrisburg Patriot_)

SEARCHING FOR THE LOST ATLANTIS

By GROSVENOR A. PARKER

Not so long ago a stubby tramp steamer nosed its way down the English
Channel and out into the Atlantic. Her rusty black bow sturdily
shouldered the seas aside or shoved through them with an insistence that
brought an angry hail of spray on deck. The tramp cared little for this
protest of the sea or for the threats of more hostile resistance.
Through the rainbow kicked up by her forefoot there glimmered and
beckoned a mirage of wealthy cities sunk fathoms deep and tenanted only
by strange sea creatures. For the tramp and her crew there was a
stranger goal than was ever sought by an argosy of legend. The lost
cities of Atlantis and all the wealth that they contain was the port
awaiting the searchers under the rim of the western ocean.

It's no wild-goose chase that had started thus unromantically. The men
who hope to gain fame and fortune by this search are sure of their
ground and they have all the most modern mechanical and electrical aids
for their quest. On the decks of their ship two submarine boats are
cradled in heavy timbers. One of them is of the usual type, but the
other looks like a strange fantasy of another Jules Verne. A great
electric eye peers cyclops-wise over the bow and reaching ahead of the
blunt nose are huge crab-like claws delicate enough to pick up a gold
piece and strong enough to tear a wall apart.

These under-water craft are only a part of the equipment that Bernard
Meeker, a young Englishman, has provided to help him in his search for
the lost city. There are divers' uniforms specially strengthened to
resist the great pressure under which the men must work. Huge electric
lamps like searchlights to be lowered into the ocean depths and give
light to the workers are stacked close beside powerful generators in the
ship's hold. In the chart room there are rolls of strange maps plotting
out the ocean floor, and on a shelf by itself rests the tangible
evidence that this search means gold. It is a little bowl of strange
design which was brought up by a diver from the bottom of the Caribbean.
When this bowl first came to light it was supposed to be part of loot
from a sunken Spanish galleon, but antiquarians could find nothing in
the art of the Orient, or Africa, or of Peru and Mexico to bear out this
theory. Even the gold of which it was made was an alloy of a different
type from anything on record.

It was this that gave Meeker his first idea that there was a city under
the sea. He found out the exact spot from which the divers had recovered
the bowl, and compared the reckonings with all the ancient charts which
spoke of the location of fabled Atlantis. In one old book he located the
lost city as being close to the spot where the divers had been, and with
this as a foundation for his theories he asked other questions of the
men who had explored that hidden country. Their tale only confirmed his
belief.

"The floor of the sea is covered with unusual coral formation," one of
them told him, "but it was the queerest coral I ever saw. It looked more
like stone walls and there was a pointed sort of arch which was
different from any coral arch I had ever seen."

That was enough to take Meeker to the Caribbean to see for himself. He
won't tell what he found, beyond the fact that he satisfied himself that
the "coral" was really stone walls pierced by arched doors and windows.

Meeker kept all his plans secret and might have sailed away on his
treasure hunt without making any stir if he had not been careless enough
to name one of his submarines "Atlantis." He had given out that he was
sailing for Yucatan to search for evidence of prehistoric civilization.
It is true that the shores of Yucatan are covered with the remnants of
great cities but the word "Atlantis" awoke suspicion. Questions followed
and Meeker had to admit the bare facts of his secret.

"Only half a dozen men know the supposed location of Atlantis," he
said, just before sailing, "and we don't intend to let any others into
the secret. Those who have furnished the money for the expedition have
done so in the hope of solving the mystery of the lost continent, and
without thought for the profit. The divers and the other men of the crew
have the wildest dreams of finding hoarded wealth. It is not at all
impossible that their dreams will come true, and that they will be
richly rewarded. At any rate they deserve it, for the work will be
dangerous.

"Our plans are simple enough. With the submarine of the usual type we
will first explore that part of the sea bottom which our charts cover.
This vessel has in its conning tower a powerful searchlight which will
reveal at least the upper portions of any buildings that may be there.
For work in greater depths we will have to depend on the 'Atlantis' with
its special equipment of ballast tanks and its hatch-ways for the
divers.

"You see, we do not plan to lower the divers from the steamer or from a
raft. Instead they will step directly out on the sea floor from a door
in the submarine which opens out of an air chamber. In this the diver
can be closed and the air pressure increased until it is high enough to
keep out the water. All that he has to do then is to open the door and
step out, trailing behind him a much shorter air hose and life line than
would hamper him if he worked from the surface. The air hose is armored
with steel links so that there will be no danger of an inquisitive shark
chopping it in two."

Previous to the diver's exploration the claws of the "Atlantis" will
search out the more promising places in the ruins. These claws work on a
joint operated electrically, and on the tip of each is a sensitive
electrical apparatus which sets off a signal in the conning tower of the
submarine. Crawling over the bottom like a strange monster, the claws
will also help to avoid collisions with walls when the depths of the
water veils the power of the searchlight.

There is, in addition, a small electric crane on the nose of the
submarine so that heavy objects can be borne to the surface. Meeker does
not expect to gain much in the way of heavy relics of the lost city, for
certain parts of the sea bottom are so covered with ooze that he
believes it only possible to clear it away through suction hose long
enough to make quick observation possible. The subaqueous lights which
will help this work are powerful Tungsten lamps enclosed in a steel
shell with a heavy prismatic lens at the bottom. These lamps are
connected to the power plant on the steamer by armored cables and will
develop 5,000 candle power each.

The generating station on the parent ship of the expedition, as the
rusty tramp is known, is as extensive as those on a first class liner or
a dreadnought. Little of the power will go for the benefit of the
steamer though. Its purpose is to furnish the light for the swinging
Tungstens and to charge the great storage batteries of the submarines.
These batteries run the many motors on which depends the success of the
work. If it were not for electricity, the searchers would be
handicapped. As it is they call to their aid all the strong magic of
modern days.




INDEX

"Accident that Gave Us Wood-Pulp Paper, The," 356

Adventure as a source of interest, 41.

Agricultural journals, 11, 20, 23;
  articles in, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 78;
  examples of articles in, 81, 248, 341;
  excerpts from, 127,128, 156

Aims in feature writing, 46

Alliteration in titles, 179

Amateur writers, opportunities for, 7, 12

_American Magazine_, articles from, 76, 87;
  excerpt from, 158

Amusements as a source of interest, 42

Analysis of articles on factory school, 107, 116

Analysis of special articles, 22;
  outline for, 201

Animals as a source of interest, 41

Appeals, kinds of, 39;
  combinations of, 45

"Arbor Day Advice," 57

Arrangement of material, 101


Balance in titles, 179

"Bedroom in Burlap, A," 68

Beginnings, 131;
  structure of, 131;
  types of, 132

_Boston Herald_, article from, 204

_Boston Transcript_, articles from, 209, 326;
  excerpt from, 145

"Boys in Search of Jobs," 209

"Brennan Mono-Rail Car," 274

Browning, John M., personality sketch of, 89

"By Parcel Post," 341


Camera, use of, for illustrations, 194

Captions for illustrations, 196

"Centennial of First Steamship to Cross the Atlantic," 360

_Chicago Tribune_, excerpt from, 159

Children as a source of interest, 41

_Christian Science Monitor_, article from, 206

Clark, Thomas Arkle, personality sketch of, 87

Class publications, 11, 20, 23

College training for writing, 16

_Collier's Weekly_, excerpt from, 139

Collins, James H., article by, 349

Confession articles, 32, 70;
  examples of, 71

"Confessions of a College Professor's Wife," 307

Contests for supremacy as a source of interest, 41

Correspondents as feature writers, 6

Cosgrove, John O'Hara, on Sunday magazine sections, 9

"County Service Station, A," 248

_Country Gentleman_, articles from, 248, 341;
  excerpt from, 156

Cover page for manuscripts, 183;
  form for, 184

Crime, presentation of, 47

Curiosity as a qualification for writers, 15


Definition of special feature article, 4

_Delineator_, article from, 293;
  excerpt from, 152

Descriptive beginnings, 138

_Designer_, article from, 68

_Detroit News_, article from, 260;
  excerpt from, 125

Diction, 161

Direct address beginnings, 157

Direct address titles, 178

Drawings for illustrations, 197;
  mailing of, 197


Eaton, Walter Prichard, article by; 326

Editorial readers, 187

Editors, point of view of, 19

Entertainment as purpose of articles, 47;
  wholesome, 47

Ethics of feature writing, 23, 47

_Everybody's Magazine_, article from, 281

_Every Week_, article from, 72

Examples, methods of presenting, 118

Exposition by narration and description, 52


Factory school, articles on, 102, 107, 115

Familiar things as a source of interest, 42

_Farm and Fireside_, article from, 81

Farm journals, 11, 20, 23, 78;
  articles in, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34;
  examples of articles in, 81, 248, 341;
  excerpts from, 127, 128, 156

Figures of speech, as element of style, 163;
  in beginnings, 144;
  in titles, 176

Filing material, 38

"Forty Years Bartered for What?" 76

"Four Men of Humble Birth Hold World Destiny," 305

Free-Lance writers, 6


Gardiner, A.G., personality sketch of former kaiser by, 166, 167

"Gentle Art of Blowing Bottles, The," 233

Gibbon, Perceval, article by, 274

"Girls and a Camp," 213

_Good Housekeeping_, excerpts from, 141, 151

Greeley Smith, Nixola, article by, 115

"Guarding a City's Water Supply," 260


_Harper's Monthly_, excerpt from, 150

_Harper's Weekly_, excerpt from, 146

Hartswick, F. Gregory, article by, 233

Headlines, 170;
  types of, 173;
  methods of framing, 180

Hendrick, Burton J., article by, 53

How-to-do-something articles, 49, 78;
  examples of, 68, 79

How-to-do-something units, 127

Hungerford, Edward, article by, 218


Ideals in feature writing, 23, 47

_Illustrated World_, excerpt from, 144

Illustrations, value of, 193;
  photographs for, 194;
  requirements for, 195;
  captions for, 196;
  mailing of, 197

Imperative beginnings, 157

Imperative titles, 178

Incidents, methods of presenting, 122

_Independent_, article from, 233;
  excerpt from, 140

Indian princess, interview with, 59

Information, trivial _vs._ significant, 49

Informative articles, 49

Instances, methods of presenting, 118

Interest, sources of, 39

Interview type of article, 56;
  examples of, 57

Interview on Arbor Day, 57;
  with Indian princess, 59


"Job Lady, The," 293

Journalism, college courses in, 17

"Just Like Pocahontas of 300 Years Ago," 59


Kaempffert, Waldemar, on scientific subjects, 27

_Kansas City Star_, article from, 299;
  excerpts from, 133, 145, 147, 154


Label titles, 173

Length of articles, 100

_Leslie's Weekly_, excerpts from, 135, 148, 157

London _Daily News_, excerpt from, 166, 167


Magazines, as field for articles, 11;
  contributors to, 11;
  study of, 21

Manuscripts, form for, 182, 184;
  mailing, 186;
  in editorial offices, 187;
  rejected, 188;
  accepted, 189

Manuscript record, 190

_McClure's Magazine,_ article from, 274;
  excerpts from, 53, 151

McClure Newspaper Syndicate, 192

"Mark Twain's First Sweetheart," 299

_Milwaukee Journal_, article from, 305

_Munsey's Magazine_, article from, 356;
  excerpts from, 136, 139

Mysteries as a source of interest, 40


Narrative article in third person, 91;
  examples of, 92

Narrative beginnings, 134

"Neighborhood Playhouse, The," 240

"New Political Wedge, A," 281

Newspaper Enterprise Association, 192;
  articles from, 89, 115;
  excerpt from, 152

Newspaper Feature Service, 192;
  excerpt from, 155

Newspaper work as training for magazine writing, 17

Newspapers, as field for articles, 5;
  characteristics of, 8;
  Sunday magazine sections of, 9;
  study of, 21;
  as source of subjects, 33

_New York Evening Post_, articles from, 213, 242;
  excerpt from, 150

_New York Evening Sun_, excerpt from, 154

_New York Sun_, article from, 336

_New York Times_, excerpts from, 119, 137, 145, 155, 158

_New York Tribune_, excerpts from, 129, 141

_New York World_, articles from, 92, 240;
  excerpt from, 133

Nose for news in feature writing, 14

Notebook, value of, 37

"Now the Public Kitchen," 92


Observation, personal, as a source of subjects and material, 28

"Occupation and Exercise Cure, The," 264

Official documents as a source of material, 34

_Ohio State Journal_, article from, 59

Origin of special feature articles, 3

Outline for analysis of feature articles, 201

Outline of articles on factory schools, 105-07

Outlining articles, value of, 99;
  method of, 105

_Outlook_, articles from, 95, 264;
  excerpts from, 126, 133, 135, 146, 156

Overline for illustrations, 197


"Paradise for a Penny, A," 326

Paradoxical beginnings, 144

Paradoxical titles, 175

Paragraphs, length and structure of, 168

Payment, rate of, 7;
  time of, 190

Personality sketches, 85;
  examples of, 87

Personal experience articles, 62;
  examples of, 63

Personal experience as a source of subjects, 30

Personal observation as a source of subjects, 28

Personal success as a source of interest, 43

_Philadelphia Public Ledger_, excerpt from, 130

Photographs, value of, 193;
  securing, 194;
  requirements for, 195;
  sizes of, 195;
  captions for, 196;
  mailing of, 197

_Pictorial Review_, article from, 331

Planning an article, 99, 102

_Popular Science Monthly_, excerpt from, 147

Practical guidance articles, 49, 78;
  examples of, 79

Practical guidance units, 127

Processes, methods of presenting, 125

Prominence as a source of interest, 42

_Providence Journal_, article from, 360;
  excerpt from, 142

Purpose, definiteness of, 45;
  statement of, 50


Qualifications for feature writing, 14

Question beginnings, 153

Question titles, 177

Quiller-Couch, Sir Arthur, on jargon, 163

Quotation beginnings, 149

Quotation titles, 176


_Railroad Man's Magazine_, excerpt from, 148

Readers, editorial, 187

Readers, point of view of, 19, 20

Recipes, methods of presenting, 127

Reporters as feature writers, 6, 17

Revision of articles, 168

Rhyme in titles, 179

Romance as a source of interest, 41


"Sales without Salesmanship," 349

_San Francisco Call_, excerpt from, 155

_Saturday Evening Post_, articles from, 218, 307, 349

Scandal, presentation of, 47

Scientific publications as a source of subjects and material, 27, 35

"Searching for the Lost Atlantis," 364

Sentences, structure of, 165;
  length of, 166

Shepherd, William G., article by, 305

Siddall, John M., on curiosity, 15;
  on readers' point of view, 21;
  on making articles personal, 45

"Singular Story of the Mosquito Man, The," 242

"Six Years of Tea Rooms," 336

Slosson, Edwin E., on scientific and technical subjects, 27

Sources of subjects and material, 25

Space rates for feature articles, 7

Staff system on magazines, 11

Statistics, methods of presenting, 122

Stevenson, Frederick Boyd, on Sunday magazine sections, 10

Stovaine, beginning of article on, 53

Striking statement beginnings, 143

Striking statement titles, 175

Study of newspapers and magazines, 21

Style, 160

Subjects for feature articles, 25

_Successful Farming_, excerpts from, 127, 128

Summary beginnings, 132

Sunday magazine sections, 9

Syndicates, 6, 192

Syndicating articles, 191

_System_, article from, 79;
  excerpt from, 137


"Taking the School to the Factory," 107

"Teach Children Love of Art Through Story-Telling," 204

Technical publications as a source of subjects and material, 27, 35

"Ten Acres and a Living," 81

"They Call Me the 'Hen Editor,'" 63

"Things We Learned to Do Without," 72

Time of payment for articles, 190

Timeliness in feature articles, 39

Titles, 170;
  types of, 173;
  methods of framing, 180

"Tommy--Who Enjoys Straightening Out Things," 87

_Tractor and Gas Engine Review_, excerpt from, 153

Trade journals, 11, 23;
  articles in, 30;
  article from, 79;
  excerpts from, 137, 153

Training for feature writing, 16

Types of beginnings, 131

Types of special articles, 55

Types of titles, 170

Typographical style, 183


Units in articles, 117


"Wanted: A Home Assistant," 331

Weed, Inis H., article by, 281

Welfare of other persons as a source of interest, 43

Wheeler, Howard, on newspaper men as magazine writers, 18

"Where Girls Learn to Wield Spade and Hoe," 206

White, Frank Marshall, article by, 264

"Who'll Do John's Work?" 79

_Woman's Home Companion_, article from, 63

Women as feature writers, 13

"Wonderful America! Thinks Little Austrian," 116

Words, choice of, 161

Writers, opportunities for amateur, 7, 12


"Your Porter," 218




ENGLISH FOR COLLEGE COURSES

EXPOSITORY WRITING
By MERVIN J. CURL.
Gives freshmen and sophomores something to write about, and helps them
in their writing.

SENTENCES AND THINKING
By NORMAN FOERSTER, University of North Carolina, and J.M.
  STEDMAN, Jr., Emory University.
A practice book in sentence-making for college freshmen.

A HANDBOOK OF ORAL READING
By LEE EMERSON BASSETT, Leland Stanford Junior University.
Especial emphasis is placed on the relation of thought and speech,
technical vocal exercises being subordinated to a study of the
principles underlying the expression of ideas. Illustrative selections
of both poetry and prose are freely employed.

ARGUMENTATION AND DEBATING (_Revised Edition_)
By WILLIAM T. FOSTER, Reed College.
The point of view throughout is that of the student rather than that of
the teacher.

THE RHETORICAL PRINCIPLES OF NARRATION
By CARROLL LEWIS MAXCY, Williams College.
A clear and thorough analysis of the three elements of narrative
writing, viz.: setting, character, and plot.

REPRESENTATIVE NARRATIVES
Edited by CARROLL LEWIS MAXCY.
This compilation contains twenty-two complete selections of various
types of narrative composition.

THE STUDY AND PRACTICE OF WRITING ENGLISH
By GERHARD R. LOMER, Ph.D., and MARGARET ASHMUN.
A textbook for use in college Freshman courses.

HOW TO WRITE SPECIAL FEATURE ARTICLES
By WILLARD G. BLEYER, University of Wisconsin.
A textbook for classes in Journalism and in advanced English
Composition.

NEWSPAPER WRITING AND EDITING
By WILLARD G. BLEYER.
This fully meets the requirements of courses in Journalism as given in
our colleges and universities, and at the same time appeals to practical
newspaper men.

TYPES OF NEWS WRITING
By WILLARD G. BLEYER.
Over two hundred typical stories taken from representative American
newspapers are here presented in a form convenient for college classes
in Journalism.



HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
1421


FOR COLLEGE LITERATURE COURSES


HISTORY AND CRITICISM

BOTTA--Handbook of Universal Literature.

GRUMBINE -- Stories from Browning.

HINCHMAN AND GUMMERE -- Lives of Great English Writers from Chaucer to
Browning.

MATTHEWS -- A Study of Versification.

MAYNADIER -- The Arthur of the English Poets.

PERRY -- A Study of Prose Fiction.

PERRY -- A Study of Poetry.

ROOT -- The Poetry of Chaucer.

SIMONDS --A Student's History of English Literature.

SIMONDS -- A Student's History of American Literature.

BAKER -- Dramatic Technique.

BROOKE -- The Tudor Drama.

MATTHEWS -- A Study of the Drama.

SCHELLING -- A History of the Elizabethan Drama.   2 vols.



ANTHOLOGIES


POETRY

HOLT -- Leading English Poets from Chaucer to Browning.

NEILSON AND WEBSTER -- The Chief British Poets of the Fourteenth and
Fifteenth Centuries.

PAGE -- The Chief American Poets.

WESTON -- The Chief Middle English Poets.


PROSE

ALDEN -- Readings in English Prose of the Eighteenth Century.

ALDEN -- Readings in English Prose of the Nineteenth Century.
Part I; Part II; Complete.

FOERSTER -- The Chief American Prose Writers.


THE DRAMA

DICKINSON -- Chief Contemporary Dramatists, First Series.

DICKINSON -- Chief Contemporary Dramatists, Second Series.

MATTHEWS -- Chief European Dramatists.

NEILSON -- The Chief Elizabethan Dramatists (except Shakespeare) to the
Close of the Theatres.


HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

1825





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of How To Write Special Feature Articles
by Willard Grosvenor Bleyer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO WRITE SPECIAL FEATURE ***

***** This file should be named 15718-8.txt or 15718-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/7/1/15718/

Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Charlene Taylor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
