The Project Gutenberg EBook of The 1997 CIA World Factbook, by 
United States. Central Intelligence Agency.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The 1997 CIA World Factbook

Author: United States. Central Intelligence Agency.

Release Date: February 21, 2010 [EBook #1662]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 1997 CIA WORLD FACTBOOK ***




Produced by Dr. Gregory B. Newby









The 1997 CIA World Factbook


TABLE OF CONTENTS

	Introduction
	A Brief History of Basic Intelligence and the World Factbook
	Notes and Definitions
	Guide to Country Profiles (Categories, Fields and Subfields)

	Afghanistan
	Albania
	Algeria
	American Samoa
	Andorra
	Angola
	Anguilla
	Antarctica
	Antigua and Barbuda
	Arctic Ocean
	Argentina
	Armenia
	Aruba
	Ashmore and Cartier Islands
	Atlantic Ocean
	Australia
	Austria
	Azerbaijan
	The Bahamas
	Bahrain
	Baker Island
	Bangladesh
	Barbados
	Bassas da India
	Belarus
	Belgium
	Belize
	Benin
	Bermuda
	Bhutan
	Bolivia
	Bosnia and Herzegovina
	Botswana
	Bouvet Island
	Brazil
	British Indian Ocean Territory
	British Virgin Islands
	Brunei
	Bulgaria
	Burkina Faso
	Burma
	Burundi
	Cambodia
	Cameroon
	Canada
	Cape Verde
	Cayman Islands
	Central African Republic
	Chad
	Chile
	China
	Christmas Island
	Clipperton Island
	Cocos (Keeling) Islands
	Colombia
	Comoros
	Congo, Democratic Republic of the
	Congo, Republic of the
	Cook Islands
	Coral Sea Islands
	Costa Rica
	Cote d'Ivoire
	Croatia
	Cuba
	Cyprus
	Czech Republic
	Denmark
	Djibouti
	Dominica
	Dominican Republic
	Ecuador
	Egypt
	El Salvador
	Equatorial Guinea
	Eritrea
	Estonia
	Ethiopia
	Europa Island
	Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)
	Faroe Islands
	Fiji
	Finland
	France
	French Guiana
	French Polynesia
	French Southern and Antarctic Lands
	Gabon
	The Gambia
	Gaza Strip
	Georgia
	Germany
	Ghana
	Gibraltar
	Glorioso Islands
	Greece
	Greenland
	Grenada
	Guadeloupe
	Guam
	Guatemala
	Guernsey
	Guinea
	Guinea-Bissau
	Guyana
	Haiti
	Heard Island and McDonald Islands
	Holy See (Vatican City)
	Honduras
	Hong Kong
	Howland Island
	Hungary
	Iceland
	India
	Indian Ocean
	Indonesia
	Iran
	Iraq
	Ireland
	Israel
	Italy
	Jamaica
	Jan Mayen
	Japan
	Jarvis Island
	Jersey
	Johnston Atoll
	Jordan
	Juan de Nova Island
	Kazakstan
	Kenya
	Kingman Reef
	Kiribati
	Korea, North
	Korea, South
	Kuwait
	Kyrgyzstan
	Laos
	Latvia
	Lebanon
	Lesotho
	Liberia
	Libya
	Liechtenstein
	Lithuania
	Luxembourg
	Macau
	Macedonia,
	Madagascar
	Malawi
	Malaysia
	Maldives
	Mali
	Malta
	Man, Isle of
	Marshall Islands
	Martinique
	Mauritania
	Mauritius
	Mayotte
	Mexico
	Micronesia, Federated States of
	Midway Islands
	Moldova
	Monaco
	Mongolia
	Montserrat
	Morocco
	Mozambique
	Namibia
	Nauru
	Navassa Island
	Nepal
	Netherlands
	Netherlands Antilles
	New Caledonia
	New Zealand
	Nicaragua
	Niger
	Nigeria
	Niue
	Norfolk Island
	Northern Mariana Islands
	Norway
	Oman
	Pacific Ocean
	Pakistan
	Palau
	Palmyra Atoll
	Panama
	Papua New Guinea
	Paracel Islands
	Paraguay
	Peru
	Philippines
	Pitcairn Islands
	Poland
	Portugal
	Puerto Rico
	Qatar
	Reunion
	Romania
	Russia
	Rwanda
	Saint Helena
	Saint Kitts and Nevis
	Saint Lucia
	Saint Pierre and Miquelon
	Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
	San Marino
	Sao Tome and Principe
	Saudi Arabia
	Senegal
	Serbia and Montenegro
	Seychelles
	Sierra Leone
	Singapore
	Slovakia
	Slovenia
	Solomon Islands
	Somalia
	South Africa
	South Georgia and the
	Spain
	Spratly Islands
	Sri Lanka
	Sudan
	Suriname
	Svalbard
	Swaziland
	Sweden
	Switzerland
	Syria
	Taiwan
	Tajikistan
	Tanzania
	Thailand
	Togo
	Tokelau
	Tonga
	Trinidad and Tobago
	Tromelin Island
	Tunisia
	Turkey
	Turkmenistan
	Turks and Caicos Islands
	Tuvalu
	Uganda
	Ukraine
	United Arab Emirates
	United Kingdom
	United States
	Uruguay
	Uzbekistan
	Vanuatu
	Venezuela
	Vietnam
	Virgin Islands
	Wake Island
	Wallis and Futuna
	West Bank
	Western Sahara
	Western Samoa
	World
	Yemen
	Zambia
	Zimbabwe

______________________________________________________________________

INTRODUCTION

The World Factbook is prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency for
the use of US Government officials, and the style, format, coverage,
and content are designed to meet their specific requirements.
Information was provided by the American Geophysical Union, Bureau of
the Census, Central Intelligence Agency, Defense Intelligence Agency,
Defense Nuclear Agency, Department of State, Foreign Broadcast
Information Service, Maritime Administration, National Imagery and
Mapping Agency, National Maritime Intelligence Center, National
Science Foundation (Antarctic Sciences Section), Office of Insular
Affairs, US Board on Geographic Names, US Coast Guard, and other
public and private sources.

The Factbook is in the public domain. Accordingly, it may be copied
freely without permission of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
The official seal of the CIA, however, may NOT be copied without
permission as required by the CIA Act of 1949 (50 U.S.C. section
403m). Misuse of the official seal of the CIA could result in civil
and criminal penalties.

Comments and queries are welcome and may be addressed to:
Central Intelligence Agency
Attn: Public Affairs Staff
Washington, DC 20505
Telephone: [1](703)482-0623
FAX: [1](703)482-1739

______________________________________________________________________

A BRIEF HISTORY OF BASIC INTELLIGENCE AND THE WORLD FACTBOOK

The Intelligence Cycle is the process by which information is
acquired, converted into intelligence, and made available to
policymakers. Information is raw data from any source that may be
fragmentary, contradictory, unreliable, ambiguous, deceptive, or
wrong. Intelligence is information that has been collected,
integrated, evaluated, analyzed, and interpreted. Finished
intelligence is the final product of the Intelligence Cycle ready to
be delivered to the policymaker.

There are three types of finished intelligence: basic, current, and
estimative. Basic intelligence is the fundamental and factual
reference material on a country or issue, current intelligence reports
on new developments, and estimative intelligence judges probable
outcomes. The three are mutually supporting because basic intelligence
is the foundation on which the other two are based, current
intelligence helps to continually update the knowledge foundation, and
estimative intelligence serves to revise overall interpretations of
country and issue prospects for both basic and current intelligence.
The World Factbook, The President's Daily Brief, and National
Intelligence Estimates are examples of the three types of finished
intelligence.

The United States has carried on foreign intelligence activities since
the days of George Washington, but only since World War II have they
been coordinated on a governmentwide basis. Three programs have
highlighted the development of coordinated basic intelligence since
that time: (1) the Joint Army Navy Intelligence Studies (JANIS), (2)
the National Intelligence Survey (NIS), and (3) The World Factbook.

During World War II intelligence consumers realized that the
production of basic intelligence by different components of the US
Government resulted in a great duplication of effort and conflicting
information. The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 brought home
to Congressional and executive branch leaders the need for integrating
and coordinating departmental reports to national policymakers.
Detailed general information was needed not only on such major powers
as Germany and Japan, but also on places of little previous interest.
In the Pacific Theater, for example, the Navy and Marines had to
launch amphibious operations against many islands about which
information was unconfirmed or nonexistent. Intelligence authorities
resolved that the United States should never again be caught
unprepared.

In 1943, Gen. George B. Strong (G-2), Adm. H. C. Train (Office of
Naval Intelligence - ONI), and Gen. William J. Donovan (Director of
the Office of Strategic Services - OSS) decided that a joint effort
should be initiated. A steering committee was appointed on 27 April
1943 that recommended the formation of a Joint Intelligence Study
Publishing Board to assemble, edit, coordinate, and publish the Joint
Army Navy Intelligence Studies (JANIS). JANIS was the first
interdepartmental basic intelligence program and fulfilled the needs
of the US Government for an authoritative and coordinated digest of
strategic basic intelligence. Between April 1943 and July 1947, the
board published 34 JANIS studies. JANIS performed well in the war
effort, and numerous letters of commendation were received including a
statement from Adm. Forrest Sherman, Chief of Staff, Pacific Ocean
Areas, which said "JANIS has become the indispensable reference work
for the shore-based planners."

The need for even more comprehensive basic intelligence in the postwar
world was well expressed in 1946 by George S. Pettee, a noted author
on national security, when he wrote in The Future of American Secret
Intelligence (Infantry Journal Press, 1946, page 46) that world
leadership in peace requires more elaborate intelligence than war.
"The conduct of peace involves all countries, all human activities-not
just the enemy and his war production."

The Central Intelligence Agency was established on 26 July 1947 and
officially began operating 18 September 1947. Effective 1 October
1947, the Director of Central Intelligence assumed operational
responsibility for JANIS. On 13 January 1948, the National Security
Council issued Intelligence Directive (NSCID) No. 3, which officially
authorized the National Intelligence Survey (NIS) program as a
peacetime replacement for the wartime JANIS program. Before adequate
NIS sections could be produced, it was necessary to develop gazetteers
and maps for an accurate presentation of intelligence by the
contributing agencies. The US Board on Geographic Names (BGN) compiled
the names, the Department of the Interior produced the gazetteers, and
CIA produced the maps.

The Hoover Commission's Clark Committee, set up in 1954 to study the
structure and administration of the CIA, reported to Congress in 1955
that: "The National Intelligence Survey is an invaluable publication
which provides the essential elements of basic intelligence on all
areas of the world. . . . There will always be a continuing
requirement for keeping the Survey up-to-date." The Factbook was
created as an annual summary and update to the encyclopedic NIS
studies. The first classified Factbook was published in August 1962,
and the first unclassified version was published in June 1971. The NIS
program was terminated except for the Factbook and gazetteers in 1973.
The 1975 Factbook was the first to be made available to the public
with sales through the US Government Printing Office (GPO). The 1996
edition was the first to be printed by GPO. The year 1997 marks the
50th anniversary of the establishment of the Central Intelligence
Agency and the 54th year of continuous basic intelligence support to
the US Government by The World Factbook and its two predecessor
programs.

______________________________________________________________________

NOTES AND DEFINITIONS

There have been some significant changes in this edition. A schema or
Guide to Country Profiles has been added. The new maps and flags
accompanying each country profile are in color. The country name Zaire
has been officially changed to Democratic Republic of the Congo. Congo
is now referred to as Republic of the Congo. New reference maps of the
United States, Ethnolinguistic Groups in Afghanistan, and Central
Africa have been included. Introduction is a new category with two
entries--Current issues and Historical perspective that now appear in
only a few country profiles, but will be added to all countries in the
future. The Area--comparative entry was separated from the Area entry.
The lowest point and highest point information has been removed from
the Terrain entry and put into a new entry called Elevation extremes.
The former Environment entry has been replaced by three new
entries--Natural hazards, Environment--current issues, and
Environment--international agreements. US diplomatic representation
has been renamed Diplomatic representation from the US in order to
parallel the Diplomatic representation in the US entry. The former
Airports entry has been split into three separate entries--Airports,
Airports--with paved runways, and Airports--with unpaved runways. The
Defense category has been renamed Military. The Branches entry has
been renamed Military branches. The former Manpower availability entry
has been replaced by four new entries--Military manpower--military
age, Military manpower--availability, Military manpower--fit for
military service, and Military manpower--reaching military age
annually. The former Defense expenditures entry has been replaced by
two new entries--Military expenditures--dollar figure, and Military
expenditures--percent of GDP. Transnational Issues is a new category
that now includes only two existing entries (Illicit drugs and
Disputes--international) but additional entries will be considered in
the future.

Abbreviations: This information is included in Appendix A:
Abbreviations which includes all abbreviations and acronyms used in
the Factbook with their expansions.

Administrative divisions: This entry generally gives the numbers,
designatory terms, and first-order administrative divisions as
approved by the US Board on Geographic Names (BGN). Changes that have
been reported but not yet acted on by BGN are noted.

Age structure: This entry provides the distribution of the population
according to age. Information is included by sex and age group (0-14
years, 15-64 years, 65 years and over). The age structure of a
population will affect a country's investment pattern. Countries with
young populations (high percentage under age 15) need to invest more
in schools, while countries with older populations (high percentage
ages 65 and over) need to invest more in the health sector. The age
structure can also be used to help predict potential political issues.
For example, the rapid growth of a young adult population unable to
find employment can lead to unrest.

Agriculture--products: This entry is a rank ordering of major crops
and products starting with the most important.

Airports: This entry gives the total number of airports. The runway(s)
may be paved (concrete or asphalt surfaces) or unpaved (grass, dirt,
sand, or gravel surfaces), but must be usable. Not all airports have
facilities for refueling, maintenance, or air traffic control.

Airports--with paved runways: This entry gives the total number of
airports with paved runways (concrete or asphalt surfaces). For
airports with more than one runway, only the longest runway is
included according to the following five groups--(1) over 3,047 m, (2)
2,438 to 3,047 m, (3) 1,524 to 2,437 m, (4) 914 to 1,523 m, and (5)
under 914 m. Not all airports have facilities for refueling,
maintenance, or air traffic control. Only airports with usable runways
are included in this listing.

Airports--with unpaved runways: This entry gives the total number of
airports with unpaved runways (grass, dirt, sand, or gravel surfaces).
For airports with more than one runway, only the longest runway is
included according to the following five groups--(1) over 3,047 m, (2)
2,438 to 3,047 m, (3) 1,524 to 2,437 m, (4) 914 to 1,523 m, and (5)
under 914 m. Not all airports have facilities for refueling,
maintenance, or air traffic control. Only airports with usable runways
are included in this listing.

Appendixes: This section includes Factbook-related material by topic.
Area: This entry includes three subfields. Total area is the sum of
all land and water areas delimited by international boundaries and/or
coastlines. Land area is the aggregate of all surfaces delimited by
international boundaries and/or coastlines, excluding inland water
bodies (lakes, reservoirs, rivers). Water area is the sum of all water
surfaces delimited by international boundaries and/or coastlines,
including inland water bodies (lakes, reservoirs, rivers).

Area--comparative: This entry provides an area comparison based on
total area equivalents. Most entities are compared with the entire US
or one of the 50 states based on area measurements (1990 revised)
provided by the US Bureau of the Census. The smaller entities are
compared with Washington, DC (178 sq km, 69 sq mi) or The Mall in
Washington, DC (0.59 sq km, 0.23 sq mi, 146 acres).

Birth rate: This entry gives the average annual number of births
during a year per 1,000 population at midyear; also known as crude
birth rate. The birth rate is usually the dominant factor in
determining the rate of population growth. It depends on both the
level of fertility and the age structure of the population.

Budget: This entry includes revenues, total expenditures, and capital
expenditures.

Climate: This entry includes a brief description of typical weather
regimes throughout the year.

Coastline: This entry gives the total length of the boundary between
the land area (including islands) and the sea.

Communications: This category deals with the means of exchanging
information and includes the radio, telephone, and television entries.

Communications--note: This entry includes miscellaneous communications
information of significance not included elsewhere.

Constitution: This entry includes the dates of adoption, revisions,
and major amendments.

Country map: Most versions of the Factbook provide a country map in
color. The maps were produced from the best information available at
the time of preparation. Names and/or boundaries may have changed
subsequently.

Country name: This entry includes all forms of the country's name
approved by the US Board on Geographic Names (Italy is used as an
example): conventional long form (Italian Republic), conventional
short form (Italy), local long form (Repubblica Italiana), local short
form (Italia), former (Kingdom of Italy), as well as the abbreviation.
See the Terminology note regarding the use of the term "country."

Currency: This entry identifies the local medium of exchange and its
basic subunit.

Current issues: This entry briefly characterizes major geographic,
social, political, and military developments in the past 12 months and
may include a statement about one or two key future trends. This entry
appears for only a few countries at the present time, but will be
added to all countries in the future.

Data code: This entry gives the official US Government digraph that
precisely identifies every land entity without overlap, duplication,
or omission. AF, for example, is the data code for Afghanistan. This
two-letter country code is a standardized geopolitical data element
promulgated in the Federal Information Processing Standards
Publication (FIPS) 10-4 by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology at the US Department of Commerce and maintained by the
Office of the Geographer and Global Issues at the US Department of
State. The data code is used to eliminate confusion and
incompatibility in the collection, processing, and dissemination of
area-specific data and is particularly useful for interchanging data
between databases. Appendix F cross-references various country codes
and Appendix G does the same thing for hydrographic codes. Data
codes-country: This information is presented in Appendix F:
Cross-Reference List of Country Data Codes which includes the US
Government approved Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS),
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), and Internet
country codes.

Data codes--hydrographic: This information is presented in Appendix G:
Cross-Reference List of Hydrographic Data Codes which includes the
International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), Aeronautical Chart and
Information Center (ACIC; now National Imagery and Mapping Agency or
NIMA), and Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) hydrographic codes. The
US Government has not yet approved a standard for hydrographic data
codes similar to the FIPS 10-4 standard for country data codes.

Dates of information: The information cutoff date was 1 January 1997,
although a few important changes after that date have been included.
Most demographic statistics are estimates for 1997.

Death rate: This entry gives the average annual number of deaths
during a year per 1,000 population at midyear; also known as crude
death rate. The death rate, while only a rough indicator of the
mortality situation in a country, accurately indicates the current
mortality impact on population growth. This indicator is significantly
affected by the age distribution, and most countries will eventually
show a rise in the rate, in spite of continued declines in mortality
at all ages, as declining fertility results in an aging population.

Debt--external: This entry gives the total amount of public foreign
financial obligations.

Dependency status: This entry describes the formal relationship
between a nonindependent entity and a sovereign nation.

Dependent areas: This entry contains an alphabetical listing of all
nonindependent entities associated in some way with a particular
sovereign nation.

Diplomatic representation: The US Government has diplomatic relations
with 184 nations, including 178 of the 185 UN members (excluded UN
members are Bhutan, Cuba, Iran, Iraq, North Korea, former Yugoslavia,
and the US itself). In addition, the US has diplomatic relations with
6 nations that are not in the UN--Holy See, Kiribati, Nauru,
Switzerland, Tonga, and Tuvalu. Diplomatic representation from the US:
This entry includes the chief of mission, embassy address, mailing
address, telephone number, FAX number, branch office locations,
consulate general locations, and consulate locations. Diplomatic
representation in the US: This entry includes the chief of mission,
chancery address, telephone number, FAX number, consulate general
locations, consulate locations, honorary consulate general locations,
and honorary consulate locations.

Disputes--international: This entry includes a wide variety of
situations that range from traditional bilateral boundary disputes to
unilateral claims of one sort or another. Information regarding
disputes over international terrestrial and maritime boundaries has
been reviewed by the US Department of State. References to other
situations involving borders or frontiers may also be included, such
as resource disputes, geopolitical questions, or irredentist issues,
however, inclusion does not necessarily constitute official acceptance
or recognition by the US Government.

Economic aid: This entry refers to bilateral commitments of official
development assistance (ODA) and other official flows (OOF). ODA is
defined as financial assistance which is concessional in character,
has the main objective to promote economic development and welfare of
LDCs, and contains a grant element of at least 25%. OOF transactions
are also official government assistance, but with a main objective
other than economic development and with a grant element less than
25%. OOF transactions include official export credits (such as Ex-Im
Bank credits), official equity and portfolio investment, and debt
reorganization by the official sector that does not meet concessional
terms. Aid is considered to have been committed when agreements are
initialed by the parties involved and constitute a formal declaration
of intent. The entry is separated into two components--donor and
recipient.

Economy: This category includes the entries dealing with the size,
development, and management of productive resources, i.e., land,
labor, and capital.

Economy--overview: This entry briefly describes the type of economy,
including the degree of market orientation, the level of economic
development, the most important natural resources, and the unique
areas of specialization. It also characterizes major economic events
and policy changes in the most recent 12 months and may include a
statement about one or two key future macroeconomic trends.

Electricity--capacity: This entry gives the maximum designed potential
for electricity production expressed in kilowatts.

Electricity--consumption per capita: This entry gives the figure for
annual electricity generation plus net imports or minus net exports,
divided by total population for the same year expressed in kilowatt
hours.

Electricity--production: This entry gives the annual amount of
electricity actually generated expressed in kilowatt hours.

Elevation extremes: This entry includes both the highest point and the
lowest point.

Entities: Some of the nations, dependent areas, areas of special
sovereignty, and governments included in this publication are not
independent, and others are not officially recognized by the US
Government. "Nation" refers to a people politically organized into a
sovereign state with a definite territory. "Dependent area" refers to
a broad category of political entities that are associated in some way
with a nation. "Country" names used in the table of contents or for
page headings are usually the short-form names as approved by the US
Board on Geographic Names and may include nations, dependencies, or
other geographic entities. There are a total of 266 separate
geographic entities in The World Factbook that may be categorized as
follows:

NATIONS

184 nations that are UN members (excluding the former Yugoslavia,
which is still counted by the UN)
7 nations that are not members of the UN--Holy See, Kiribati, Nauru,
Serbia and Montenegro, Switzerland, Tonga, Tuvalu

OTHER

1 Taiwan

DEPENDENT AREAS

6 Australian dependencies--Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas
Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard Island and
McDonald Islands, Norfolk Island
2 Danish dependencies--Faroe Islands, Greenland
2 Dutch dependencies--Aruba, Netherlands Antilles
16 French dependencies--Bassas da India, Clipperton Island, Europa
Island, French Guiana, French Polynesia, French Southern and Antarctic
Lands, Glorioso Islands, Guadeloupe, Juan de Nova Island, Martinique,
Mayotte, New Caledonia, Reunion, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Tromelin
Island, Wallis and Futuna
3 New Zealand dependencies--Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau
3 Norwegian dependencies--Bouvet Island, Jan Mayen, Svalbard
1 Portuguese dependency--Macau
16 UK dependencies--Anguilla, Bermuda, British Indian Ocean Territory,
British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Gibraltar,
Guernsey, Hong Kong, Jersey, Isle of Man, Montserrat, Pitcairn
Islands, Saint Helena, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands,
Turks and Caicos Islands
14 US dependencies--American Samoa, Baker Island, Guam, Howland
Island, Jarvis Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Islands,
Navassa Island, Northern Mariana Islands, Palmyra Atoll, Puerto Rico,
Virgin Islands, Wake Island

MISCELLANEOUS

  6 Antarctica, Gaza Strip, Paracel Islands, Spratly Islands, West
Bank, Western Sahara

OTHER ENTITIES

  4 oceans--Arctic Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean, Pacific Ocean
  1 World
__________

266 Total

Environment--current issues: This entry lists the most pressing and
important environmental problems.

Environment--international agreements: This entry separates country
participation in international environmental agreements into two
levels--party to and signed but not ratified. Agreements are listed in
alphabetical order by the abbreviated form of the full name.

Environmental agreements: This information is presented in Appendix D:
Selected International Environmental Agreements which includes the
name, abbreviation, date opened for signature, date entered into
force, objective, and parties by category.

Ethnic groups: This entry provides a rank ordering of ethnic groups
starting with the largest and sometimes includes the percent of total
population. Exchange rates: This entry provides the official value of
a nation's monetary unit at a given date or over a given period of
time, as expressed in units of local currency per US dollar and as
determined by international market forces or official fiat.

Executive branch: This entry includes several subfields. Chief of
state includes the name and title of the titular leader of the country
who represents the state at official and ceremonial functions but may
not be involved with the day-to-day activities of the government. Head
of government includes the name and title of the administrative leader
who is designated to manage the day-to-day activities of the
government. Cabinet includes the official name for this body of
advisers and the method of selection for members. Elections includes
the nature of election process or accession to power, date of the last
election, and date of the next election. Election results includes the
percent of vote for each candidate in the last election. In the UK,
the monarch is the chief of state, and the prime minister is the head
of government. In the US, the President is both the chief of state and
the head of government.

Exports: This entry includes three subfields. Total value is the total
US dollar amount of exports on an f.o.b. basis. Commodities is a rank
ordering of exported products starting with the most important and
sometimes includes the percent of dollar value. Partners is a rank
ordering of trading partners starting with the most important and
sometimes includes the percent of dollar value.

Fiscal year: This entry identifies the beginning and ending months for
a country's accounting period of 12 months, which often is the
calendar year but may begin in any month. FY93/94 refers to the fiscal
year that began in calendar year 1993 and ended in calendar year 1994.
All yearly references are for the calendar year (CY) unless indicated
as a noncalendar fiscal year (FY).

Flag description: This entry provides a written flag description
produced from actual flags or the best information available at the
time the entry was written. The flags of independent nations are used
by their dependencies unless there is an officially recognized local
flag. Some disputed and other areas do not have flags.

Flag graphic: Most versions of the Factbook provide a color flag
available at the beginning of the country entry. The flag graphics
were produced from actual flags or the best information available at
the time of preparation. The flags of independent nations are used by
their dependencies unless there is an officially recognized local
flag. Some disputed and other areas do not have flags.

GDP: This entry gives the gross domestic product (GDP) or value of all
final goods and services produced within a nation in a given year. GDP
dollar estimates in the Factbook are derived from purchasing power
parity (PPP) calculations. See the note on GDP methodology for more
information.

GDP methodology: In the Economy section, GDP dollar estimates for all
countries are derived from purchasing power parity (PPP) calculations
rather than from conversions at official currency exchange rates. The
PPP method involves the use of standardized international dollar price
weights, which are applied to the quantities of final goods and
services produced in a given economy. The data derived from the PPP
method provide a better comparison of economic well-being between
countries. The division of a GDP estimate in domestic currency by the
corresponding PPP estimate in dollars gives the PPP conversion rate.
When converted at PPP rates, $1,000 will buy the same market basket of
goods in any country. Whereas PPP estimates for OECD countries are
quite reliable, PPP estimates for developing countries are often rough
approximations. Most of the GDP estimates are based on extrapolation
of PPP numbers published by the UN International Comparison Program
(UNICP) and by Professors Robert Summers and Alan Heston of the
University of Pennsylvania and their colleagues. In contrast, currency
exchange rates depend on a variety of international and domestic
financial forces that often have little relation to domestic output.
In developing countries with weak currencies the exchange rate
estimate of GDP in dollars is typically one-fourth to one-half the PPP
estimate. Furthermore, exchange rates may suddenly go up or down by
10% or more because of market forces or official fiat whereas real
output has remained unchanged. On 12 January 1994, for example, the 14
countries of the African Financial Community (whose currencies are
tied to the French franc) devalued their currencies by 50%. This move,
of course, did not cut the real output of these countries by half. One
important caution: the proportion of, say, defense expenditures as a
percentage of GDP in local currency accounts may differ substantially
from the proportion when GDP accounts are expressed in PPP terms, as,
for example, when an observer tries to estimate the dollar level of
Russian or Japanese military expenditures. Note: the numbers for GDP
and other economic data can not be chained together from successive
volumes of the Factbook because of changes in the US dollar measuring
rod, revisions of data by statistical agencies, use of new or
different sources of information, and changes in national statistical
methods and practices. For statistical series on GDP and other
economic variables, see the [1]Handbook of International Economic
Statistics available from the same sources as The World Factbook.

GDP--composition by sector: This entry gives the percentage
contribution of agriculture, industry, and services to total GDP.

GDP--per capita: This entry shows GDP on a purchasing power parity
basis divided by population as of 1 July for the same year.

GDP--real growth rate: This entry gives GDP growth on an annual basis
adjusted for inflation and expressed as a percent.

Geographic coordinates: This entry includes rounded latitude and
longitude for finding purposes of the approximate geographic center of
the country and is based on the Gazetteer of Conventional Names, Third
Edition, August 1988, US Board on Geographic Names and on other
sources.

Geographic names: This information is presented in Appendix H:
Cross-Reference List of Geographic Names which indicates where various
geographic names--including the location of all US Foreign Service
Posts, alternate names of countries, former names, and political or
geographical portions of larger entities--can be found in The World
Factbook. Spellings are normally, but not always, those approved by
the US Board on Geographic Names (BGN). Alternate names are included
in parentheses, while additional information is included in brackets.

Geography: This category includes the entries dealing with the natural
environment and the effects of human activity.

Geography--note: This entry includes miscellaneous geographic
information of significance not included elsewhere.

GNP: Gross national product (GNP) is the value of all final goods and
services produced within a nation in a given year, plus income earned
by its citizens abroad, minus income earned by foreigners from
domestic production. The Factbook uses GDP rather than GNP to measure
national production.

Government: This category includes the entries dealing with the system
for the adoption and administration of public policy.

Government type: This entry gives the basic form of government (e.g.,
republic, constitutional monarchy, federal republic, parliamentary
democracy, military dictatorship).

Government--note: This entry includes miscellaneous government
information of significance not included elsewhere.

Gross domestic product: see GDP

Gross national product: see GNP

Gross world product: see GWP

GWP: This entry gives the gross world product (GWP) or aggregate value
of all final goods and services produced worldwide in a given year.

Heliports: This entry gives the total number of helicopter takeoff and
landing sites (which may or may not have fuel or other services).

Highways: This entry includes the total length of the highway system
as well as the length of the paved and unpaved components.

Historical perspective: This entry contains a brief summary of the
background information necessary to understand the current situation
in a country. The entry appears for only a few countries at the
present time, but will be added to all countries in the future.

Illicit drugs: This entry gives information on the five categories of
illicit drugs--narcotics, stimulants, depressants (sedatives),
hallucinogens, and cannabis. These categories include many drugs
legally produced and prescribed by doctors as well as those illegally
produced and sold outside of medical channels.

Cannabis (Cannabis sativa) is the common hemp plant, which provides
hallucinogens with some sedative properties, and includes marijuana
(pot, Acapulco gold, grass, reefer), tetrahydrocannabinol (THC,
Marinol), hashish (hash), and hashish oil (hash oil).

Coca (mostly Erythroxylum coca) is a bush with leaves that contain the
stimulant used to make cocaine. Coca is not to be confused with cocoa,
which comes from cacao seeds and is used in making chocolate, cocoa,
and cocoa butter.

Cocaine is a stimulant derived from the leaves of the coca bush.

Depressants (sedatives) are drugs that reduce tension and anxiety and
include chloral hydrate, barbiturates (Amytal, Nembutal, Seconal,
phenobarbital), benzodiazepines (Librium, Valium), methaqualone
(Quaalude), glutethimide (Doriden), and others (Equanil, Placidyl,
Valmid).

Drugs are any chemical substances that effect a physical, mental,
emotional, or behavioral change in an individual.

Drug abuse is the use of any licit or illicit chemical substance that
results in physical, mental, emotional, or behavioral impairment in an
individual.

Hallucinogens are drugs that affect sensation, thinking,
self-awareness, and emotion. Hallucinogens include LSD (acid,
microdot), mescaline and peyote (mexc, buttons, cactus), amphetamine
variants (PMA, STP, DOB), phencyclidine (PCP, angel dust, hog),
phencyclidine analogues (PCE, PCPy, TCP), and others (psilocybin,
psilocyn).

Hashish is the resinous exudate of the cannabis or hemp plant
(Cannabis sativa).

Heroin is a semisynthetic derivative of morphine.

Mandrax is a trade name for methaqualone, a pharmaceutical depressant.

Marijuana is the dried leaves of the cannabis or hemp plant (Cannabis
sativa).

Methaqualone is a pharmaceutical depressant, referred to as mandrax in
Southwest Asia.

Narcotics are drugs that relieve pain, often induce sleep, and refer
to opium, opium derivatives, and synthetic substitutes. Natural
narcotics include opium (paregoric, parepectolin), morphine
(MS-Contin, Roxanol), codeine (Tylenol with codeine, Empirin with
codeine, Robitussan AC), and thebaine. Semisynthetic narcotics include
heroin (horse, smack), and hydromorphone (Dilaudid). Synthetic
narcotics include meperidine or Pethidine (Demerol, Mepergan),
methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), and others (Darvon, Lomotil).

Opium is the brown, gummy exudate of the incised, unripe seedpod of
the opium poppy.

Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum) is the source for the natural and
semisynthetic narcotics.

Poppy straw concentrate is the alkaloid derived from the mature dried
opium poppy.

Qat (kat, khat) is a stimulant from the buds or leaves of Catha edulis
that is chewed or drunk as tea.

Quaaludes is the North American slang term for methaqualone, a
pharmaceutical depressant.

Imports: This entry includes three subfields. Total value is the total
US dollar amount of imports on a c.i.f. or f.o.b. basis. Commodities
is a rank ordering of imported products starting with the most
important and sometimes includes the percent of dollar value. Partners
is a rank ordering of trading partners starting with the most
important and sometimes includes the percent of dollar value.

Independence: This entry gives the date that sovereignty was achieved
and from what nation.

Industrial production growth rate: This entry gives the annual
percentage increase in industrial production (includes manufacturing,
mining, and construction).

Industries: This entry provides a rank ordering of industries starting
with the largest by value of annual output.

Infant mortality rate: This entry gives the number of deaths of
infants under one year old in a given year per 1,000 live births
occurring in the same year. The infant mortality rate is often used an
indicator of the level of health in a country.

Inflation rate-consumer price index: This entry furnishes the annual
percent change in consumer prices compared with the previous year's
consumer prices.

International disputes: see Disputes--international

International organization participation: This entry lists in
alphabetical order by abbreviation those international organizations
in which the subject country is a member or participates in some other
way.

International organizations: This information is presented in Appendix
C: International Organizations and Groups which includes the name,
abbreviation, address, telephone, FAX, date established, aim, and
members by category.

Introduction: This category includes two entries--Current issues and
Historical perspective.

Irrigated land: This entry gives the number of square kilometers of
land area that is artificially supplied with water.

Judicial branch: This entry contains the name(s) of the highest
court(s) and a brief description of the selection process for members.

Labor force: This entry contains the total labor force figure and a
rank ordering of component parts by occupation.

Land boundaries: This entry contains the total length of all land
boundaries and the individual lengths for each of the contiguous
border countries.

Land use: This entry contains the percentage shares of total land area
for five different types of land use. Arable land--land cultivated for
crops that are replanted after each harvest like wheat, maize, and
rice. Permanent crops--land cultivated for crops that are not
replanted after each harvest like citrus, coffee, and rubber.
Permanent pastures--land permanently used for herbaceous forage crops.
Forests and woodland--land under dense or open stands of trees.
Other--any land type not specifically mentioned above like urban
areas, roads, desert, etc.

Languages: This entry provides a rank ordering of languages starting
with the largest and sometimes includes the percent of total
population speaking that language.

Legal system: This entry contains a brief description of the legal
system's historical roots, role in government, and acceptance of
International Court of Justice (ICJ) jurisdiction.

Legislative branch: This entry contains information on the structure
(unicameral, bicameral, tricameral), formal name, number of seats, and
term of office. Elections includes the nature of election process or
accession to power, date of the last election, and date of the next
election. Election results includes the percent of vote and/or number
of seats held by each party in the last election.

Life expectancy at birth: This entry contains the average number of
years to be lived by a group of people born in the same year, if
mortality at each age remains constant in the future. The entry
includes total population as well as the male and female components.
Life expectancy at birth is also a measure of overall quality of life
in a country and summarizes the mortality at all ages. It can also be
thought of as indicating the potential return on investment in human
capital, and is necessary for the calculation of various actuarial
measures.

Literacy: This entry includes a definition of literacy and Census
Bureau percentages for the total population, males, and females. There
are no universal definitions and standards of literacy. Unless
otherwise specified, all rates are based on the most common
definition--the ability to read and write at a specified age.
Detailing the standards that individual countries use to assess the
ability to read and write is beyond the scope of the Factbook.
Information on literacy, while not a perfect measure of educational
results, is probably the most easily available and valid for
international comparisons. Low levels of literacy, and education in
general, can impede the economic development of a country in the
current rapidly changing, technology-driven world.

Location: This entry identifies the country's regional location,
neighboring countries, and adjacent bodies of water.

Map references: This entry includes the name of the Factbook reference
map on which a country may be found. The entry on Geographic
coordinates may be helpful in finding some smaller countries.

Maritime claims: This entry includes the following claims: contiguous
zone, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone, exclusive fishing
zone, extended fishing zone, none (usually for a landlocked country),
other (unique maritime claims like Libya's Gulf of Sidra Closing Line
or North Korea's Military Boundary Line), and territorial sea. The
proximity of neighboring states may prevent some national claims from
being extended the full distance.

Merchant marine: Merchant marine may be defined as all ships engaged
in the carriage of goods; all commercial vessels (as opposed to all
nonmilitary ships) which excludes tugs, fishing vessels, offshore oil
rigs, etc.; or a grouping of merchant ships by nationality or
register. This entry contains information in two subfields--total and
ships by type. Total includes the total number of ships (1,000 GRT or
over), total DWT for all ships, and total GRT for all ships. Ships by
type includes a listing of barge carriers, bulk cargo ships, cargo
ships, combination bulk carriers, combination ore/oil carriers,
container ships, intermodal ships, liquefied gas tankers, livestock
carriers, multifunction large-load carriers, oil tankers, passenger
ships, passenger-cargo ships, railcar carriers, refrigerated cargo
ships, roll-on/roll-off cargo ships, short-sea passenger ships,
specialized tankers, tanker tug-barges, and vehicle carriers.

Captive register is a register of ships maintained by a territory,
possession, or colony primarily or exclusively for the use of ships
owned in the parent country; also referred to as an offshore register,
the offshore equivalent of an internal register. Ships on a captive
register will fly the same flag as the parent country, or a local
variant of it, but will be subject to the maritime laws and taxation
rules of the offshore territory. Although the nature of a captive
register makes it especially desirable for ships owned in the parent
country, just as in the internal register, the ships may also be owned
abroad. The captive register then acts as a flag of convenience
register, except that it is not the register of an independent state.

Flag of convenience register is a national register offering
registration to a merchant ship not owned in the flag state. The major
flags of convenience (FOC) attract ships to their registers by virtue
of low fees, low or nonexistent taxation of profits, and liberal
manning requirements. True FOC registers are characterized by having
relatively few of the registered ships actually owned in the flag
state. Thus, while virtually any flag can be used for ships under a
given set of circumstances, an FOC register is one where the majority
of the merchant fleet is owned abroad. It is also referred to as an
open register.

Flag state is the nation in which a ship is registered and which holds
legal jurisdiction over operation of the ship, whether at home or
abroad. Maritime legislation of the flag state determines how a ship
is crewed and taxed and whether a foreign-owned ship may be placed on
the register.

Internal register is a register of ships maintained as a subset of a
national register. Ships on the internal register fly the national
flag and have that nationality but are subject to a separate set of
maritime rules from those on the main national register. These
differences usually include lower taxation of profits, use of foreign
nationals as crew members, and, usually, ownership outside the flag
state (when it functions as an FOC register). The Norwegian
International Ship Register and Danish International Ship Register are
the most notable examples of an internal register. Both have been
instrumental in stemming flight from the national flag to flags of
convenience and in attracting foreign-owned ships to the Norwegian and
Danish flags.

Merchant ship is a vessel that carries goods against payment of
freight; commonly used to denote any nonmilitary ship but accurately
restricted to commercial vessels only.

Register is the record of a ship's ownership and nationality as listed
with the maritime authorities of a country; also, the compendium of
such individual ships' registrations. Registration of a ship provides
it with a nationality and makes it subject to the laws of the country
in which registered (the flag state) regardless of the nationality of
the ship's ultimate owner.

Military: This category includes the entries dealing with a country's
military structure, manpower, and expenditures.

Military branches: This entry lists the names of the ground, naval,
air, marine, and other defense or military-type forces.

Military expenditures--dollar figure: This entry gives current
military expenditures in US dollars; the figure is calculated by
multiplying the estimated defense spending in percentage terms by the
gross domestic product (GDP) in purchasing power parity (PPP) terms.
The figure should be treated with caution because of different price
patterns and accounting methods among nations.

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: This entry gives current
military expenditures as an estimated percent of gross domestic
product (GDP).

Military manpower--availability: This entry gives the total numbers of
males and females age 15-49 and assumes that every individual is fit
to serve.

Military manpower--fit for military service: This entry gives the
number of males and females age 15-49 fit for military service. This
is a more refined measure of potential military manpower availability
which tries to correct for the health situation in the country and
reduces the maximum potential number to a more realistic estimate of
the actual number fit to serve.

Military manpower--military age: This entry gives the minimum age at
which an individual may volunteer for military service or be subject
to conscription.

Military manpower--reaching military age annually: This entry gives
the number of draft-age males and females entering the military
manpower pool in any given year and is a measure of the availability
of draft-age young adults.

Military--note: This entry includes miscellaneous military information
of significance not included elsewhere.

Money figures: All money figures are expressed in contemporaneous US
dollars unless otherwise indicated.

National capital: This entry gives the location of the seat of
government.

National holiday: This entry gives the primary national day of
celebration--usually independence day.

Nationality: This entry provides the identifying terms for
citizens--noun and adjective.

Natural hazards: This entry lists potential natural disasters.

Natural resources: This entry lists a country's mineral, petroleum,
hydropower, and other resources of commercial importance.

Net migration rate: This entry includes the figure for the difference
between the number of persons entering and leaving a country during
the year per 1,000 persons (based on midyear population). An excess of
persons entering the country is referred to as net immigration (e.g.,
3.56 migrants/1,000 population); an excess of persons leaving the
country as net emigration (e.g., -9.26 migrants/1,000 population). The
net migration rate indicates the contribution of migration to the
overall level of population change. High levels of migration can cause
problems such as increasing unemployment and potential ethnic strife
(if people are coming in) or reducing the labor force, perhaps in
certain key sectors (if people are leaving).

People: This category includes the entries dealing with the
characteristics of the people and their society.

People--note: This entry includes miscellaneous demographic
information of significance not included elsewhere.

Pipelines: This entry gives the lengths and types of pipelines for
transporting products like natural gas, crude oil, or petroleum
products.

Political parties and leaders: This entry includes a listing of
political organizations and their leaders.

Political pressure groups and leaders: This entry includes a listing
of organizations with leaders involved in politics, but not standing
for legislative election.

Population: This entry gives an estimate from the US Bureau of the
Census based on statistics from population censuses, vital statistics
registration systems, or sample surveys pertaining to the recent past,
and on assumptions about future trends. Starting with the 1993
Factbook, demographic estimates for some countries (mostly African)
have taken into account the effects of the growing incidence of AIDS
infections; in 1997 these countries were Botswana, Brazil, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Republic of the
Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, Guyana, Haiti, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi,
Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa, Tanzania, Thailand, Uganda, Zaire which
is now known as Democratic Republic of the Congo, Zambia, and
Zimbabwe. The total population presents one overall measure of the
potential impact of the country on the world and within its region.

Population growth rate: The average annual percent change in the
population, resulting from a surplus (or deficit) of births over
deaths and the balance of migrants entering and leaving a country. The
rate may be positive or negative. Also known as growth rate or average
annual rate of growth. The growth rate is a factor in determining how
rapidly a country responds to the changing needs of its people in
terms of infrastructure (e.g., schools, hospitals, housing, roads),
resources (e.g., food, water, electricity), and jobs. Rapid population
growth can also be seen as threatening by neighboring countries.

Ports and harbors: This entry lists a few ports and harbors selected
on the basis of overall importance to each country. This is determined
by evaluating a number of factors (e.g., dollar value of goods
handled, gross tonnage, facilities, military significance).

Radio broadcast stations: This entry includes the total number of AM,
FM, and shortwave broadcast stations.

Radios: This entry gives the total number of radio receivers.

Railways: This entry includes the total length of the railway network
and component parts by gauge: broad, dual, narrow, standard, and
other.

Reference maps: This section includes world, regional, and special or
current interest maps.

Religions: This entry includes a rank ordering of religions starting
with the largest and sometimes includes the percent of total
population.

Sex ratio: This entry includes the number of males for each female in
five age groups-at birth, under 15 years, 15-64 years, 65 years and
over, and for the total population. Sex ratio at birth has recently
emerged as an indicator of certain kinds of sex discrimination in some
countries. For instance, high sex ratios at birth in some Asian
countries are now attributed to sex-selective abortion and infanticide
due to a strong preference for sons. This will affect future marriage
patterns and fertility patterns and could cause unrest among young
adult males who are unable to find partners. The sex ratio at birth
for the World is 1.06 (1997 est.).

Suffrage: This entry gives the age at enfranchisement and whether the
right to vote is universal or restricted.

Telephone numbers: All telephone numbers in the Factbook consist of
the country code in brackets, the city or area code (where required)
in parentheses, and the local number. The one component that is not
presented is the international access code which varies from country
to country. For example, an international direct dial telephone call
placed from the US to Madrid, Spain, would be as follows:

011 [34] (1) 577-xxxx where
011 is the international access code for station-to-station calls
(01 is for calls other than station-to-station calls),
[34] is the country code for Spain,
(1) is the city code for Madrid,
577 is the local exchange, and
xxxx is the local telephone number.

An international direct dial telephone call placed from another
country to the US would be as follows:

An international direct dial telephone call placed from another
country to the US would be as follows:

[1] is the country code for the US,
(202) is the area code for Washington, DC,
939 is the local exchange, and
xxxx is the local telephone number.

Telephone system: This entry includes a brief characterization of the
system with details on the domestic and international components. The
following terms and abbreviations are used throughout the entry:

Arabsat-Arab Satellite Communications Organization (Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia)

Autodin--Automatic Digital Network (US Department of Defense)

CB--citizen's band mobile radio communications

cellular telephone system--the telephones in this system are radio

transceivers, each instrument having its own private radio frequency
with sufficient radiated power to reach the booster station in its
area (cell), from which the telephone signal is fed to a regular
telephone exchange

Central American Microwave System--a trunk microwave radio relay
system that links the countries of Central America and Mexico with
each other

coaxial cable--a multichannel communication cable consisting of a
central conducting wire, surrounded by and insulated from a
cylindrical conducting shell; a large number of telephone channels can
be made available within the insulated space by the use of a large
number of carrier frequencies

DSN--Defense Switched Network (formerly Automatic Voice Network or
Autovon); basic general--purpose, switched voice network of the
Defense Communications System (US Department of Defense)

Eutelsat--European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Paris)

fiber-optic cable--a multichannel communications cable using a thread
of optical glass fibers as a transmission medium in which the signal
(voice, video, etc.) is in the form of a coded pulse of light

HF--high-frequency; any radio frequency in the 3,000- to 30,000-kHz
range

Inmarsat-International Mobile Satellite Organization (London);
provider of global mobile satellite communications for commercial and
distress and safety applications, at sea, in the air, and on land

Intelsat--International Telecommunications Satellite Organization
(Washington, DC)

Intersputnik--International Organization of Space Communications
(Moscow); first established in the former Soviet Union and the East
European countries, it is now marketing its services worldwide with
earth stations in North America, Africa, and East Asia

landline--communication wire or cable of any sort that is installed on
poles or buried in the ground

Marecs--Maritime European Communications Satellite used in the
Inmarsat system on lease from the European Space Agency

Marisat--satellites of the Comsat Corporation that participate in the
Inmarsat system

Medarabtel--the Middle East Telecommunications Project of the
International Telecommunications Union (ITU), providing a modern
telecommunications network, primarily by microwave radio relay,
linking Algeria, Djibouti, Egypt, Jordan, Libya, Morocco, Saudi
Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, and Yemen (initially started
in Morocco in 1970 by the Arab Telecommunications Union (ATU) and
known at that time as the Middle East Mediterranean Telecommunications
Network)

NMT--Nordic Mobile Telephone; an analog cellular telephone system that
was developed jointly by the national telecommunications authorities
of the Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and
Sweden)

Orbita--a Russian television service; also the trade name of a
packet--switched digital telephone network

radiotelephone communications--the two--way transmission and reception
of sounds by broadcast radio on authorized frequencies using telephone
handsets

satellite communication system--a communication system consisting of
two or more earth stations and at least one satellite that provides
long distance transmission of voice, data, and television; the system
usually serves as a trunk connection between telephone exchanges; if
the earth stations are in the same country, it is a domestic system

satellite earth station--a communications facility with a microwave
radio transmitting and receiving antenna and required receiving and
transmitting equipment for communicating with satellites

satellite link--a radio connection between a satellite and an earth
station permitting communication between them, either one--way (down
link from satellite to earth station--television receive--only
transmission) or two-way (telephone channels)

SHF--super--high--frequency; any radio frequency in the 3,000- to
30,000-MHz range

SHF--super-high-frequency; any radio frequency in the 3,000- to
30,000-MHz range

Solidaridad-geosynchronous satellites in Mexico's system of
international telecommunications in the Western Hemisphere

Statsionar--Russia's geostationary system for satellite
telecommunications

submarine cable--a cable designed for service under water

TAT--Trans--Atlantic Telephone; any of a number of high--capacity
submarine coaxial telephone cables linking Europe with North America

telefax--facsimile service between subscriber stations via the public
switched telephone network or the international Datel network

telegraph--a telecommunications system designed for unmodulated
electric impulse transmission

telex--a communication service involving teletypewriters connected by
wire through automatic exchanges

tropospheric scatter--a form of microwave radio transmission in which
the troposphere is used to scatter and reflect a fraction of the
incident radio waves back to earth; powerful, highly directional
antennas are used to transmit and receive the microwave signals;
reliable over-the-horizon communications are realized for distances up
to 600 miles in a single hop; additional hops can extend the range of
this system for very long distances

trunk network--a network of switching centers, connected by
multichannel trunk lines

UHF--ultra-high-frequency; any radio frequency in the 300- to
3,000-MHz range

VHF--very-high-frequency; any radio frequency in the 30- to 300-MHz
range

Telephones: This entry gives the total number of subscribers.

Television broadcast stations: This entry gives the total number of
separate broadcast stations plus any repeater stations.

Televisions: This entry gives the total number of television sets.

Terminology: Due to the highly structured nature of the Factbook
database, some collective generic terms have to be used. "Country
name" and "National capital", for example are used collectively to
include nations, dependent areas, uninhabited islands, areas of
special sovereignty, etc. The term "Military" is also used as an
umbrella term for various civil defense, security, and defense
activities.

Terrain: This entry contains a brief description of the topography.

Total fertility rate: This entry gives a figure for the average number
of children that would be born per woman if all women lived to the end
of their childbearing years and bore children according to a given
fertility rate at each age. The total fertility rate is a more direct
measure of the level of fertility than the crude birth rate, since it
refers to births per woman. This indicator shows the potential for
population growth in the country. High rates will also place some
limits on the labor force participation rates for women. Large numbers
of children born to women indicate large family sizes that might limit
the capacity of the families to educate their children.

Transnational Issues: This category includes only two entries at the
present time. Disputes--international and Illicit drugs--deal with
current issues going beyond national boundaries.

Transportation: This category includes the entries dealing with the
movement of people or material.

Transportation--note: This entry includes miscellaneous transportation
information of significance not included elsewhere.

Unemployment rate: This entry contains the percent of the labor force
that is without jobs. Substantial underemployment might be noted.

United Nations System: This information is presented in Appendix B:
United Nations System which is a chart, table, or text (depending on
the version of the Factbook) that shows the organization of the UN in
detail.

Waterways: This entry gives the total length and individual names of
navigable rivers, canals, and other inland bodies of water.

Weights and measures: This information is presented in Appendix E:
Weights and Measures which includes mathematical notations
(mathematical powers and names), metric interrelationships (prefix;
symbol; length, weight, or capacity; area; volume), and standard
conversion factors.

Years: All year references are for the calendar year (CY) unless
indicated as fiscal year (FY). The calendar year is an accounting
period of 12 months from 1 January to 31 December. The fiscal year is
an accounting period of 12 months other than 1 January to 31 December.
FY93/94 refers to the fiscal year that began in calendar year 1993 and
ended in calendar year 1994.

Note: Information for the US and US dependencies was compiled from
material in the public domain and does not represent Intelligence
Community estimates. The [2]Handbook of International Economic
Statistics, published annually in September by the Central
Intelligence Agency, contains detailed economic information for the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
countries, the successor nations to the Soviet Union, and selected
other countries. The Handbook can be obtained wherever the Factbook is
available.

References

1. http://www.odci.gov/cia/publications/hies97/index.htm
2. http://www.odci.gov/cia/publications/hies97/index.htm

______________________________________________________________________

GUIDE TO COUNTRY PROFILES (CATEGORIES, FIELDS AND SUBFIELDS)

Introduction

Current issues
Historical perspective

Geography

Location
Geographic coordinates
Map references
Area
total
    land
    water

Area--comparative
Land boundaries
total
    border countries

Coastline
Maritime claims
contiguous zone
    continental shelf
    exclusive economic zone
    exclusive fishing zone
    extended fishing zone
    other
    territorial sea

Climate
Terrain
Elevation extremes
lowest point
    highest point

Natural resources
Land use
arable land
    permanent crops
    permanent pastures
    forests and woodland
    other

Irrigated land
Natural hazards
Environment--current issues
Environment--international agreements
party to
    signed, but not ratified

Geography--note

People

Population
Age structure
0-14 years
    15-64 years
    65 years and over

Population growth rate
Birth rate
Death rate
Net migration rate
Sex ratio
at birthunder
    15 years
    15-64 years
    65 years and over
    total population

Infant mortality rate
Life expectancy at birth
total population
    male
    female

Total fertility rate
Nationality
noun
    adjective

Ethnic groups
Religions
Languages
Literacy
definition
    total population
    male
    female

Government

Country name
conventional long form
    conventional short form
    local long form
    local short form
    former

Data code
Dependency status
Government type
National capital
Administrative divisions
Dependent areas
Independence
National holiday
Constitution
Legal system
Suffrage
Executive branch
chief of state
    head of government
    cabinet
    elections
    election results

Legislative branch
elections
    election results

Judicial branch
Political parties and leaders
Political pressure groups and leaders
International organization participation
Diplomatic representation in the US
chief of mission
    chancery
    telephone
    FAX
    consulate(s) general
    consulate(s)
    honorary consulate(s)
    honorary consulate(s) general

Diplomatic representation from the US
chief of mission
    embassy
    branch office
    mailing address
    telephone
    FAX
    consulate(s) general
    consulate(s)

Flag description
Government--note

Economy

Economy--overview
GDP
GDP--real growth
GDP--per capita
GDP--composition by sector
agriculture
    industry
    services

Inflation rate--consumer price index
Labor force
total
    by occupation

Unemployment rate
Budget
revenues
    expenditures

Industries
Industrial production growth rate
Electricity--capacity
Electricity--production
Electricity--consumption per capita
Agriculture--products
Exports
total value
    commodities
    partners

Imports
total value
    commodities
    partners

Debt--external
Economic aid
donor
    recipient

Currency
Exchange rates
Fiscal year

Communications

Telephones
Telephone system
domestic
    international

Radio broadcast stations
Radios
Television broadcast stations
Televisions
Communications--note

Transportation

Railways
total
    broad gauge
    dual gauge
    narrow gauge
    other gauges
    standard gauge

Highways
total
    paved
    unpaved

Waterways
Pipelines
Ports and harbors
Merchant marine
total
    ships by type

Airports
Airports--with paved runways
total
    over 3,047m
    2,438 to 3,047m
    1,524 to 2,437m
    914 to 1,523m
    under 914m

Airports--with unpaved runways
total
    over 3,047m
    2,438 to 3,047m
    1,524 to 2,437m
    914 to 1,523m
    under 914m

Heliports
Transportation--note

Military

Military branches
Military manpower--military age
Military manpower--availability
males age 15-49
    females age 15-49

Military manpower--fit for military service
males
    females

Military manpower--reaching military age annually
males
    females

Military expenditures--dollar figure
Military expenditures--percent of GDP
Military--note

Transnational Issues

Disputes--international
Illicit drugs

______________________________________________________________________


AFGHANISTAN

@Afghanistan:Geography

Location: Southern Asia, north and west of Pakistan, east of Iran

Geographic coordinates: 33 00 N, 65 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total: 647,500 sq km
land: 647,500 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 5,529 km
border countries: China 76 km, Iran 936 km, Pakistan 2,430 km,
Tajikistan 1,206 km, Turkmenistan 744 km, Uzbekistan 137 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: arid to semiarid; cold winters and hot summers

Terrain: mostly rugged mountains; plains in north and southwest

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Amu Darya 258 m
highest point: Nowshak 7,485 m

Natural resources: natural gas, petroleum, coal, copper, talc,
barites, sulfur, lead, zinc, iron ore, salt, precious and semiprecious
stones

Land use:
arable land: 12%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 46%
forests and woodland: 3%
other: 39% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 30,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: damaging earthquakes occur in Hindu Kush mountains;
flooding

Environment - current issues: soil degradation; overgrazing;
deforestation (much of the remaining forests are being cut down for
fuel and building materials); desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban
signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: landlocked

@Afghanistan:People

Population: 23,738,085 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 5,201,585; female 5,003,503)
15-64 years: 54% (male 6,680,687; female 6,208,463)
65 years and over : 3% (male 341,301; female 302,546) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 4.48% (1997 est.)
note: this rate reflects the continued return of refugees

Birth rate: 42.72 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 17.78 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 19.9 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.13 male(s)/female
total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 146.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 46.34 years
male: 46.89 years
female: 45.76 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.07 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Afghan(s)
adjective: Afghan

Ethnic groups: Pashtun 38%, Tajik 25%, Uzbek 6%, Hazara 19%, minor
ethnic groups (Aimaks, Turkmen, Baloch, and others)

Religions: Sunni Muslim 84%, Shi'a Muslim 15%, other 1%

Languages: Pashtu 35%, Afghan Persian (Dari) 50%, Turkic languages
(primarily Uzbek and Turkmen) 11%, 30 minor languages (primarily
Balochi and Pashai) 4%, much bilingualism

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 31.5%
male : 47.2%
female: 15% (1995 est.)

@Afghanistan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Islamic State of Afghanistan
conventional short form: Afghanistan
local long form : Dowlat-e Eslami-ye Afghanestan
local short form: Afghanestan
former: Republic of Afghanistan

Data code: AF

Government type: transitional government

National capital: Kabul

Administrative divisions: 30 provinces (velayat, singular - velayat);
Badakhshan, Badghis, Baghlan, Balkh, Bamian, Farah, Faryab, Ghazni,
Ghowr, Helmand, Herat, Jowzjan, Kabol, Kandahar, Kapisa, Konar,
Kondoz, Laghman, Lowgar, Nangarhar, Nimruz, Oruzgan, Paktia, Paktika,
Parvan, Samangan, Sar-e Pol, Takhar, Vardak, Zabol
note : there may be two new provinces of Nurestan (Nuristan) and
Khowst

Independence: 19 August 1919 (from UK control over Afghan foreign
affairs)

National holiday: Victory of the Muslim Nation, 28 April; Remembrance
Day for Martyrs and Disabled, 4 May; Independence Day, 19 August

Constitution: none

Legal system: a new legal system has not been adopted but all factions
tacitly agree they will follow Islamic law (Shari'a)

Suffrage: undetermined; previously males 15-50 years of age

Executive branch: on 27 September 1996, the ruling members of the
Afghan Government were displaced by members of the Islamic Taliban
movement; the Islamic State of Afghanistan has no functioning
government at this time, and the country remains divided among
fighting factions
note: the Taliban have declared themselves the legitimate government
of Afghanistan; the UN has deferred a decision on credentials and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference has left the Afghan seat vacant
until the question of legitimacy can be resolved through negotiations
among the warring factions; the country is essentially divided along
ethnic lines; the Taliban controls the capital of Kabul and
approximately two-thirds of the country including the predominately
ethnic Pashtun areas in southern Afghanistan; opposing factions have
their stonghold in the ethnically diverse north - General DOSTAM's
National Islamic Movement controls several northcentral provinces and
Commander MASOOD controls the ethnic Tajik majority areas of the
northeast

Legislative branch: non-functioning as of June 1993

Judicial branch: non-functioning as of March 1995, although there are
local Shari'a (Islamic law) courts throughout the country

Political parties and leaders: Taliban (Religious Students Movement),
Mohammad OMAR; Supreme Defense Council of Afghanistan [comprised of
Jumbesh-i-Melli Islami (National Islamic Movement), Abdul Rashid
DOSTAM; Jamiat-i-Islami (Islamic Society), Burhanuddin RABBANI and
Ahmad Shah MASOOD; and Hizbi Wahdat-Khalili faction (Islamic Unity
Party), Abdul Karim KHALILI]; other smaller parties are Hizbi
Islami-Gulbuddin (Islamic Party), Gulbuddin HIKMATYAR faction; Hizbi
Islami-Khalis (Islamic Party), Yunis KHALIS faction; Ittihad-i-Islami
Barai Azadi Afghanistan (Islamic Union for the Liberation of
Afghanistan), Abdul Rasul SAYYAF; Harakat-Inqilab-i-Islami (Islamic
Revolutionary Movement), Mohammad Nabi MOHAMMADI;
Jabha-i-Najat-i-Milli Afghanistan (Afghanistan National Liberation
Front), Sibghatullah MOJADDEDI; Mahaz-i-Milli-Islami (National Islamic
Front), Sayed Ahamad GAILANI; Hizbi Wahdat-Akbari faction (Islamic
Unity Party), Mohammad Akbar AKBARI; Harakat-i-Islami (Islamic
Movement), Mohammed Asif MOHSENI

Political pressure groups and leaders: tribal elders represent
traditional Pashtun leadership; Afghan refugees in Pakistan,
Australia, US, and elsewhere have organized politically; Peshawar,
Pakistan-based groups such as the Coordination Council for National
Unity and Understanding in Afghanistan (CUNUA), Ishaq GAILANI; Writers
Union of Free Afghanistan (WUFA), A. Rasul AMIN; Mellat (Social
Democratic Party), leader NA

International organization participation: AsDB, CP, ECO, ESCAP, FAO,
G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
Intelsat, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NAM, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Yar Mohammed
MOHABBAT
chancery: 2341 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 234-3770, 3771
FAX: [1] (202) 328-3516
consulate(s) general : New York
consulate(s): Washington, DC

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US embassy in Kabul has
been closed since January 1989 due to security concerns

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white,
and black with a gold emblem centered on the three bands; the emblem
features a temple-like structure with Islamic inscriptions above and
below, encircled by a wreath on the left and right and by a bolder
Islamic inscription above, all of which are encircled by two crossed
scimitars

Economy

Economy - overview: Afghanistan is an extremely poor, landlocked
country, highly dependent on farming and livestock raising (sheep and
goats). Economic considerations have played second fiddle to political
and military upheavals during more than 17 years of war, including the
nearly 10-year Soviet military occupation (which ended 15 February
1989). During the war one-third of the population fled the country,
with Pakistan and Iran sheltering a combined peak of more than 6
million refugees. Now, only 750,000 registered Afghan refugees remain
in Pakistan and about 1.2 million in Iran. Another 1 million have
probably moved into and around urban areas within Afghanistan. Gross
domestic product has fallen substantially over the past 17 years
because of the loss of labor and capital and the disruption of trade
and transport. Millions of people continue to suffer from insufficient
food, clothing, housing, and medical care. Inflation remains a serious
problem throughout the country, with one estimate putting the rate at
240% in Kabul in 1996. Numerical data are likely to be either
unavailable or unreliable.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $18.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 56%
industry: 15%
services: 29%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 240% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 7.1 million
by occupation: agriculture and animal husbandry 67.8%, industry 10.2%,
construction 6.3%, commerce 5.0%, services and other 10.7% (1980 est.)

Unemployment rate: 8% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: small-scale production of textiles, soap, furniture,
shoes, fertilizer, and cement; handwoven carpets; natural gas, oil,
coal, copper

Electricity - capacity: 371,000 kW (1993)

Electricity - production: 670 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 35 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, fruits, nuts, karakul pelts; wool,
mutton

Exports:
total value: $80 million (1996 est.)
commodities: fruits and nuts, handwoven carpets, wool, cotton, hides
and pelts, precious and semi-precious gems
partners : FSU, Pakistan, Iran, Germany, India, UK, Belgium,
Luxembourg, Czechoslovakia

Imports:
total value : $150 million (1996 est.)
commodities: food and petroleum products; most consumer goods
partners: FSU, Pakistan, Iran, Japan, Singapore, India, South Korea,
Germany

Debt - external: $2.3 billion (March 1991 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA; about $56 million in UN aid plus additional bilateral
aid and aid in kind (1996)
note: US provided $450 million in bilateral assistance (1985-93); US
continues to contribute to multilateral assistance through the UN
programs of food aid, immunization, land mine removal, and a wide
range of aid to refugees and displaced persons

Currency: 1 afghani (AF) = 100 puls

Exchange rates: afghanis (Af) per US$1 - 17,000 (December 1996), 7,000
(January 1995), 1,900 (January 1994), 1,019 (March 1993), 850 (1991);
note - these rates reflect the free market exchange rates rather than
the official exchange rate, which is a fixed rate of 50.600 afghanis
to the dollar

Fiscal year: 21 March - 20 March

@Afghanistan:Communications

Telephones: 31,200 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : very limited telephone and telegraph service
international: satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)
linked only to Iran and 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 0, shortwave 2

Radios: 1.8 million (1996 est.); note - about 60% of families own a
radio

Television broadcast stations: NA
note: one television station run by Jumbesh faction provides
intermittent service

Televisions: 100,000 (1993 est.)

@Afghanistan:Transportation

Railways:
total: 24.6 km
broad gauge: 9.6 km 1.524-m gauge from Gushgy (Turkmenistan) to
Towraghondi; 15 km 1,524-m gauge from Termiz (Uzbekistan) to Kheyrabad
transshipment point on south bank of Amu Darya

Highways:
total: 21,000 km
paved: 2,793 km
unpaved: 18,207 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,200 km; chiefly Amu Darya, which handles vessels up to
about 500 DWT

Pipelines: petroleum products - Uzbekistan to Bagram and Turkmenistan
to Shindand; natural gas 180 km

Ports and harbors: Kheyrabad, Shir Khan

Airports: 33 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 16
over 3,047 m: 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m : 2
under 914 m: 7 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 17
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 12
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 3 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: NA; note - the military does not exist on a
national basis; some elements of the former Army, Air and Air Defense
Forces, National Guard, Border Guard Forces, National Police Force
(Sarandoi), and tribal militias still exist but are factionalized
among the various groups

Military manpower - military age: 22 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 5,813,298 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 3,118,004 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 231,250 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: some support from RABBANI and MASOOD to
anti-government Islamic fighters in Tajikistan's civil war; support to
Islamic militants worldwide by some factions; question over which
group should hold Afghanistan's seat at the UN

Illicit drugs: world's second-largest illicit opium producer after
Burma (1,230 metric tons in 1996 - down 2% from 1995) and a major
source of hashish
______________________________________________________________________

ALBANIA

@Albania:Geography

Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Adriatic Sea and Ionian
Sea, between Greece and Serbia and Montenegro

Geographic coordinates: 41 00 N, 20 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 28,750 sq km
land: 27,400 sq km
water: 1,350 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
total: 720 km
border countries: Greece 282 km, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia 151 km, Serbia and Montenegro 287 km (114 km with Serbia,
173 km with Montenegro)

Coastline: 362 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: mild temperate; cool, cloudy, wet winters; hot, clear, dry
summers; interior is cooler and wetter

Terrain: mostly mountains and hills; small plains along coast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Adriatic Sea 0 m
highest point : Maja e Korabit 2,753 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, coal, chromium, copper,
timber, nickel

Land use:
arable land: 21%
permanent crops: 5%
permanent pastures: 15%
forests and woodland: 38%
other: 21% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 3,410 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: destructive earthquakes; tsunamis occur along
southwestern coast

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; water
pollution from industrial and domestic effluents

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: strategic location along Strait of Otranto (links
Adriatic Sea to Ionian Sea and Mediterranean Sea)

@Albania:People

Population: 3,299,757 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 34% (male 575,087; female 534,618)
15-64 years: 60% (male 927,791; female 1,068,922)
65 years and over: 6% (male 80,135; female 113,204) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.9% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 21.96 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.54 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -5.46 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.08 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.87 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.71 male(s)/female
total population: 0.92 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 47.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 68.28 years
male: 65.24 years
female: 71.55 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.64 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Albanian(s)
adjective: Albanian

Ethnic groups: Albanian 95%, Greeks 3%, other 2% (Vlachs, Gypsies,
Serbs, and Bulgarians) (1989 est.)
note: in 1989, other estimates of the Greek population ranged from 1%
(official Albanian statistics) to 12% (from a Greek organization)

Religions: Muslim 70%, Albanian Orthodox 20%, Roman Catholic 10%
note: all mosques and churches were closed in 1967 and religious
observances prohibited; in November 1990, Albania began allowing
private religious practice

Languages: Albanian (Tosk is the official dialect), Greek

Literacy:
definition: age 9 and over can read and write
total population: 72%
male: 80%
female: 63% (1955 est.)

@Albania:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Albania
conventional short form: Albania
local long form: Republika e Shqiperise
local short form: Shqiperia
former: People's Socialist Republic of Albania

Data code: AL

Government type: emerging democracy

National capital: Tirane

Administrative divisions: 26 districts (rrethe, singular - rreth);
Berat, Dibre, Durres, Elbasan, Fier, Gjirokaster, Gramsh, Kolonje,
Korce, Kruje, Kukes, Lezhe, Librazhd, Lushnje, Mat, Mirdite, Permet,
Pogradec, Puke, Sarande, Shkoder, Skrapar, Tepelene, Tirane, Tropoje,
Vlore
note: some new administrative units may have been created

Independence: 28 November 1912 (from Ottoman Empire)

National holiday: Independence Day, 28 November (1912)

Constitution: an interim basic law was approved by the People's
Assembly on 29 April 1991; a draft constitution was rejected by
popular referendum in the fall of 1994 and a new draft is pending

Legal system: has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state : President of the Republic Sali BERISHA (since 9 April
1992)
head of government: Prime Minister of the interim National
Reconciliation Government Bashkim FINO (since 12 March 1997)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections: president elected by the People's Assembly for a five-year
term; election last held NA 1992 (next to be held NA March 1997);
prime minister appointed by the president
election results : Sali BERISHA elected president; percent of People's
Assembly vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral People's Assembly or Kuvendi Popullor
(140 seats; most members are elected by direct popular vote and some
by proportional vote for four-year terms)
elections: last held 26 May 1996 (next tentatively scheduled for 29
June 1997)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - DP
122, PS 10, RP 3, UHP 3, Balli Kombetar 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chairman of the Supreme Court is
elected by the People's Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Albanian Socialist Party or PS
(formerly the Albania Workers Party) [Fatos NANO, chairman];
Democratic Party or PD [Tritan SHEHU]; Albanian Republican Party or PR
[Sabri GODO]; Social Democratic Party or SDP [Skender GJINUSHI];
Democratic Alliance Party or DAP [Neritan CEKA, chairman]; Unity for
Human Rights Party or PBDNJ [Vasil MELO, chairman]; Movement for
Democracy Party or LDP [ruled by committee of Genc RULI, Alfred
SERREQI, Dashimir SHEHI, Maksim KONOMI]; Balli Kombetar [Hysen SELFO]

International organization participation: BSEC, CCC, CE, CEI, EBRD,
ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC,
IOM, ISO, ITU, NACC, OIC, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
UNOMIG, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Lublin DILJA
chancery: Suite 1000, 1511 K Street NW, Washington, DC 20005
telephone: [1] (202) 223-4942, 8187
FAX: [1] (202) 628-7342

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Marisa R. LINO (15 July 1996)
embassy: Rruga E. Labinoti 103, Tirane
mailing address: PSC 59, Box 100 (A), APO AE 09624
telephone: [355] (42) 328-75, 335-20
FAX: [355] (42) 322-22

Flag description: red with a black two-headed eagle in the center

Economy

Economy - overview: An extremely poor country by European standards,
Albania is making the difficult transition to a more open-market
economy. The economy rebounded in 1993-95 after a severe depression
accompanying the collapse of the previous centrally planned system in
1990 and 1991. However, a weakening of government resolve to maintain
stabilization policies in the election year of 1996 contributed to
renewal of inflationary pressures, spurred by the budget deficit which
exceeded 12%. The collapse of financial pyramid schemes in early 1997
- which had attracted deposits from a substantial portion of Albania's
adult population - triggered unrest in much of the south in early
1997. The economy continues to be buoyed by remittances of some 20% of
the labor force which works abroad, mostly in Greece and Italy. These
remittances supplement GDP and help offset the large foreign trade
deficit. Most agricultural land was privatized in 1992, substantially
improving peasant incomes. Overall economic performance is likely to
be substantially worse in 1997; inflation will easily top 50% and GDP
may drop by 5% or more.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $4.4 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,290 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 56%
industry: 21%
services: 23% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 17.4% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 1.692 million (1994 est.) (including 352,000 emigrant workers
and 261,000 domestically unemployed)
by occupation : agriculture (nearly all private) 49.5%, private sector
22.2%, state (nonfarm) sector 28.3% (including state-owned industry
7.8%); note - includes only those domestically employed

Unemployment rate: 13% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $624 million
expenditures : $996 million, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: food processing, textiles and clothing; lumber, oil,
cement, chemicals, mining, basic metals, hydropower

Industrial production growth rate: 6% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 1.533 million kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 3.86 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,221 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wide range of temperate-zone crops and
livestock

Exports:
total value: $205 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities : asphalt, metals and metallic ores, electricity, crude
oil, vegetables, fruits, tobacco
partners: Italy, US, Greece, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

Imports:
total value: $680 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities : machinery, consumer goods, grains
partners: Italy, Greece, Bulgaria, Turkey, The Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

Debt - external: $500 million (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 lek (L) = 100 qintars

Exchange rates: leke (L) per US$1 - 150.00 (May 1997), 104.50 (1996),
92.70 (1995), 94.62 (1994), 102.06 (1993), 75.03 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Albania:Communications

Telephones: 55,000

Telephone system:
domestic: obsolete wire system; no longer provides a telephone for
every village; in 1992, following the fall of the communist
government, peasants cut the wire to about 1,000 villages and used it
to build fences
international : inadequate; international traffic carried by microwave
radio relay from the Tirane exchange to Italy and Greece

Radio broadcast stations: AM 17, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 577,000 (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 9

Televisions: 300,000 (1993 est.)

@Albania:Transportation

Railways:
total : 670 km
standard gauge: 670 km 1.435-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 15,500 km
paved: 4,650 km
unpaved: 10,850 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 43 km plus Albanian sections of Lake Scutari, Lake Ohrid,
and Lake Prespa (1990)

Pipelines: crude oil 145 km; petroleum products 55 km; natural gas 64
km (1991)

Ports and harbors: Durres, Sarande, Shengjin, Vlore

Merchant marine:
total: 8 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 39,201 GRT/57,938
DWT (1996 est.)

Airports: 11 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 5
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 6
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m : 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Interior
Ministry Troops, Border Guards

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 738,082 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 600,403 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 31,823 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $42 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.5% to 2.0% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: the Albanian Government supports protection
of the rights of ethnic Albanians outside of its borders; Albanian
majority in Kosovo seeks independence from Serbian Republic; Albanians
in Macedonia claim discrimination in education, access to
public-sector jobs and representation in government

Illicit drugs: increasingly active transshipment point for Southwest
Asian opiates, hashish, and cannabis transiting the Balkan route and
cocaine from South America destined for Western Europe; limited opium
and cannabis production; ethnic Albanian narcotrafficking
organizations active in Central and Eastern Europe
______________________________________________________________________

ALGERIA

@Algeria:Geography

Location: Northern Africa, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between
Morocco and Tunisia

Geographic coordinates: 28 00 N, 3 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total : 2,381,740 sq km
land: 2,381,740 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than 3.5 times the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 6,343 km
border countries : Libya 982 km, Mali 1,376 km, Mauritania 463 km,
Morocco 1,559 km, Niger 956 km, Tunisia 965 km, Western Sahara 42 km

Coastline: 998 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 32-52 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: arid to semiarid; mild, wet winters with hot, dry summers
along coast; drier with cold winters and hot summers on high plateau;
sirocco is a hot, dust/sand-laden wind especially common in summer

Terrain: mostly high plateau and desert; some mountains; narrow,
discontinuous coastal plain

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Chott Melrhir -40 m
highest point: Tahat 3,003 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, phosphates,
uranium, lead, zinc

Land use:
arable land: 3%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 13%
forests and woodland: 2%
other : 82% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 5,550 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: mountainous areas subject to severe earthquakes; mud
slides

Environment - current issues: soil erosion from overgrazing and other
poor farming practices; desertification; dumping of raw sewage,
petroleum refining wastes, and other industrial effluents is leading
to the pollution of rivers and coastal waters; Mediterranean Sea, in
particular, becoming polluted from oil wastes, soil erosion, and
fertilizer runoff; inadequate supplies of potable water

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Nuclear Test Ban

Geography - note: second-largest country in Africa (after Sudan)

@Algeria:People

Population: 29,830,370 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 39% (male 5,923,391; female 5,712,088)
15-64 years: 57% (male 8,619,009; female 8,450,774)
65 years and over: 4% (male 525,556; female 599,552) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.18% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 28.01 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.76 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.49 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.88 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 47.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 68.62 years
male : 67.5 years
female: 69.79 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.48 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Algerian(s)
adjective: Algerian

Ethnic groups: Arab-Berber 99%, European less than 1%

Religions: Sunni Muslim (state religion) 99%, Christian and Jewish 1%

Languages: Arabic (official), French, Berber dialects

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 61.6%
male: 73.9%
female : 49% (1995 est.)

@Algeria:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria
conventional short form: Algeria
local long form: Al Jumhuriyah al Jaza'iriyah ad Dimuqratiyah ash
Shabiyah
local short form: Al Jaza'ir

Data code: AG

Government type: republic

National capital: Algiers

Administrative divisions: 48 provinces (wilayas, singular - wilaya);
Adrar, Ain Defla, Ain Temouchent, Alger, Annaba, Batna, Bechar,
Bejaia, Biskra, Blida, Bordj Bou Arreridj, Bouira, Boumerdes, Chlef,
Constantine, Djelfa, El Bayadh, El Oued, El Tarf, Ghardaia, Guelma,
Illizi, Jijel, Khenchela, Laghouat, Mascara, Medea, Mila, Mostaganem,
M'Sila, Naama, Oran, Ouargla, Oum el Bouaghi, Relizane, Saida, Setif,
Sidi Bel Abbes, Skikda, Souk Ahras, Tamanghasset, Tebessa, Tiaret,
Tindouf, Tipaza, Tissemsilt, Tizi Ouzou, Tlemcen

Independence: 5 July 1962 (from France)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Revolution, 1 November (1954)

Constitution: 19 November 1976, effective 22 November 1976; revised 3
November 1988, 23 February 1989, and 28 November 1996; note -
referendum approving the revisions of 28 November 1996 was signed into
law 7 December 1996

Legal system: socialist, based on French and Islamic law; judicial
review of legislative acts in ad hoc Constitutional Council composed
of various public officials, including several Supreme Court justices;
has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Liamine ZEROUAL (appointed president 31
January 1994, elected president 16 November 1995)
head of government : Prime Minister Ahmed OUYAHIA (since 31 December
1995)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 16 November 1995 (next to be held NA 2000); prime
minister appointed by the president
election results : Liamine ZEROUAL elected president; percent of vote
- Liamine ZEROUAL 61.3%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the National
People's Assembly or Al-Majlis Ech-Chaabi Al-Watani (380 seats;
members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms; suspended
since 1992) and the Council of Nations (144 seats; one-third of the
members appointed by the president, two-thirds elected by indirect
vote; members serve six-year terms; created as a result of the
constitutional revision of November 1996)
elections : National People's Assembly - first-round held 26 December
1991; second round canceled by the military after President BENDJEDID
resigned 11 January 1992, effectively suspending the assembly (next
election scheduled for 5 June 1997)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - the
fundamentalist FIS won 188 of the 231 seats contested in the first
round of the 1991 elections

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders: Islamic Salvation Front (FIS, outlawed
April 1992), Ali BELHADJ, Dr. Abassi MADANI, Rabeh KEBIR (self-exile
in Germany); National Liberation Front (FLN), Boualem BENHAMOUDA,
secretary general; Socialist Forces Front (FFS), Hocine Ait AHMED,
secretary general (self-exile in Switzerland); Movement of a Peaceful
Society (Hamas), Mahfoud NAHNAH, chairman; Rally for Culture and
Democracy (RCD), Said SAADI, secretary general; Algerian Renewal Party
(PRA), Noureddine BOUKROUH, chairman; Nahda Movement (Al Nahda),
Abdallah DJABALLAH, president; Democratic National Rally (RND),
Abdelkader BENSALAH, chairman; Movement for Democracy in Algeria
(MDA), Ahmed Ben BELLA
note : the government established a multiparty system in September
1989 and, as of 31 December 1990, over 50 legal parties existed; a new
party law was enacted in March 1997

International organization participation: ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF,
AMU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO,
Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OAS
(observer), OAU, OIC, OPEC, OSCE (partner), UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNMIH, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
(applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Ramtane LAMAMRA
chancery: 2118 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 265-2800
FAX : [1] (202) 667-2174

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Ronald E. NEUMANN
embassy : 4 Chemin Cheikh Bachir El-Ibrahimi, Algiers
mailing address: B. P. Box 549, Alger-Gare, 16000 Algiers
telephone: [213] (2) 69-11-86, 69-12-55
FAX: [213] (2) 69-39-79

Flag description: two equal vertical bands of green (hoist side) and
white with a red, five-pointed star within a red crescent; the
crescent, star, and color green are traditional symbols of Islam (the
state religion)

Economy

Economy - overview: The hydrocarbons sector is the backbone of the
economy, accounting for roughly 57% of government revenues, 25% of
GDP, and almost all export earnings; Algeria has the fifth-largest
reserves of natural gas in the world and is the second largest gas
exporter; and it ranks fourteenth for oil reserves. Algiers' efforts
to reform one of the most centrally planned economies in the Arab
world began after the 1986 collapse of world oil prices plunged the
country into a severe recession. In 1989, the government launched a
comprehensive, IMF-supported program to achieve economic stabilization
and to introduce market mechanisms into the economy. Despite
substantial progress toward economic adjustment, in 1992 the reform
drive stalled as Algiers became embroiled in political turmoil. In
September 1993, a new government was formed, and one priority was the
resumption and acceleration of the structural adjustment process.
Buffeted by the slump in world oil prices and burdened with a heavy
foreign debt, Algiers concluded a one-year standby arrangement with
the IMF in April 1994. Following a Paris Club debt rescheduling in
1995, a robust harvest, and elevated oil prices, the economy
experienced a strong recovery and key economic improvements. Recent
and planned investments in developing hydrocarbon resources are likely
to increase growth and export earnings.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $115.9 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $4,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 12%
industry: 50%
services: 38% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 19.8% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 7.8 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: government 29.5%, agriculture 22%, construction and
public works 16.2%, industry 13.6%, commerce and services 13.5%,
transportation and communication 5.2% (1989)

Unemployment rate: 28% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $14.3 billion
expenditures: $17.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: petroleum, light industries, natural gas, mining,
electrical, petrochemical, food processing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 6.01 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 18.7 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 583 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, barley, oats, grapes, olives, citrus,
fruits; sheep, cattle

Exports:
total value: $11 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: petroleum and natural gas 97%
partners: Italy 18.8%, US 14.8%, France 11.8%, Spain 8%, Germany 7.9%
(1995 est.)

Imports:
total value : $10.5 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: capital goods, food and beverages, consumer goods
partners: France 29%, Spain 10.5%, Italy 8.2%, US 8%, Germany 5.6%
(1995 est.)

Debt - external: $32 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $420 million (1996)

Currency: 1 Algerian dinar (DA) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Algerian dinars (DA) per US$1 - 57.136 (January 1997),
54.749 (1996), 47.663 (1995), 35.059 (1994), 23.345 (1993), 21.836
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Algeria:Communications

Telephones: 862,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: excellent service in north but sparse in south; domestic
satellite system with 12 earth stations (20 additional domestic earth
stations are planned)
international: 5 submarine cables; microwave radio relay to Italy,
France, Spain, Morocco, and Tunisia; coaxial cable to Morocco and
Tunisia; participant in Medarabtel; satellite earth stations - 2
Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), 1 Intersputnik, and 1
Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 26, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 6 million (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 18

Televisions: 2 million (1993 est.)

@Algeria:Transportation

Railways:
total : 4,772 km
standard gauge: 3,616 km 1.435-m gauge (301 km electrified; 215 km
double track)
narrow gauge: 1,156 km 1.055-m gauge

Highways:
total: 102,424 km
paved : 70,570 km (including 6,080 km of expressways)
unpaved: 31,854 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 6,612 km; petroleum products 298 km; natural gas
2,948 km

Ports and harbors: Algiers, Annaba, Arzew, Bejaia, Beni Saf, Dellys,
Djendjene, Ghazaouet, Jijel, Mostaganem, Oran, Skikda, Tenes

Merchant marine:
total : 78 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 925,261 GRT/1,094,281
DWT
ships by type: bulk 9, cargo 27, chemical tanker 7, liquefied gas
tanker 11, oil tanker 5, roll-on/roll-off cargo 13, short-sea
passenger 5, specialized tanker 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 119 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 66
over 3,047 m: 8
2,438 to 3,047 m : 24
1,524 to 2,437 m: 13
914 to 1,523 m: 4
under 914 m: 17 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 53
2,438 to 3,047 m : 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 19
914 to 1,523 m: 31 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: National Popular Army, Navy, Air Force, Territorial
Air Defense, National Gendarmerie

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 7,666,961 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 4,700,502 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 337,630 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.3 billion (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.7% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: part of southeastern region claimed by
Libya; land boundary dispute with Tunisia settled in 1993
______________________________________________________________________

AMERICAN SAMOA

(territory of the US)

@American Samoa:Geography

Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean, about
one-half of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 14 20 S, 170 00 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 199 sq km
land: 199 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Rose Island and Swains Island

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 116 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine, moderated by southeast trade winds; annual
rainfall averages 124 inches; rainy season from November to April, dry
season from May to October; little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: five volcanic islands with rugged peaks and limited coastal
plains, two coral atolls (Rose Island, Swains Island)

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Lata 966 m

Natural resources: pumice, pumicite

Land use:
arable land: 5%
permanent crops: 10%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland : 70%
other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons common from December to March

Environment - current issues: limited natural fresh water resources;
the water division of the government has spent substantial funds in
the past few years to improve water catchments and pipelines

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: Pago Pago has one of the best natural deepwater
harbors in the South Pacific Ocean, sheltered by shape from rough seas
and protected by peripheral mountains from high winds; strategic
location in the South Pacific Ocean

@American Samoa:People

Population: 61,819 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 3.72% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 35.23 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.01 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population : NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 18.78 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 72.91 years
male: 71.03 years
female: 74.85 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.16 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: American Samoan(s)
adjective: American Samoan

Ethnic groups: Samoan (Polynesian) 89%, Caucasian 2%, Tongan 4%, other
5%

Religions: Christian Congregationalist 50%, Roman Catholic 20%,
Protestant denominations and other 30%

Languages: Samoan (closely related to Hawaiian and other Polynesian
languages), English
note: most people are bilingual

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 97%
male: 98%
female: 97% (1980 est.)

@American Samoa:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Territory of American Samoa
conventional short form: American Samoa
abbreviation: AS

Data code: AQ

Dependency status: unincorporated and unorganized territory of the US;
administered by the US Department of Interior, Office of Territorial
and International Affairs

Government type: NA

National capital: Pago Pago

Administrative divisions: none (territory of the US)

Independence: none (territory of the US)

National holiday: Territorial Flag Day, 17 April (1900)

Constitution: ratified 1966, in effect 1967

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President of the US William Jefferson CLINTON (since
20 January 1993) and Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January
1993)
head of government: Governor Tauese P. SUNIA (since 3 January 1997)
and Lieutenant Governor Togiola Tulafono (since 3 January 1997)
cabinet: NA
elections: governor and lieutenant governor elected on the same ticket
by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 3 November
1996 (next to be held 7 November 2000)
election results: Tauese P. SUNIA elected governor of American Samoa;
percent of vote - Tauese P. SUNIA (Democrat) 51%, Peter REID
(Independent) 49%

Legislative branch: bicameral Fono or Legislative Assembly consists of
the House of Representatives (21 seats - 20 of which are elected by
popular vote and 1 is an appointed, nonvoting delegate from Swains
Island; members serve two-year terms) and the Senate (18 seats;
members are elected from local chiefs who serve four-year terms)
elections: House of Representatives - last held 5 November 1996 (next
to be held NA November 1998); Senate - last held 3 November 1996 (next
to be held 7 November 2000)
election results : House of Representatives - percent of vote by party
- NA; seats by party - NA; Senate - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - NA
note: American Samoa elects one delegate to the US House of
Representatives; elections last held 5 November 1996 (next to be held
NA November 1998); results - Eni R. F. H. FALEOMAVAEGA reelected as
delegate

Judicial branch: High Court, chief justice and associate justices are
appointed by the US Secretary of the Interior

Political parties and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ESCAP (associate), Interpol
(subbureau), IOC, SPC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of the US)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of the US)

Flag description: blue with a white triangle edged in red that is
based on the outer side and extends to the hoist side; a brown and
white American bald eagle flying toward the hoist side is carrying two
traditional Samoan symbols of authority, a staff and a war club

Economy

Economy - overview: Economic activity is strongly linked to the US,
with which American Samoa conducts the great bulk of its foreign
trade. Tuna fishing and tuna processing plants are the backbone of the
private sector, with canned tuna the primary export. The tuna
canneries and the government are by far the two largest employers.
Other economic activities include a slowly developing tourist
industry. Transfers from the US Government add substantially to
American Samoa's economic well-being. According to one observer,
attempts by the government to develop a larger and broader economy are
restrained by Samoa's remote location, its limited transportation, and
its devastating hurricanes.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $128 million (1991 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,600 (1991 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA %

Labor force:
total: 14,400 (1990)
by occupation: government 33%, tuna canneries 34%, other 33% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 12% (1991)

Budget:
revenues: $97 million ($43 million in local revenue and $54 million in
grant revenue)
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY90/91)

Industries: tuna canneries (largely dependent on foreign fishing
vessels), handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 33,000 kW (1993)

Electricity - production: 100 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,743 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: bananas, coconuts, vegetables, taro,
breadfruit, yams, copra, pineapples, papayas; dairy farming

Exports:
total value: $306 million (f.o.b., 1989)
commodities: canned tuna 93%
partners : US 99.6%

Imports:
total value: $360.3 million (c.i.f., 1989)
commodities: materials for canneries 56%, food 8%, petroleum products
7%, machinery and parts 6%
partners : US 62%, Japan 9%, NZ 7%, Australia 11%, Fiji 4%, other 7%

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note : important financial support from the US

Currency: 1 US dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September

@American Samoa:Communications

Telephones: 9,000 (1994 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: good telex, telegraph, facsimile and cellular phone
services; domestic satellite system with 1 Comsat earth station
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 8,000 (1993 est.)

@American Samoa:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 350 km
paved: 150 km
unpaved: 200 km

Ports and harbors: Aunu'u (new construction), Auasi, Faleosao, Ofu,
Pago Pago, Ta'u

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

ANDORRA

@Andorra:Geography

Location: Southwestern Europe, between France and Spain

Geographic coordinates: 42 30 N, 1 30 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total : 450 sq km
land: 450 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
total: 125 km
border countries : France 60 km, Spain 65 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; snowy, cold winters and warm, dry summers

Terrain: rugged mountains dissected by narrow valleys

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Riu Valira 840 m
highest point : Coma Pedrosa 2,946 m

Natural resources: hydropower, mineral water, timber, iron ore, lead

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 56%
forests and woodland: 22%
other: 20% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: snowslides, avalanches

Environment - current issues: deforestation; overgrazing of mountain
meadows contributes to soil erosion

Environment - international agreements:
party to: none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked

@Andorra:People

Population: 64,000 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 14% (male 4,788; female 4,452)
15-64 years : 74% (male 25,291; female 21,807)
65 years and over: 12% (male 3,903; female 3,759) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.72% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 10.67 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.2 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.77 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.16 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.04 male(s)/female
total population: 1.13 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 4.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 83.45 years
male : 80.53 years
female: 86.53 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.21 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Andorran(s)
adjective: Andorran

Ethnic groups: Spanish 61%, Andorran 30%, French 6%, other 3%

Religions: Roman Catholic (predominant)

Languages: Catalan (official), French, Castilian

Literacy: NA

@Andorra:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Principality of Andorra
conventional short form: Andorra
local long form: Principat d'Andorra
local short form : Andorra

Data code: AN

Government type: parliamentary democracy (since March 1993) that
retains as its heads of state a coprincipality; the two princes are
the president of France and Spanish bishop of Seo de Urgel, who are
represented locally by officials called veguers

National capital: Andorra la Vella

Administrative divisions: 7 parishes (parroquies, singular -
parroquia); Andorra, Canillo, Encamp, La Massana, Les Escaldes,
Ordino, Sant Julia de Loria

Independence: 1278

National holiday: Mare de Deu de Meritxell, 8 September

Constitution: Andorra's first written constitution was drafted in
1991; adopted 14 March 1993

Legal system: based on French and Spanish civil codes; no judicial
review of legislative acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: French Coprince Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May 1995) and
Spanish Episcopal Coprince Monseigneur Juan MARTI Alanis (since 31
January 1971); note - each coprince is represented by a veguer
(current names NA)
head of government: Executive Council President Marc FORNE Molne
(since 21 December 1994)
cabinet: Executive Council designated by the executive council
president
elections: executive council president elected by the General Council
and formally appointed by the coprinces; election last held 16
February 1997 (next to be held NA 2001)
election results: Marc FORNE Molne elected executive council
president; percent of General Council vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council of the Valleys or
Consell General de las Valls (28 seats; members are elected by direct
popular vote, 14 from a single national constituency and 14 to
represent each of the 7 parishes; members serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 16 February 1997 (next to be held February 2001)
election results: percent of vote by party - UL 57%, AND 21%, IDN 7%,
ND 7%, other 8%; seats by party - UL 16, AND 6, ND 2, IDN 2, UPO 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Andorra at Perpignan (France) two
civil judges appointed by the veguers, one appeals judge appointed by
the coprinces alternately; Ecclesiastical Court of the Bishop of Seo
de Urgel (Spain); Tribunal of the Courts or Tribunal des Cortes
presided over by the two civil judges, one appeals judge, the veguers,
and two members of the General Council

Political parties and leaders: National Democratic Group or AND [Oscar
RIBAS Reig and Jordi FARRAS]; Liberal Union or UL [Francesc CERQUEDA];
New Democracy or ND [Jaume BARTOMEU]; Andorran National Coalition or
CNA [Antoni CERQUEDA]; National Democratic Initiative or IDN [Vincenc
MATEU]; Liberal Party of Andorra (Partit Liberal d'Andorra) or PLA
[Marc FORNE]; Unio Parroquial d'Ordino or UDO
note : there are two other small parties

International organization participation: CE, ECE, ICRM, IFRCS,
Interpol, IOC, ITU, UN, UNESCO, WIPO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Juli MINOVES-TRIQUELL (also Permanent
Representative to the UN)
chancery: 2 United Nations Plaza, 25th Floor, New York, NY 10017
telephone: [1] (212) 750-8064
FAX: [1] (212) 750-6630

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Andorra; US interests in Andorra are represented by the Consulate
General's office in Barcelona (Spain); mailing address: Paseo Reina
Elisenda, 23, 08034 Barcelona, Spain; telephone: (343) 280-2227; FAX:
(343) 205-7705; note - Consul General Maurice S. PARKER makes periodic
visits to Andorra

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side),
yellow, and red with the national coat of arms centered in the yellow
band; the coat of arms features a quartered shield; similar to the
flags of Chad and Romania that do not have a national coat of arms in
the center

Economy

Economy - overview: Tourism, the mainstay of Andorra's tiny,
well-to-do economy, accounts for roughly 80% of GDP. An estimated 10
million tourists visit annually, attracted by Andorra's duty-free
status and by its summer and winter resorts. Andorra's comparative
advantage has recently eroded as the economies of neighboring France
and Spain have been opened up, providing broader availability of goods
and lower tariffs. The banking sector, with its "tax haven" status,
also contributes substantially to the economy. Agricultural production
is limited by a scarcity of arable land, and most food has to be
imported. The principal livestock activity is sheep raising.
Manufacturing consists mainly of cigarettes, cigars, and furniture.
Andorra is a member of the EU Customs Union and is treated as an EU
member for trade in manufactured goods (no tariffs) and as a non-EU
member for agricultural products.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.2 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $18,000 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: 0%

Budget:
revenues : $138 million
expenditures: $177 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1993)

Industries: tourism (particularly skiing), sheep, timber, tobacco,
banking

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 35,000 kW (1992)

Electricity - production: 140 million kWh (1992)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh; note - Andorra exports
most of its electricity to France and Spain

Agriculture - products: small quantities of tobacco, rye, wheat,
barley, oats, vegetables; sheep raising

Exports:
total value : $47 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: electricity, tobacco products, furniture
partners : France 49%, Spain 47%

Imports:
total value: $1 billion (1995)
commodities: consumer goods, food
partners: France, Spain, US 4.2%

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid: none

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes; 1 peseta (Pta) = 100
centimos; the French and Spanish currencies are used

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.4169 (January 1997),
5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520 (1994), 5.6632 (1993), 5.2938
(1992); Spanish pesetas (Ptas) per US$1 - 134.77 (January 1997),
126.66 (1996), 124.69 (1995), 133.96 (1994), 127.26 (1993), 102.38
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Andorra:Communications

Telephones: 21,258 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : modern system with microwave radio relay connections
between exchanges
international: landline circuits to France and Spain

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 10,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: 7,000 (1991 est.)

@Andorra:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 269 km
paved: 198 km
unpaved : 71 km (1991 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: none

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France and Spain

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

ANGOLA

Introduction

Current issues: Civil war has been the norm since independence from
Portugal on 11 November 1975. A cease-fire lasted from 31 May 1991
until October 1992 when the insurgent National Union for the Total
Independence of Angola (UNITA) refused to accept its defeat in
internationally monitored elections and fighting resumed throughout
much of the countryside. The two sides signed another peace accord on
20 November 1994 and the cease-fire is generally holding, but military
tensions persist and banditry is increasing. In order to bring armed
insurgents under government control the peace accord of 20 November
1994 provided for the integration of former UNITA insurgents into the
Angolan armed forces. Military integration began in June 1996 and a
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation was installed in April
1997. Efforts which began in May 1997 to extend government into
UNITA-occupied areas are proceeding slowly. The original 7,200-man UN
peacekeeping force began a phased drawdown in late 1996. All UN
peacekeepers are scheduled to depart by September 1997 but a small UN
military observer force will probably remain in Angola through 1998.

@Angola:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean, between
Namibia and Democratic Republic of the Congo

Geographic coordinates: 12 30 S, 18 30 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 1,246,700 sq km
land : 1,246,700 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 5,198 km
border countries: Democratic Republic of the Congo 2,511 km of which
220 km is the boundary of discontiguous Cabinda province, Republic of
the Congo 201 km, Namibia 1,376 km, Zambia 1,110 km

Coastline: 1,600 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 20 nm

Climate: semiarid in south and along coast to Luanda; north has cool,
dry season (May to October) and hot, rainy season (November to April)

Terrain: narrow coastal plain rises abruptly to vast interior plateau

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Morro de Moco 2,620 m

Natural resources: petroleum, diamonds, iron ore, phosphates, copper,
feldspar, gold, bauxite, uranium

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 23%
forests and woodland: 43%
other : 32% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 750 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: locally heavy rainfall causes periodic flooding on
the plateau

Environment - current issues: the overuse of pastures and subsequent
soil erosion attributable to population pressures; desertification;
deforestation of tropical rain forest, in response to both
international demand for tropical timber and to domestic use as fuel,
resulting in loss of biodiversity; soil erosion contributing to water
pollution and siltation of rivers and dams; inadequate supplies of
potable water

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Law of the Sea
signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Climate Change,
Desertification

Geography - note: Cabinda is separated from rest of country by Congo
(Kinshasa)

@Angola:People

Population: 10,548,847 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 45% (male 2,393,009; female 2,327,186)
15-64 years: 52% (male 2,793,038; female 2,753,624)
65 years and over: 3% (male 131,720; female 150,270) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.06% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 44.11 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 17.24 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.69 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.88 male(s)/female
total population : 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 135.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 47.32 years
male: 45.12 years
female: 49.64 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.27 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Angolan(s)
adjective: Angolan

Ethnic groups: Ovimbundu 37%, Kimbundu 25%, Bakongo 13%, mestico
(mixed European and Native African) 2%, European 1%, other 22%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 47%, Roman Catholic 38%, Protestant 15%
(est.)

Languages: Portuguese (official), Bantu and other African languages

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 42%
male : 56%
female: 28% (1990 est.)

@Angola:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Angola
conventional short form: Angola
local long form: Republica de Angola
local short form: Angola
former: People's Republic of Angola

Data code: AO

Government type: transitional government, nominally a multiparty
democracy with a strong presidential system

National capital: Luanda

Administrative divisions: 18 provinces (provincias, singular -
provincia); Bengo, Benguela, Bie, Cabinda, Cuando Cubango, Cuanza
Norte, Cuanza Sul, Cunene, Huambo, Huila, Luanda, Lunda Norte, Lunda
Sul, Malanje, Moxico, Namibe, Uige, Zaire

Independence: 11 November 1975 (from Portugal)

National holiday: Independence Day, 11 November (1975)

Constitution: 11 November 1975; revised 7 January 1978, 11 August
1980, 6 March 1991, and 26 August 1992

Legal system: based on Portuguese civil law system and customary law;
recently modified to accommodate political pluralism and increased use
of free markets

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Jose Eduardo DOS SANTOS (since 21 September
1979)
head of government: Prime Minister Fernando Jose de Franca Vieira Dias
VAN DUNEM (since 8 June 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections: President DOS SANTOS originally elected without opposition
under a one-party system and stood for reelection in Angola's first
multiparty elections in 28-29 September 1992, the last elections to be
held, (next to be held NA); prime minister appointed by the president
and answerable to the Assembly
election results: DOS SANTOS received 49.6% of the total vote, making
a run-off election necessary between him and second-place Jonas
SAVIMBI; the run-off was not held and SAVIMBI's National Union for the
Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) disputed the results of the first
election; the civil war was resumed

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assembleia
Nacional (223 seats; members elected by proportional vote to serve
four-year terms)
elections: last held 29-30 September 1992 (next to be held NA)
election results : percent of vote by party - MPLA 54%, UNITA 34%,
others 12%; seats by party - NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Tribunal da Relacao, judges of the
Supreme Court are appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: Popular Movement for the Liberation of
Angola or MPLA [Jose Eduardo DOS SANTOS], is the ruling party and has
been in power since 1975; National Union for the Total Independence of
Angola or UNITA [Jonas SAVIMBI], is the largest opposition party and
engaged in years of armed resistance to the government
note: about a dozen minor parties participated in the 1992 elections
but won few seats and have little influence in the National Assembly

Political pressure groups and leaders: Front for the Liberation of the
Enclave of Cabinda or FLEC
note: FLEC is waging a small-scale, highly factionalized, armed
struggle for the independence of Cabinda Province

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEEAC
(observer), ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer),
OAU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Antonio dos Santos FRANCA "N'dalu"
chancery: 1050 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 760, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 785-1156
FAX : [1] (202) 785-1258

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Donald K. STEINBERG
embassy: No. 32 Rua Houari Boumedienne, Miramar, Luanda
mailing address: C.P. 6484, Luanda; American Embassy, Department of
State, Washington, DC 20521-2550 (pouch)
telephone : [244] (2) 345-481, 346-418
FAX: [244] (2) 346-924

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and black
with a centered yellow emblem consisting of a five-pointed star within
half a cogwheel crossed by a machete (in the style of a hammer and
sickle)

Economy

Economy - overview: Angola is an economy in disarray. Despite its
abundant natural resources, output per capita is among the world's
lowest. Subsistence agriculture provides the main livelihood for
80%-90% of the population but accounts for about 12% of GDP. Oil
production and the supporting activities are vital to the economy,
contributing about 50% to GDP. Notwithstanding the signing of a peace
accord in November 1994, sporadic violence continues, millions of land
mines remain, and many farmers are reluctant to return to their
fields. As a result, much of the country's food must still be
imported. To take advantage of its rich resources - notably gold,
diamonds, extensive forests, Atlantic fisheries, arable land, and
large oil deposits - Angola will need to observe the cease-fire,
implement the peace agreement, and reform government policies. Despite
the high inflation and political difficulties, total output grew an
estimated 9% in 1996, largely due to increased oil production.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $8.3 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 9% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 12%
industry: 56%
services: 32% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1,700% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 2.783 million economically active
by occupation: agriculture 85%, industry 15% (1985 est.)

Unemployment rate: extensive unemployment and underemployment
affecting more than half the population (1994 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $928 million
expenditures: $2.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $963
million (1992 est.)

Industries: petroleum; diamonds, iron ore, phosphates, feldspar,
bauxite, uranium, and gold; cement; basic metal products; fish
processing; food processing; brewing; tobacco products; sugar;
textiles;

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 620,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 1.82 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 171 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: bananas, sugarcane, coffee, sisal, corn,
cotton, manioc (tapioca), tobacco, vegetables, plantains; livestock;
forest products; fish

Exports:
total value: $4 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: crude oil 90%, diamonds, refined petroleum products, gas,
coffee, sisal, fish and fish products, timber, cotton
partners: US 70%, EU

Imports:
total value : $1.7 billion (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: capital equipment (machinery and electrical equipment),
vehicles and spare parts; medicines, food, textiles and clothing;
substantial military supplies
partners : Portugal, Brazil, US, France, Spain

Debt - external: $12.5 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $451 million (1994)

Currency: 1 new kwanza (NKz) = 100 lwei

Exchange rates: new kwanza (NKz) per US$1 - 201,994 (November 1996),
900,000 (25 April 1995), 600,000 (10 January 1995), 90,000 (1 June
1994), 7,000 (16 December 1993), 3.884 (July 1993), 550 (April 1992)
note: black market rates - new Kwanza (NKz) per US$1 - 1,900,000 (6
April 1995), 180,000 (1 June 1994), 50,000 (16 December 1993)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Angola:Communications

Telephones: 78,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: telephone service limited mostly to government and
business use; HF radiotelephone used extensively for military links
domestic: limited system of wire, microwave radio relay, and
tropospheric scatter
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 17, FM 13, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 6

Televisions: 50,000 (1993 est.)

@Angola:Transportation

Railways:
total : 2,952 km limited trackage in use because of land mines still
in place from the civil war) (1997 est.)
narrow gauge: 2,798 km 1.067-m gauge; 154 km 0.600-m gauge

Highways:
total: 72,626 km
paved: 18,157 km
unpaved: 54,469 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,295 km navigable

Pipelines: crude oil 179 km

Ports and harbors: Ambriz, Cabinda, Lobito, Luanda, Malogo, Namibe,
Porto Amboim, Soyo

Merchant marine:
total : 11 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 55,255 GRT/86,886 DWT
ships by type: cargo 10, oil tanker 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 144 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 67
over 3,047 m: 3
2,438 to 3,047 m : 9
1,524 to 2,437 m: 11
914 to 1,523 m: 4
under 914 m: 40 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 77
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m: 24
914 to 1,523 m: 48 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, National
Police Force

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,412,445 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,213,988 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 102,712 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.1 billion (1993)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 31% (1993)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: increasingly used as a transshipment point for cocaine
and heroin destined for Western Europe and other African states
______________________________________________________________________

ANGUILLA

(dependent territory of the UK)

@Anguilla:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, east of Puerto Rico

Geographic coordinates: 18 15 N, 63 10 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 91 sq km
land : 91 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about half the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 61 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by northeast trade winds

Terrain: flat and low-lying island of coral and limestone

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Crocus Hill 65 m

Natural resources: salt, fish, lobster

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other : 100% (mostly rock with sparse scrub oak, few trees, some
commercial salt ponds)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: frequent hurricanes and other tropical storms (July
to October)

Environment - current issues: supplies of potable water sometimes
cannot meet increasing demand largely because of poor distribution
system

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

@Anguilla:People

Population: 10,785 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 28% (male 1,527; female 1,483)
15-64 years : 65% (male 3,563; female 3,407)
65 years and over: 7% (male 351; female 454) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.36% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 17.43 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.47 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 21.6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.04 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.05 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.77 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 21.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.02 years
male: 74.07 years
female: 80.08 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.01 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Anguillan(s)
adjective: Anguillan

Ethnic groups: black

Religions: Anglican 40%, Methodist 33%, Seventh-Day Adventist 7%,
Baptist 5%, Roman Catholic 3%, other 12%

Languages: English (official)

Literacy:
definition: age 12 and over can read and write
total population : 95%
male: 95%
female: 95% (1984 est.)

@Anguilla:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form : Anguilla

Data code: AV

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK

Government type: NA

National capital: The Valley

Administrative divisions: none (dependent territory of the UK)

Independence: none (dependent territory of the UK)

National holiday: Anguilla Day, 30 May

Constitution: Anguilla Constitutional Order 1 April 1982; amended 1990

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952);
represented by Governor Alan HOOLE (since 1 November 1995)
head of government: Chief Minister Hubert HUGHES (since 16 March 1994)
cabinet: Executive Council appointed by the governor from among the
elected members of the House of Assembly
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor appointed
by the queen; chief minister appointed by the governor from among the
members of the House of Assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Assembly (11 seats total, 7
elected by direct popular vote; members serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 16 March 1994 (next to be held March 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - ANA
2, AUP 2, ADP 2, independent 1

Judicial branch: High Court, judge provided by Eastern Caribbean
Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Anguilla National Alliance or ANA
[Osbourne FLEMING]; Anguilla United Party or AUP [Hubert HUGHES];
Anguilla Democratic Party or ADP [Victor BANKS]

International organization participation: Caricom (observer), CDB,
Interpol (subbureau), OECS (associate), ECLAC (associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (dependent territory of
the UK)

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
quadrant and the Anguillan coat of arms centered in the outer half of
the flag; the coat of arms depicts three orange dolphins in an
interlocking circular design on a white background with blue wavy
water below

Economy

Economy - overview: Anguilla has few natural resources, and the
economy depends heavily on high-class tourism, offshore banking,
lobster fishing, and remittances from emigrants. Output growth had
averaged about 7% in recent years, mainly as a result of a boom in
tourism thanks to economic expansion in North America and the UK. The
economy, and especially the tourism sector, suffered a setback in late
1995 due to the effects of Hurricane Luis in September. Agricultural
output had only just begun to recover from a drought in 1994 when Luis
hit. Anguillan officials have put substantial effort into developing
the offshore financing sector. A comprehensive package of financial
services legislation was enacted in late 1994. In the medium term,
prospects for the economy will depend on the tourism sector and,
therefore, on continuing income growth in the industrialized nations.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $52 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -4.3% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $7,400 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.6% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 4,400 (1992)
by occupation: commerce 36%, services 29%, construction 18%,
transportation and utilities 10%, manufacturing 3%,
agriculture/fishing/forestry/mining 4%

Unemployment rate: 7% (1992 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $13.5 million (1993)
expenditures: $17.6 million, including capital expenditures of
$740,000 (1995 est.)

Industries: tourism, boat building, offshore financial services

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: pigeon peas, corn, sweet potatoes; sheep,
goats, pigs, cattle, poultry; fishing (including lobster)

Exports:
total value : $1.3 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: lobster and salt
partners : NA

Imports:
total value: $39.8 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: NA
partners: NA

Debt - external: $8.5 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (February
1997; fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Anguilla:Communications

Telephones: 890

Telephone system:
domestic: modern internal telephone system
international: microwave radio relay to island of Saint Martin
(Guadeloupe and Netherlands Antilles)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 2,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: NA

@Anguilla:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 105 km
paved: 65 km
unpaved : 40 km (1992 est.)

Ports and harbors: Blowing Point, Road Bay

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
914 to 1,523 m : 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

ANTARCTICA

@Antarctica:Geography

Location: continent mostly south of the Antarctic Circle

Geographic coordinates: 90 00 S, 0 00 E

Map references: Antarctic Region

Area:
total: 14 million sq km
land: 14 million sq km (280,000 sq km ice-free, 13.72 million sq km
ice-covered) (est.)
note : second-smallest continent (after Australia)

Area - comparative: slightly less than 1.5 times the size of the US

Land boundaries: 0 km
note: see entry on International disputes

Coastline: 17,968 km

Maritime claims: none, but see entry on International disputes

Climate: severe low temperatures vary with latitude, elevation, and
distance from the ocean; East Antarctica is colder than West
Antarctica because of its higher elevation; Antarctic Peninsula has
the most moderate climate; higher temperatures occur in January along
the coast and average slightly below freezing

Terrain: about 98% thick continental ice sheet and 2% barren rock,
with average elevations between 2,000 and 4,000 meters; mountain
ranges up to about 5,000 meters; ice-free coastal areas include parts
of southern Victoria Land, Wilkes Land, the Antarctic Peninsula area,
and parts of Ross Island on McMurdo Sound; glaciers form ice shelves
along about half of the coastline, and floating ice shelves constitute
11% of the area of the continent

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Vinson Massif 5,140 m

Natural resources: none presently exploited; iron ore, chromium,
copper, gold, nickel, platinum and other minerals, and coal and
hydrocarbons have been found in small, uncommercial quantities

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other : 100% (ice 98%, barren rock 2%)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: katabatic (gravity-driven) winds blow coastward from
the high interior; frequent blizzards form near the foot of the
plateau; cyclonic storms form over the ocean and move clockwise along
the coast; volcanism on Deception Island and isolated areas of West
Antarctica; other seismic activity rare and weak

Environment - current issues: in 1995 it was reported that the ozone
shield, which protects the Earth's surface from harmful ultraviolet
radiation, had dwindled to the lowest level recorded over Antarctica
since 1975 when measurements were first taken

Environment - international agreements:
party to: none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: the coldest, windiest, highest, and driest
continent; during summer, more solar radiation reaches the surface at
the South Pole than is received at the Equator in an equivalent
period; mostly uninhabitable

@Antarctica:People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants; note - there are seasonally
staffed research stations; Summer (January) population - over 4,115
total; Argentina 207, Australia 268, Belgium 13, Brazil 80, Chile 256,
China NA, Ecuador NA, Finland 11, France 78, Germany 32, Greenpeace
12, India 60, Italy 210, Japan 59, South Korea 14, Netherlands 10, NZ
264, Norway 23, Peru 39, Poland NA, South Africa 79, Spain 43, Sweden
10, UK 116, Uruguay NA, US 1,666, former USSR 565 (1989-90); Winter
(July) population - over 1,046 total; Argentina 150, Australia 71,
Brazil 12, Chile 73, China NA, France 33, Germany 19, Greenpeace 5,
India 1, Japan 38, South Korea 14, NZ 11, Poland NA, South Africa 12,
UK 69, Uruguay NA, US 225, former USSR 313 (1989-90); Year-round
stations - 42 total; Argentina 6, Australia 3, Brazil 1, Chile 3,
China 2, Finland 1, France 1, Germany 1, India 1, Japan 2, South Korea
1, NZ 1, Poland 1, South Africa 3, UK 5, Uruguay 1, US 3, former USSR
6 (1990-91); Summer-only stations - over 38 total; Argentina 7,
Australia 3, Chile 5, Germany 3, India 1, Italy 1, Japan 4, NZ 2,
Norway 1, Peru 1, South Africa 1, Spain 1, Sweden 2, UK 1, US
numerous, former USSR 5 (1989-90); note - the disintegration of the
former USSR has placed the status and future of its Antarctic
facilities in doubt; stations may be subject to closings at any time
because of ongoing economic difficulties

@Antarctica:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form : Antarctica

Data code: AY

Government type: Antarctic Treaty Summary - The Antarctic Treaty,
signed on 1 December 1959 and entered into force on 23 June 1961,
establishes the legal framework for the management of Antarctica.
Administration is carried out through consultative member meetings -
the 18th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting was in Japan in April
1993. Currently, there are 42 treaty member nations: 26 consultative
and 16 acceding. Consultative (voting) members include the seven
nations that claim portions of Antarctica as national territory (some
claims overlap) and 19 nonclaimant nations. The US and some other
nations that have made no claims have reserved the right to do so. The
US does not recognize the claims of others. The year in parentheses
indicates when an acceding nation was voted to full consultative
(voting) status, while no date indicates the country was an original
1959 treaty signatory. Claimant nations are - Argentina, Australia,
Chile, France, New Zealand, Norway, and the UK. Nonclaimant
consultative nations are - Belgium, Brazil (1983), China (1985),
Ecuador (1990), Finland (1989), Germany (1981), India (1983), Italy
(1987), Japan, South Korea (1989), Netherlands (1990), Peru (1989),
Poland (1977), South Africa, Spain (1988), Sweden (1988), Uruguay
(1985), the US, and Russia. Acceding (nonvoting) members, with year of
accession in parentheses, are - Austria (1987), Bulgaria (1978),
Canada (1988), Colombia (1988), Cuba (1984), Czech Republic (1993),
Denmark (1965), Greece (1987), Guatemala (1991), Hungary (1984), North
Korea (1987), Papua New Guinea (1981), Romania (1971), Slovakia
(1993), Switzerland (1990), and Ukraine (1992). Article 1 - area to be
used for peaceful purposes only; military activity, such as weapons
testing, is prohibited, but military personnel and equipment may be
used for scientific research or any other peaceful purpose; Article 2
- freedom of scientific investigation and cooperation shall continue;
Article 3 - free exchange of information and personnel in cooperation
with the UN and other international agencies; Article 4 - does not
recognize, dispute, or establish territorial claims and no new claims
shall be asserted while the treaty is in force; Article 5 - prohibits
nuclear explosions or disposal of radioactive wastes; Article 6 -
includes under the treaty all land and ice shelves south of 60 degrees
00 minutes south; Article 7 - treaty-state observers have free access,
including aerial observation, to any area and may inspect all
stations, installations, and equipment; advance notice of all
activities and of the introduction of military personnel must be
given; Article 8 - allows for jurisdiction over observers and
scientists by their own states; Article 9 - frequent consultative
meetings take place among member nations; Article 10 - treaty states
will discourage activities by any country in Antarctica that are
contrary to the treaty; Article 11 - disputes to be settled peacefully
by the parties concerned or, ultimately, by the ICJ; Articles 12, 13,
14 - deal with upholding, interpreting, and amending the treaty among
involved nations; Other agreements - more than 170 recommendations
adopted at treaty consultative meetings and ratified by governments
include - Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and
Flora (1964); Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals
(1972); Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources (1980); a mineral resources agreement was signed in 1988 but
was subsequently rejected; in 1991 the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty was signed and awaits ratification;
this agreement provides for the protection of the Antarctic
environment through five specific annexes on marine pollution, fauna,
and flora, environmental impact assessments, waste management, and
protected areas; it also prohibits all activities relating to mineral
resources except scientific research; 21 parties have ratified
Protocol as of April 1996

Legal system: US law, including certain criminal offenses by or
against US nationals, such as murder, may apply to areas not under
jurisdiction of other countries. Some US laws directly apply to
Antarctica. For example, the Antarctic Conservation Act, 16 U.S.C.
section 2401 et seq., provides civil and criminal penalties for the
following activities, unless authorized by regulation of statute: The
taking of native mammals or birds; the introduction of nonindigenous
plants and animals; entry into specially protected or scientific
areas; the discharge or disposal of pollutants; and the importation
into the US of certain items from Antarctica. Violation of the
Antarctic Conservation Act carries penalties of up to $10,000 in fines
and 1 year in prison. The Departments of Treasury, Commerce,
Transportation, and Interior share enforcement responsibilities.
Public Law 95-541, the US Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978, requires
expeditions from the US to Antarctica to notify, in advance, the
Office of Oceans and Polar Affairs, Room 5801, Department of State,
Washington, DC 20520, which reports such plans to other nations as
required by the Antarctic Treaty. For more information contact Permit
Office, Office of Polar Programs, National Science Foundation,
Arlington, Virginia 22230 (703) 306-1031.

Economy

Economy - overview: No economic activity at present except for fishing
off the coast and small-scale tourism, both based abroad.

@Antarctica:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

@Antarctica:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage

Airports: 42 landing facilities at different locations operated by 16
national governments party to the Treaty; one additional air facility
operated by commercial (non-governmental) tourist organization;
helicopter pads at 32 of these locations; runways at 10 locations are
gravel, sea ice, glacier ice, or compacted snow surface suitable for
wheeled fixed-wing aircraft; no paved runways; 17 locations have
snow-surface skiways limited to use by ski-equipped planes - 1 skiway
greater than 3,000 m, 19 runways/skiways 1,000 to 3,000 m, 2
runways/skiways less than 1,000 m, and 5 of unspecified or variable
length; airports generally subject to severe restrictions and
limitations resulting from extreme seasonal and geographic conditions;
airports do not meet ICAO standards; advance approval from the
respective governmental or non-governmental operating organization
required for landing (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: the Antarctic Treaty prohibits any measures of a
military nature, such as the establishment of military bases and
fortifications, the carrying out of military maneuvers, or the testing
of any type of weapon; it permits the use of military personnel or
equipment for scientific research or for any other peaceful purposes

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Antarctic Treaty defers claims (see
Antarctic Treaty Summary above); sections (some overlapping) claimed
by Argentina, Australia, Chile, France (Adelie Land), New Zealand
(Ross Dependency), Norway (Queen Maud Land), and UK; the US and most
other nations do not recognize the territorial claims of other nations
and have made no claims themselves (the US reserves the right to do
so); no formal claims have been made in the sector between 90 degrees
west and 150 degrees west
______________________________________________________________________

ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA

@Antigua and Barbuda:Geography

Location: Caribbean, islands between the Caribbean Sea and the North
Atlantic Ocean, east-southeast of Puerto Rico

Geographic coordinates: 17 03 N, 61 48 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 440 sq km
land: 440 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Redonda

Area - comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 153 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf : 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: mostly low-lying limestone and coral islands with some higher
volcanic areas

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Boggy Peak 402 m

Natural resources: negligible; pleasant climate fosters tourism

Land use:
arable land : 18%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 9%
forests and woodland: 11%
other: 62% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hurricanes and tropical storms (July to October);
periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: water management - a major concern
because of limited natural fresh water resources - is further hampered
by the clearing of trees to increase crop production, causing rainfall
to run off quickly

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental Modification,
Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

@Antigua and Barbuda:People

Population: 63,739 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 26% (male 8,514; female 8,221)
15-64 years: 68% (male 21,499; female 21,891)
65 years and over : 6% (male 1,571; female 2,043) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.44% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 17.27 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.98 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -6.95 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.77 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 22 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 70.93 years
male : 68.58 years
female: 73.4 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.76 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Antiguan(s), Barbudan(s)
adjective: Antiguan, Barbudan

Ethnic groups: black, British, Portuguese, Lebanese, Syrian

Religions: Anglican (predominant), other Protestant sects, some Roman
Catholic

Languages: English (official), local dialects

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over has completed five or more years of
schooling
total population: 89%
male: 90%
female: 88% (1960 est.)

@Antigua and Barbuda:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Antigua and Barbuda

Data code: AC

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Saint John's

Administrative divisions: 6 parishes and 2 dependencies*; Barbuda*,
Redonda*, Saint George, Saint John, Saint Mary, Saint Paul, Saint
Peter, Saint Philip

Independence: 1 November 1981 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 November (1981)

Constitution: 1 November 1981

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General James B. CARLISLE (since NA 1993)
head of government: Prime Minister Lester Bryant BIRD (since 8 March
1994)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the governor general on the
advice of the prime minister
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor general
chosen by the queen on the advice of the prime minister; prime
minister appointed by the governor general

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
(17-member body appointed by the governor general) and the House of
Representatives (17 seats; members are elected by proportional
representation to serve 5-year terms)
elections: House of Representatives - last held 8 March 1994 (next to
be held NA 1999)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - ALP
11, UPP 5, independent 1

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (based in Saint
Lucia), one judge of the Supreme Court is a resident of the islands
and presides over the Court of Summary Jurisdiction

Political parties and leaders: Antigua Labor Party or ALP [Lester
Bryant BIRD]; United Progressive Party or UPP [Baldwin SPENCER], a
coalition of three opposition political parties - the United National
Democratic Party or UNDP; the Antigua Caribbean Liberation Movement or
ACLM; and the Progressive Labor Movement or PLM

Political pressure groups and leaders: Antigua Trades and Labor Union
or ATLU [William ROBINSON]; People's Democratic Movement or PDM [Hugh
MARSHALL]

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CDB, ECLAC,
FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ISO (subscriber), ITU,
NAM (observer), OAS, OECS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WCL, WFTU,
WHO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Lionel Alexander HURST
chancery: 3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016
telephone: [1] (202) 362-5211, 5166, 5122
FAX : [1] (202) 362-5225
consulate(s) general: Miami

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Antigua and Barbuda (embassy closed 30 June 1994); the US
Ambassador to Barbados is accredited to Antigua and Barbuda

Flag description: red with an inverted isosceles triangle based on the
top edge of the flag; the triangle contains three horizontal bands of
black (top), light blue, and white with a yellow rising sun in the
black band

Economy

Economy - overview: Tourism continues to be by far the dominant
activity in the economy but the combined share in GDP of transport and
communications, trade, and public utilities has increased markedly in
recent years. Tourism's direct contribution to output in 1994 was
about 20%. In addition, increased tourist arrivals helped spur growth
in the construction and transport sectors. The dual island nation's
agricultural production is mainly directed to the domestic market; the
sector is constrained by the limited water supply and labor shortages
that reflect the pull of higher wages in tourism and construction.
Manufacturing comprises enclave-type assembly for export with major
products being bedding, handicrafts, and electronic components.
Prospects for economic growth in the medium term will continue to
depend on income growth in the industrialized world, especially in the
US, which accounts for about half of all tourist arrivals.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $446 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.7% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 3.5%
industry: 19.3%
services: 77.2% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 30,000
by occupation : commerce and services 82%, agriculture 11%, industry
7% (1983)

Unemployment rate: 5%-10%(1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $134 million
expenditures: $135.4 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995)

Industries: tourism, construction, light manufacturing (clothing,
alcohol, household appliances)

Industrial production growth rate: NA

Electricity - capacity: 54,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: cotton, fruits, vegetables, bananas, coconuts,
cucumbers, mangoes, sugarcane; livestock

Exports:
total value: $45 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: petroleum products 48%, manufactures 23%, food and live
animals 4%, machinery and transport equipment 17%
partners: OECS 26%, Barbados 15%, Guyana 4%, Trinidad and Tobago 2%,
US 0.3%

Imports:
total value: $350.8 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: food and live animals, machinery and transport equipment,
manufactures, chemicals, oil
partners: US 27%, UK 16%, Canada 4%, OECS 3%, other 50%

Debt - external: $435 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (February
1997; fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Antigua and Barbuda:Communications

Telephones: 6,700

Telephone system:
domestic: good automatic telephone system
international: 1 coaxial submarine cable; satellite earth station - 1
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean); tropospheric scatter to Saba (Netherlands
Antilles) and Guadeloupe

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 2, shortwave 2

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2

Televisions: 28,000 (1993 est.)

@Antigua and Barbuda:Transportation

Railways:
total: 77 km
narrow gauge: 64 km 0.760-m gauge; 13 km 0.610-m gauge (used almost
exclusively for handling sugarcane)

Highways:
total: 245 km (1995 est.)
paved : NA km
unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Saint John's

Merchant marine:
total: 419 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,965,180 GRT/2,637,644
DWT
ships by type: bulk 9, cargo 285, chemical tanker 6, combination bulk
1, container 83, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker 4, refrigerated
cargo 11, roll-on/roll-off cargo 19
note : a flag of convenience registry: Germany owns 13 ships, Slovenia
3, Croatia 1, Cyprus 1, and US 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m : 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Antigua and Barbuda Defense Force, Royal
Antigua and Barbuda Police Force (includes the Coast Guard)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.4 million (FY90/91)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1% (FY90/91)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: considered a long-time but relatively minor
transshipment point for narcotics bound for the US and Europe and
recent transshipment point for heroin from Europe to the US;
potentially more significant as a drug money-laundering center
______________________________________________________________________

ARCTIC OCEAN
[Map of Arctic Ocean]

@Arctic Ocean:Geography

Location: body of water mostly north of the Arctic Circle

Geographic coordinates: 90 00 N, 0 00 E

Map references: Arctic Region

Area:
total: 14.056 million sq km
note: includes Baffin Bay, Barents Sea, Beaufort Sea, Chukchi Sea,
East Siberian Sea, Greenland Sea, Hudson Bay, Hudson Strait, Kara Sea,
Laptev Sea, Northwest Passage, and other tributary water bodies

Area - comparative: slightly less than 1.5 times the size of the US;
smallest of the world's four oceans (after Pacific Ocean, Atlantic
Ocean, and Indian Ocean)

Coastline: 45,389 km

Climate: polar climate characterized by persistent cold and relatively
narrow annual temperature ranges; winters characterized by continuous
darkness, cold and stable weather conditions, and clear skies; summers
characterized by continuous daylight, damp and foggy weather, and weak
cyclones with rain or snow

Terrain: central surface covered by a perennial drifting polar icepack
that averages about 3 meters in thickness, although pressure ridges
may be three times that size; clockwise drift pattern in the Beaufort
Gyral Stream, but nearly straight line movement from the New Siberian
Islands (Russia) to Denmark Strait (between Greenland and Iceland);
the icepack is surrounded by open seas during the summer, but more
than doubles in size during the winter and extends to the encircling
land masses; the ocean floor is about 50% continental shelf (highest
percentage of any ocean) with the remainder a central basin
interrupted by three submarine ridges (Alpha Cordillera, Nansen
Cordillera, and Lomonsov Ridge)

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Fram Basin -4,665 m
highest point: sea level 0 m

Natural resources: sand and gravel aggregates, placer deposits,
polymetallic nodules, oil and gas fields, fish, marine mammals (seals
and whales)

Natural hazards: ice islands occasionally break away from northern
Ellesmere Island; icebergs calved from glaciers in western Greenland
and extreme northeastern Canada; permafrost in islands; virtually
icelocked from October to June; ships subject to superstructure icing
from October to May

Environment - current issues: endangered marine species include
walruses and whales; fragile ecosystem slow to change and slow to
recover from disruptions or damage

Environment - international agreements:
party to : none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: major chokepoint is the southern Chukchi Sea
(northern access to the Pacific Ocean via the Bering Strait);
strategic location between North America and Russia; shortest marine
link between the extremes of eastern and western Russia, floating
research stations operated by the US and Russia; maximum snow cover in
March or April about 20 to 50 centimeters over the frozen ocean; snow
cover lasts about 10 months

@Arctic Ocean:Government

Data code: none; the US Government has not approved a standard for
hydrographic codes - see the Cross-Reference List of Hydrographic Data
Codes appendix

Economy

Economy - overview: Economic activity is limited to the exploitation
of natural resources, including petroleum, natural gas, fish, and
seals.

@Arctic Ocean:Communications

Telephone system:
international: no submarine cables

@Arctic Ocean:Transportation

Ports and harbors: Churchill (Canada), Murmansk (Russia), Prudhoe Bay
(US)

Transportation - note: sparse network of air, ocean, river, and land
routes; the Northwest Passage (North America) and Northern Sea Route
(Eurasia) are important seasonal waterways

Military

:

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: some maritime disputes (see littoral
states); Svalbard is the focus of a maritime boundary dispute between
Norway and Russia
______________________________________________________________________

ARGENTINA

@Argentina:Geography

Location: Southern South America, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean,
between Chile and Uruguay

Geographic coordinates: 34 00 S, 64 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total: 2,766,890 sq km
land: 2,736,690 sq km
water : 30,200 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than three-tenths the size of the US

Land boundaries:
total: 9,665 km
border countries: Bolivia 832 km, Brazil 1,224 km, Chile 5,150 km,
Paraguay 1,880 km, Uruguay 579 km

Coastline: 4,989 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly temperate; arid in southeast; subantarctic in
southwest

Terrain: rich plains of the Pampas in northern half, flat to rolling
plateau of Patagonia in south, rugged Andes along western border

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Salinas Chicas -40 m
highest point: Cerro Aconcagua 6,962 m

Natural resources: fertile plains of the pampas, lead, zinc, tin,
copper, iron ore, manganese, petroleum, uranium

Land use:
arable land: 9%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 52%
forests and woodland: 19%
other: 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 17,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: San Miguel de Tucuman and Mendoza areas in the Andes
subject to earthquakes; pamperos are violent windstorms that can
strike the Pampas and northeast; heavy flooding

Environment - current issues: erosion results from inadequate flood
controls and improper land use practices; irrigated soil degradation;
desertification; air pollution in Buenos Aires and other major cities;
water pollution in urban areas; rivers becoming polluted due to
increased pesticide and fertilizer use

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: second-largest country in South America (after
Brazil); strategic location relative to sea lanes between South
Atlantic and South Pacific Oceans (Strait of Magellan, Beagle Channel,
Drake Passage)

@Argentina:People

Population: 35,797,985 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 28% (male 5,042,521; female 4,855,874)
15-64 years : 62% (male 11,133,884; female 11,155,104)
65 years and over: 10% (male 1,499,538; female 2,111,064) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.3% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 20.01 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.68 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.67 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 19.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 74.31 years
male: 70.67 years
female: 78.12 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.69 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Argentine(s)
adjective: Argentine

Ethnic groups: white 85%, mestizo, Amerindian, or other nonwhite
groups 15%

Religions: nominally Roman Catholic 90% (less than 20% practicing),
Protestant 2%, Jewish 2%, other 6%

Languages: Spanish (official), English, Italian, German, French

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 96.2%
male : 96.2%
female: 96.2% (1995 est.)

@Argentina:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Argentine Republic
conventional short form: Argentina
local long form: Republica Argentina
local short form: Argentina

Data code: AR

Government type: republic

National capital: Buenos Aires

Administrative divisions: 23 provinces (provincias, singular -
provincia), and 1 federal district* (distrito federal); Buenos Aires;
Catamarca; Chaco; Chubut; Cordoba; Corrientes; Distrito Federal*;
Entre Rios; Formosa; Jujuy; La Pampa; La Rioja; Mendoza; Misiones;
Neuquen; Rio Negro; Salta; San Juan; San Luis; Santa Cruz; Santa Fe;
Santiago del Estero; Tierra del Fuego, Antartida e Islas del Atlantico
Sur; Tucuman
note: the US does not recognize any claims to Antarctica

Independence: 9 July 1816 (from Spain)

National holiday: Revolution Day, 25 May (1810)

Constitution: 1 May 1853; revised August 1994

Legal system: mixture of US and West European legal systems; has not
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Carlos Saul MENEM (since 8 July 1989); Vice
President Carlos RUCKAUF (since 8 July 1995); note - the president is
both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Carlos Saul MENEM (since 8 July 1989);
Vice President Carlos RUCKAUF (since 8 July 1995); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 14 May 1995 (next
to be held May 1999)
election results : Carlos Saul MENEM reelected president; percent of
vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral National Congress or Congreso Nacional
consists of the Senate (72 seats; three members appointed by each of
the provincial legislatures, one-third of the members appointed every
three years to a 9-year term) and the Chamber of Deputies (257 seats;
one-half of the members elected every two years to four-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held NA May 1995 (next to be held NA 1998);
Chamber of Deputies - last held 14 May 1995; (next to be held NA
October 1997)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - PJ 38, others 34; Chamber of Deputies - percent of vote by
party - NA; seats by party - PJ 132, UCR 68, Frepaso 26, other 31

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), the nine Supreme Court
judges are appointed by the president with approval of the Senate

Political parties and leaders: Justicialist Party or PJ [Carlos Saul
MENEM] (Peronist umbrella political organization); Radical Civic Union
or UCR [Rodolfo TERRAGNO] (moderately left-of-center party); Union of
the Democratic Center or UCD (conservative party); Dignity and
Independence Political Party or MODIN [Aldo RICO] (right-wing party);
Front for a Country in Solidarity or Frepaso (a four party coalition)
[leader Carlos ALVAREZ]; several provincial parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: Peronist-dominated labor
movement; General Confederation of Labor or CGT (Peronist-leaning
umbrella labor organization); Argentine Industrial Union
(manufacturers' association); Argentine Rural Society (large
landowners' association); business organizations; students; the Roman
Catholic Church; the Armed Forces

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer),
Australia Group, BCIE, CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G- 6, G-11, G-15, G-19, G-24,
G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
LAES, LAIA, Mercosur, MINURSO, MTCR, NSG (observer), OAS, OPANAL, PCA,
RG, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM,
UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Raul Enrique GRANILLO OCAMPO
chancery: 1600 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 939-6400 through 6403
FAX: [1] (202) 332-3171
consulate(s) general : Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
New Orleans, New York, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador James R. CHEEK has returned to
Washington; replacement not yet appointed
embassy: 4300 Colombia, 1425 Buenos Aires
mailing address : Unit 4334, APO AA 34034
telephone: [54] (1) 777-4533, 4534
FAX : [54] (1) 777-0197

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of light blue (top),
white, and light blue; centered in the white band is a radiant yellow
sun with a human face known as the Sun of May

Economy

Economy - overview: Argentina benefits from rich natural resources, a
highly literate population, an export-oriented agricultural sector,
and a diversified industrial base. Nevertheless, following decades of
mismanagement and statist policies, the economy in the late 1980s was
plagued with huge external debts and recurring bouts of
hyperinflation. Elected in 1989, in the depths of recession, President
MENEM has implemented a comprehensive economic restructuring program
that shows signs of putting Argentina on a path of stable, sustainable
growth. Argentina's currency has traded at par with the US dollar
since April 1991, and inflation has fallen to its lowest level in 50
years. Argentines have responded to price stability by repatriating
capital and investing in domestic industry. Growth averaged more than
8% between 1991 and 1994, then fell to 4.6% in 1995, largely in
reaction to the Mexican peso crisis. The economy grew at 4.4% in 1996,
with the strongest growth occurring in the second half of the year.
Unemployment increased slightly - to over 17% - and Buenos Aires was
forced to renegotiate fiscal targets with the IMF. Although the
economy is expected to grow by at least 5% in 1997, unemployment and
fiscal concerns will continue to challenge the MENEM administration.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $296.9 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.4% (1996)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $8,600 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 7%
industry: 29%
services: 64% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 0.1% (yearend 1996)

Labor force:
total: 14.5 million (1995 est.)
by occupation : agriculture 12%, industry 31%, services 57% (1985
est.)

Unemployment rate: 17.3% (October 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $50.3 billion
expenditures : $51.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.2
billion (1995 est.)

Industries: food processing, motor vehicles, consumer durables,
textiles, chemicals and petrochemicals, printing, metallurgy, steel

Industrial production growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 20.207 million kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 67.369 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,606 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, corn, sorghum, soybeans, sugar beets;
livestock

Exports:
total value: $23.8 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities : meat, wheat, corn, oilseed, manufactures, fuels
partners: Brazil 26.1%, US 8.5%, Chile 7.0%, Netherlands 5.7%, Italy
3.5% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $23.7 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: machinery and equipment, chemicals, metals, transport
equipment, agricultural products
partners: Brazil 20.8%, US 20.7%, Italy 6.3%, Germany 6.2%, France
5.2% (1995)

Debt - external: $95 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 nuevo peso argentino = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: pesos per US$1 - 0.99950 (January 1997), 0.99966
(1996), 0.99975 (1995), 0.99901 (1994), 0.99895 (1993), 0.99064 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Argentina:Communications

Telephones: 4.6 million (1990)

Telephone system: 12,000 public telephones; extensive modern system
but many families do not have telephones; despite extensive use of
microwave radio relay, the telephone system frequently grounds out
during rainstorms, even in Buenos Aires
domestic: microwave radio relay and a domestic satellite system with
40 earth stations serve the trunk network
international : satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 171, FM 0, shortwave 13

Radios: 22.3 million (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 231

Televisions: 7.165 million (1991 est.)

@Argentina:Transportation

Railways:
total: 37,910 km
broad gauge: 24,124 km 1.676-m gauge (142 km electrified)
standard gauge: 2,765 km 1.435-m gauge
narrow gauge: 11,021 km 1.000-m gauge (26 km electrified)

Highways:
total : 216,100 km
paved: 61,589 km (including 600 km of expressways)
unpaved : 154,511 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 11,000 km navigable

Pipelines: crude oil 4,090 km; petroleum products 2,900 km; natural
gas 9,918 km

Ports and harbors: Bahia Blanca, Buenos Aires, Comodoro Rivadavia,
Concepcion del Uruguay, La Plata, Mar del Plata, Necochea, Rio
Gallegos, Rosario, Santa Fe, Ushuaia

Merchant marine:
total: 36 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 263,266 GRT/385,211 DWT
ships by type: cargo 11, chemical tanker 1, container 2, oil tanker
14, railcar carrier 1, refrigerated cargo 6, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1
(1996 est.)

Airports: 1,202 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 598
over 3,047 m: 5
2,438 to 3,047 m: 25
1,524 to 2,437 m: 55
914 to 1,523 m : 44
under 914 m: 469 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 604
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m : 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 59
914 to 1,523 m: 542 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Argentine Army, Navy of the Argentine Republic,
Argentine Air Force, National Gendarmerie, Argentine Naval Prefecture
(Coast Guard only), National Aeronautical Police Force

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 8,932,491 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 7,244,682 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 321,345 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $4.6 billion (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.6% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: short section of the boundary with Chile is
indefinite; claims British-administered Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas); claims British-administered South Georgia and the South
Sandwich Islands; territorial claim in Antarctica

Illicit drugs: increasing use as a transshipment country for cocaine
headed for Europe and the US
______________________________________________________________________

ARMENIA

Introduction

Current issues: Armenia's leaders remain preoccupied by Armenia's
nine-year old conflict with Azerbaijan over the Nagorno-Karabakh
enclave. Although a cease-fire has been in effect since May 1994, the
sides have not made substantial progress toward a peaceful resolution.
President TER-PETROSSIAN's latitude on the issue may be further
constrained by his controversial reelection in September 1996. When
supporters of the main opposition candidate stormed the parliament
following the announcement of TER-PETROSSIAN's victory, MVD forces
were called in to restore order. The subsequent political standoff
between government and opposition supporters diminished in late 1996
as the government has gradually attempted reconciliation. Despite
these political problems, the Armenian government has been pursuing
its aggressive economic reform program, although implementation of its
privatization program stalled in late 1996.

@Armenia:Geography

Location: Southwestern Asia, east of Turkey

Geographic coordinates: 40 00 N, 45 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
total : 29,800 sq km
land: 28,400 sq km
water: 1,400 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
total: 1,254 km
border countries: Azerbaijan-proper 566 km, Azerbaijan-Naxcivan
exclave 221 km, Georgia 164 km, Iran 35 km, Turkey 268 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: highland continental, hot summers, cold winters

Terrain: high Armenian Plateau with mountains; little forest land;
fast flowing rivers; good soil in Aras River valley

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Debed River 400 m
highest point: Aragats Lerr 4,095 m

Natural resources: small deposits of gold, copper, molybdenum, zinc,
alumina

Land use:
arable land : 17%
permanent crops: 3%
permanent pastures: 24%
forests and woodland: 15%
other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 2,870 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasionally severe earthquakes; droughts

Environment - current issues: soil pollution from toxic chemicals such
as DDT; energy blockade, the result of conflict with Azerbaijan, has
led to deforestation when citizens scavenged for firewood; pollution
of Hrazdan (Razdan) and Aras Rivers; the draining of Sevana Lich, a
result of its use as a source for hydropower, threatens drinking water
supplies; restart of Metsamor nuclear power plant without adequate
(IAEA-recommended) safety and backup systems

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Nuclear Test Ban, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

Geography - note: landlocked

@Armenia:People

Population: 3,433,629 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 27% (male 476,375; female 456,723)
15-64 years: 65% (male 1,088,103; female 1,134,649)
65 years and over: 8% (male 115,135; female 162,644) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.33% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 13.59 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.6 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -8.32 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 40.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 66.9 years
male: 62.69 years
female: 71.32 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.71 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Armenian(s)
adjective: Armenian

Ethnic groups: Armenian 93%, Azeri 3%, Russian 2%, other (mostly
Yezidi Kurds) 2% (1989)
note: as of the end of 1993, virtually all Azeris had emigrated from
Armenia

Religions: Armenian Orthodox 94%

Languages: Armenian 96%, Russian 2%, other 2%

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99%
male: 99%
female : 98% (1989 est.)

@Armenia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Armenia
conventional short form: Armenia
local long form : Hayastani Hanrapetut'yun
local short form: Hayastan
former : Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic; Armenian Republic

Data code: AM

Government type: republic

National capital: Yerevan

Administrative divisions: 10 provinces (marzer, singular - marz) and 1
city* (k'aghak'ner, singular - k'aghak'); Aragatsotn, Ararat, Armavir,
Geghark'unik', Kotayk', Lorri, Shirak, Syunik', Tavush, Vayots' Dzor,
Yerevan*

Independence: 28 May 1918 (First Armenian Republic); 23 September 1991
(from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Referendum Day, 21 September

Constitution: adopted by nationwide referendum 5 July 1995

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Levon Akopovich TER-PETROSSIAN (since NA
October 1991); note - prior to becoming Armenia's first president,
TER-PETROSSIAN was chairman of the Armenian Supreme Soviet since 4
August 1990
head of government: Prime Minister Robert KOCHARIAN (since 20 March
1997)
cabinet : Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 22 September 1996 (next to be held NA September
2001); prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Levon Akopovich TER-PETROSSIAN elected president;
percent of vote - Levon Akopovich TER-PETROSSIAN 52%, Vazgen MANUKYAN
41%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Azgayin Zhoghov
(190 seats; members serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 5 July 1995 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
Republican Bloc 159 (ANM 63, DLP-Hanrapetutyun Bloc 6, Republic Party
4, CDU 3, Intellectual Armenia 3, Social Democratic Party 2,
independents 78), SWM 8, ACP 7, NDU 5, NSDU 3, DLP 1, ARF 1, other 4,
vacant 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Constitutional Court

Political parties and leaders:
Republic Bloc (Hanrapetoutioun): Armenian National Movement or ANM
[Husik LAZARIAN, chairman]; Democratic Liberal Party [Orthosis
GYONJIAN, chairman]; Republican Party [Ashot NAVARSARDIAN, chairman];
Christian Democratic Union or CDU [Azat ARSHAKIAN, chairman];
Intellectual Armenia [H. TOKMAJIAN]; Social Democratic (Hnchakian)
Party [Yeghia NAJARIAN]
opposition parties: Shamiram Women's Movement or SWM [Shoger
MATEVOSIAN]; Armenian Communist Party or ACP [Sergey BADALYAN];
National Democratic Union or NDU [Davit VARDANIAN and Vasgen
MANUKIAN]; Union of National Self-Determination or NSDU [Paruir
HAIRIKIAN, chairman]; Democratic Liberal Party or DLP [Rouben
MIRZAKHANIAN, chairman]; Armenian Revolutionary Federation or ARF
[Rouben HAKOBIAN, chairman]

International organization participation: BSEC, CCC, CE (guest), CIS,
EBRD, ECE, ESCAP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NACC, NAM
(observer), OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Ruben SHUGARIAN
chancery: 2225 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 319-1976
FAX : [1] (202) 319-2982
consulate(s) general: Los Angeles

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Peter TOMSEN
embassy: 18 Gen Bagramian, Yerevan
mailing address : use embassy street address
telephone: [374] (2) 151-144, 524-661
FAX: [374] (2) 151-550

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), blue, and
gold

Economy

Economy - overview: Under the old Soviet central planning system,
Armenia had developed a modern industrial sector, supplying machine
building tools, textiles, and other manufactured goods to sister
republics in exchange for raw materials and energy. Since the
implosion of the USSR in December 1991, Armenia has switched to
small-scale agriculture away from the large agroindustrial complexes
of the Soviet area. The privatization of industry has been at a much
slower pace. Armenia is a food importer and its mineral deposits
(gold, bauxite) are small. The ongoing conflict with Azerbaijan over
the ethnic Armenian-dominated region of Nagorno-Karabakh and the
embargoes imposed by Azerbaijan and Turkey contributed to a severe
economic decline in the early 1990s. By 1994, however, the Armenian
Government had launched an ambitious IMF-sponsored economic program
that has resulted in positive growth rates in 1995 and 1996. Armenia
also managed to slash inflation and to privatize most small and
medium-sized enterprises. The chronic energy shortages Armenia
suffered in recent years has been partially offset by the energy
supplied by one of its nuclear power plants at Metsamor, which in 1996
supplied about 40% of the country's energy needs, according to the
Armenian Government. Moreover, Armenia is expanding its energy imports
from Iran.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $9.7 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 35%
industry: 35%
services : 30% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5.7% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 1.6 million (1996)
by occupation: industry and construction 23%, agriculture 38%,
services 37%, other 2%

Unemployment rate: 7.4% officially registered unemployed, but large
numbers of underemployed (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues : $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: much of industry is shut down; metal-cutting machine
tools, forging-pressing machines, electric motors, tires, knitted
wear, hosiery, shoes, silk fabric, washing machines, chemicals,
trucks, watches, instruments, microelectronics

Industrial production growth rate: 1% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 2.77 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 6.3 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,462 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: fruit (especially grapes), vegetables;
vineyards near Yerevan are famous for brandy and other liqueurs; minor
livestock sector

Exports:
total value : $273 million (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: gold and jewelry, aluminum, transport equipment,
electrical equipment, scrap metal
partners: Iran, Russia, Turkmenistan, Georgia

Imports:
total value : $830 million (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: grain, other foods, fuel, other energy
partners: Iran, Russia, Turkmenistan, Georgia, US, EU

Debt - external: $850 million (of which $75 million to Russia) (1995
est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note: commitments (excluding Russia), $1,385 million ($675 million in
disbursements) (1992-95)

Currency: 1 dram = 100 luma (introduced new currency in November 1993)

Exchange rates: dram per US$1 - 443 (December 1996), 401.8 (end
December 1995), 406 (end December 1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Armenia:Communications

Telephones: 650,000

Telephone system: joint venture agreement to install fiber-optic cable
and construct facilities for cellular telephone service is in the
implementation phase
domestic: NA
international : international connections to other former Soviet
republics are by landline or microwave radio relay and to other
countries by satellite and by leased connection through the Moscow
international gateway switch; satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 10, FM 3, shortwave NA (1991)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1
note: 100% of population receives Armenian and Russian TV programs

Televisions: NA

@Armenia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 825 km in common carrier service; does not include industrial
lines
broad gauge: 825 km 1.520-m gauge (1992)

Highways:
total : 7,720 km
paved: 7,496 km
unpaved: 224 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: NA km

Pipelines: natural gas 900 km (1991)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 11 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 5
over 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 6
1,524 to 2,437 m : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Air Force, Air Defense Force, Security Forces
(internal and border troops)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 907,579 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 722,715 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 30,942 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $75 million (1992)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Armenia supports ethnic Armenians in the
Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan in the longstanding, separatist
conflict against the Azerbaijani Government; traditional demands on
former Armenian lands in Turkey have subsided

Illicit drugs: illicit cultivator of cannabis mostly for domestic
consumption; used as a transshipment point for illicit drugs to
Western Europe and the US
______________________________________________________________________

ARUBA

(part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands)

@Aruba:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, north of Venezuela

Geographic coordinates: 12 30 N, 69 58 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 193 sq km
land: 193 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 68.5 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: flat with a few hills; scant vegetation

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Mount Jamanota 188 m

Natural resources: negligible; white sandy beaches

Land use:
arable land: 11%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: 89% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: lies outside the Caribbean hurricane belt

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

@Aruba:People

Population: 68,031 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 22% (male 7,814; female 7,127)
15-64 years: 69% (male 22,544; female 24,656)
65 years and over: 9% (male 2,433; female 3,457) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.39% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 14.2 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.32 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -3.97 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.91 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
total population: 0.93 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 8.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 76.8 years
male: 73.11 years
female : 80.68 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.81 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Aruban(s)
adjective: Aruban

Ethnic groups: mixed white/Caribbean Amerindian 80%

Religions: Roman Catholic 82%, Protestant 8%, Hindu, Muslim,
Confucian, Jewish

Languages: Dutch (official), Papiamento (a Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch,
English dialect), English (widely spoken), Spanish

Literacy: NA

@Aruba:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Aruba

Data code: AA

Dependency status: part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands; full
autonomy in internal affairs obtained in 1986 upon separation from the
Netherlands Antilles

Government type: NA

National capital: Oranjestad

Administrative divisions: none (part of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands)

Independence: none (part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands; in 1990,
Aruba requested and received from the Netherlands cancellation of the
agreement to automatically give independence to the island in 1996)

National holiday: Flag Day, 18 March

Constitution: 1 January 1986

Legal system: based on Dutch civil law system, with some English
common law influence

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen BEATRIX Wilhelmina Armgard of the Netherlands
(since 30 April 1980), represented by Governor General Olindo KOOLMAN
(since 1 January 1992)
head of government: Prime Minister Jan (Henny) H. EMAN (since 29 July
1994) and Deputy Prime Minister Glenbert F. CROES
cabinet : Council of Ministers elected by the Staten
elections: the queen is a constitutional monarch; governor general
appointed for a six-year term by the queen; prime minister and deputy
prime minister elected by the Staten for a four-year term; election
last held 29 July 1994 (next to be held by July 1998)
election results : Jan (Henny) H. EMAN elected prime minister; percent
of legislative vote - NA; Glenbert F. CROES elected deputy prime
minister; percent of legislative vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislature or Staten (21 seats;
members elected by direct popular vote and serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 29 July 1994 (next to be held by NA July 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - AVP
10, MEP 9, OLA 2

Judicial branch: Joint High Court of Justice

Political parties and leaders: Electoral Movement Party or MEP [Nelson
ODUBER]; Aruban People's Party or AVP [Jan (Henny) H. EMAN]; National
Democratic Action or ADN [Pedro Charro KELLY]; New Patriotic Party or
PPN [Eddy WERLEMEN]; Aruban Patriotic Party or PPA [Benny NISBET];
Aruban Democratic Party or PDA [Leo BERLINSKI]; Democratic Action '86
or AD '86 [Arturo ODUBER]; Aruban Liberal Party or OLA [Glenbert
CROES]
note: governing coalition includes the AVP and OLA

International organization participation: ECLAC (associate), Interpol,
IOC, UNESCO (associate), WCL, WToO (associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (represented by the Kingdom
of the Netherlands)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (part of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands)

Flag description: blue with two narrow horizontal yellow stripes
across the lower portion and a red, four-pointed star outlined in
white in the upper hoist-side corner

Economy

Economy - overview: Tourism is the mainstay of the Aruban economy,
although offshore banking and oil refining and storage are also
important. The rapid growth of the tourism sector over the last decade
has resulted in a substantial expansion of other activities.
Construction has boomed, with hotel capacity five times the 1985
level. In addition, the reopening of the country's oil refinery in
1993, a major source of employment and foreign exchange earnings, has
further spurred growth. Aruba's small labor force and less than 1%
unemployment rate have led to a large number of unfilled job vacancies
despite sharp rises in wage rates in recent years.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.4 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $21,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3.5% (1996)

Labor force: NA
by occupation: most employment is in the tourist industry (1996)

Unemployment rate: 0.5% (1994)

Budget:
revenues: $145 million
expenditures : $185 million, including capital expenditures of $42
million (1988)

Industries: tourism, transshipment facilities, oil refining

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: aloes; livestock; fishing

Exports:
total value: $1.3 billion (including oil re-exports) (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: mostly refined petroleum products
partners: US 64%, EU

Imports:
total value: $1.8 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: food, consumer goods, manufactures, petroleum products,
crude oil for refining and reexport
partners: US 8%, EU

Debt - external: $669 million (December 1995)

Economic aid: the Netherlands provided a 1996 aid package of $224
million to Aruba, the Netherlands Antilles, and Suriname

Currency: 1 Aruban florin (Af.) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Aruban florins (Af.) per US$1 - 1.7900 (fixed rate
since 1986)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Aruba:Communications

Telephones: 22,922 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: more than adequate
international: 1 submarine cable to Sint Maarten (Netherlands
Antilles); extensive interisland microwave radio relay links

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 19,000 (1993 est.)

@Aruba:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: NA km
paved : NA km
unpaved: NA km
note : most coastal roads are paved, while unpaved roads serve large
tracts of the interior

Ports and harbors: Barcadera, Oranjestad, Sint Nicolaas

Merchant marine:
total : 4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 7,274 GRT/ 10,130 DWT
ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 3 (1996 est.)

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: drug money-laundering center and transit point for
narcotics bound for the US and Europe; added to the US list of major
drug producing or drug transit countries in December 1996
______________________________________________________________________

ASHMORE AND CARTIER ISLANDS
Islands]

(territory of Australia)

@Ashmore and Cartier Islands:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, islands in the Indian Ocean, northwest of
Australia

Geographic coordinates: 12 14 S, 123 05 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 5 sq km
land: 5 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Ashmore Reef (West, Middle, and East Islets) and
Cartier Island

Area - comparative: about eight times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 74.1 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 12 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: low with sand and coral

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 3 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100% (all grass and sand)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: surrounded by shoals and reefs that can pose maritime
hazards

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: Ashmore Reef National Nature Reserve established in
August 1983

@Ashmore and Cartier Islands:People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants
note: there are only seasonal caretakers

@Ashmore and Cartier Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Territory of Ashmore and Cartier Islands
conventional short form : Ashmore and Cartier Islands

Data code: AT

Dependency status: territory of Australia; administered by the
Australian Ministry for Sport, Territories, and Local Government

National capital: none; administered from Canberra, Australia

Administrative divisions: none (territory of Australia)

Independence: none (territory of Australia)

Legal system: relevant laws of the Northern Territory of Australia

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Australia)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of Australia)

Flag description: the flag of Australia is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Ashmore and Cartier Islands:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Australia; periodic
visits by the Royal Australian Navy and Royal Australian Air Force

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

ATLANTIC OCEAN
[Map of Argentina]

@Atlantic Ocean:Geography

Location: body of water between Africa, Europe, Antarctica, and the
Western Hemisphere

Geographic coordinates: 0 00 N, 25 00 W

Map references: World

Area:
total: 82.217 million sq km
note: includes Baltic Sea, Black Sea, Caribbean Sea, Davis Strait,
Denmark Strait, Drake Passage, Gulf of Mexico, Mediterranean Sea,
North Sea, Norwegian Sea, Scotia Sea, Weddell Sea, and other tributary
water bodies

Area - comparative: slightly less than nine times the size of the US;
second-largest of the world's four oceans (after the Pacific Ocean,
but larger than Indian Ocean or Arctic Ocean)

Coastline: 111,866 km

Climate: tropical cyclones (hurricanes) develop off the coast of
Africa near Cape Verde and move westward into the Caribbean Sea;
hurricanes can occur from May to December, but are most frequent from
August to November

Terrain: surface usually covered with sea ice in Labrador Sea, Denmark
Strait, and Baltic Sea from October to June; clockwise warm water gyre
(broad, circular system of currents) in the northern Atlantic,
counterclockwise warm water gyre in the southern Atlantic; the ocean
floor is dominated by the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, a rugged north-south
centerline for the entire Atlantic basin

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Puerto Rico Trench -8,605 m
highest point : sea level 0 m

Natural resources: oil and gas fields, fish, marine mammals (seals and
whales), sand and gravel aggregates, placer deposits, polymetallic
nodules, precious stones

Natural hazards: icebergs common in Davis Strait, Denmark Strait, and
the northwestern Atlantic Ocean from February to August and have been
spotted as far south as Bermuda and the Madeira Islands; icebergs from
Antarctica occur in the extreme southern Atlantic Ocean; ships subject
to superstructure icing in extreme northern Atlantic from October to
May and extreme southern Atlantic from May to October; persistent fog
can be a maritime hazard from May to September

Environment - current issues: endangered marine species include the
manatee, seals, sea lions, turtles, and whales; drift net fishing is
hastening the decline of fish stocks and contributing to international
disputes; municipal sludge pollution off eastern US, southern Brazil,
and eastern Argentina; oil pollution in Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Mexico,
Lake Maracaibo, Mediterranean Sea, and North Sea; industrial waste and
municipal sewage pollution in Baltic Sea, North Sea, and Mediterranean
Sea

Environment - international agreements:
party to : none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: major choke points include the Dardanelles, Strait
of Gibraltar, access to the Panama and Suez Canals; strategic straits
include the Strait of Dover, Straits of Florida, Mona Passage, The
Sound (Oresund), and Windward Passage; the Equator divides the
Atlantic Ocean into the North Atlantic Ocean and South Atlantic Ocean

@Atlantic Ocean:Government

Data code: none; the US Government has not approved a standard for
hydrographic codes - see the Cross-Reference List of Hydrographic Data
Codes appendix

Economy

Economy - overview: The Atlantic Ocean provides some of the world's
most heavily trafficked sea routes, between and within the Eastern and
Western Hemispheres. Other economic activity includes the exploitation
of natural resources, e.g., fishing, the dredging of aragonite sands
(The Bahamas), and production of crude oil and natural gas (Caribbean
Sea, Gulf of Mexico, and North Sea).

@Atlantic Ocean:Communications

Telephone system:
international: numerous submarine cables with most between continental
Europe and the UK, between North America and the UK, and in the
Mediterranean; numerous direct links across Atlantic via satellite
networks

@Atlantic Ocean:Transportation

Ports and harbors: Alexandria (Egypt), Algiers (Algeria), Antwerp
(Belgium), Barcelona (Spain), Buenos Aires (Argentina), Casablanca
(Morocco), Colon (Panama), Copenhagen (Denmark), Dakar (Senegal),
Gdansk (Poland), Hamburg (Germany), Helsinki (Finland), Las Palmas
(Canary Islands, Spain), Le Havre (France), Lisbon (Portugal), London
(UK), Marseille (France), Montevideo (Uruguay), Montreal (Canada),
Naples (Italy), New Orleans (US), New York (US), Oran (Algeria), Oslo
(Norway), Piraeus (Greece), Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), Rotterdam
(Netherlands), Saint Petersburg (Russia), Stockholm (Sweden)

Transportation - note: Kiel Canal and Saint Lawrence Seaway are two
important waterways

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: some maritime disputes (see littoral states)
______________________________________________________________________

AUSTRALIA

@Australia:Geography

Location: Oceania, continent between the Indian Ocean and the South
Pacific Ocean

Geographic coordinates: 27 00 S, 133 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 7,686,850 sq km
land: 7,617,930 sq km
water : 68,920 sq km
note: includes Lord Howe Island and Macquarie Island

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than the US

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 25,760 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: generally arid to semiarid; temperate in south and east;
tropical in north

Terrain: mostly low plateau with deserts; fertile plain in southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Lake Eyre -15 m
highest point: Mount Kosciusko 2,229 m

Natural resources: bauxite, coal, iron ore, copper, tin, silver,
uranium, nickel, tungsten, mineral sands, lead, zinc, diamonds,
natural gas, petroleum

Land use:
arable land: 6%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 54%
forests and woodland: 19%
other : 21% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 21,070 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: cyclones along the coast; severe droughts

Environment - current issues: soil erosion from overgrazing,
industrial development, urbanization, and poor farming practices; soil
salinity rising due to the use of poor quality water; desertification;
clearing for agricultural purposes threatens the natural habitat of
many unique animal and plant species; the Great Barrier Reef off the
northeast coast, the largest coral reef in the world, is threatened by
increased shipping and its popularity as a tourist site; limited
natural fresh water resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine
Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Desertification

Geography - note: world's smallest continent but sixth-largest
country; population concentrated along the eastern and southeastern
coasts; regular, tropical, invigorating, sea breeze known as "the
Doctor" occurs along the west coast in the summer

@Australia:People

Population: 18,438,824 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 22% (male 2,018,363; female 1,921,252)
15-64 years: 66% (male 6,188,476; female 6,041,173)
65 years and over : 12% (male 987,092; female 1,282,468) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.96% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 13.73 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.89 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.71 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.77 male(s)/female
total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 79.64 years
male : 76.69 years
female: 82.74 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.83 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Australian(s)
adjective: Australian

Ethnic groups: Caucasian 95%, Asian 4%, aboriginal and other 1%

Religions: Anglican 26.1%, Roman Catholic 26%, other Christian 24.3%

Languages: English, native languages

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 100%
male: 100%
female : 100% (1980 est.)

@Australia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Commonwealth of Australia
conventional short form: Australia

Data code: AS

Government type: federal parliamentary state

National capital: Canberra

Administrative divisions: 6 states and 2 territories*; Australian
Capital Territory*, New South Wales, Northern Territory*, Queensland,
South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia

Dependent areas: Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas Island, Cocos
(Keeling) Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard Island and McDonald
Islands, Norfolk Island

Independence: 1 January 1901 (federation of UK colonies)

National holiday: Australia Day, 26 January (1788)

Constitution: 9 July 1900, effective 1 January 1901

Legal system: based on English common law; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General Sir William DEANE (since 16 February
1996)
head of government : Prime Minister John Winston HOWARD (since 11
March 1996); Deputy Prime Minister Timothy Andrew FISCHER (since 11
March 1996)
cabinet: Cabinet selected from among the members of Federal Parliament
by the governor general on the advice of the prime minister
elections : none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor general
appointed by the queen; following legislative elections, the leader of
the majority party or leader of a majority coalition is usually
appointed prime minister by the governor general for a three-year term

Legislative branch: bicameral Federal Parliament consists of the
Senate (76 seats - 12 from each of the six states and two from each of
the two territories; one-half of the members elected every three years
by popular vote to serve six-year terms) and the House of
Representatives (148 seats; members elected by popular vote on the
basis of proportional representation to serve three-year terms; no
state can have fewer than five representatives)
elections: Senate - last held 2 March 1996 (next to be held NA 1999);
House of Representatives - last held 2 March 1996 (next to be held NA
1999)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - Liberal-National 37, Labor 29, Australian Democrats 8, Greens
1, independent 1; note - subsequent to the election, there has been a
change in the distribution of seats; the new distribution is as
follows - Liberal-National 37, Labor 28, Australian Democrats 7,
Greens 2, independents 2; House of Representatives - percent of vote
by party - NA; seats by party - Liberal-National 94, Labor 49,
independent 5

Judicial branch: High Court, the Chief Justice and six other justices
are appointed by the governor general

Political parties and leaders:
government : coalition of Liberal Party, John Winston HOWARD, and
National Party, Timothy Andrew FISCHER
opposition: Australian Labor Party, Kim BEAZLEY; Australian Democratic
Party, Cheryl KERNOT; Green Party, Bob BROWN

Political pressure groups and leaders: Australian Democratic Labor
Party (anti-Communist Labor Party splinter group); Peace and Nuclear
Disarmament Action (Nuclear Disarmament Party splinter group)

International organization participation: AG (observer), ANZUS, APEC,
AsDB, Australia Group, BIS, C, CCC, CP, EBRD, ESCAP, FAO, G- 8, IAEA,
IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NAM
(guest), NEA, NSG, OECD, PCA, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Andrew Sharp PEACOCK
chancery : 1601 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 797-3000
FAX: [1] (202) 797-3168
consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Honolulu, Los Angeles, New York, and
San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Genta Hawkins HOLMES
embassy: Moonah Place, Yarralumla, Canberra, Australian Capital
Territory 2600
mailing address: APO AP 96549
telephone: [61] (6) 270-5000
FAX: [61] (6) 270-5970
consulate(s) general: Melbourne, Perth, and Sydney

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
quadrant and a large seven-pointed star in the lower hoist-side
quadrant; the remaining half is a representation of the Southern Cross
constellation in white with one small five-pointed star and four,
larger, seven-pointed stars

Economy

Economy - overview: Australia has a prosperous Western-style
capitalist economy, with a per capita GDP above the levels in highly
industrialized West European countries. Rich in natural resources,
Australia is a major exporter of agricultural products, minerals,
metals, and fossil fuels. Commodities account for about 60% of the
value of total exports, so that a downturn in world commodity prices
can have a big impact on the economy. The government is pushing for
increased exports of manufactured goods, but competition in
international markets continues to be severe. Australia has suffered
from the low growth and high unemployment characterizing the OECD
countries in the early 1990s, but the economy has expanded at
reasonably steady rates in recent years. In addition to high
unemployment, short-term economic problems include a balancing of
output growth and inflationary pressures and the stimulation of
exports to offset rising imports.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $430.5 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $23,600 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 3.1%
industry: 27.7%
services: 69.2% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3.1% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 8.4 million (December 1996)
by occupation : finance and services 34%, public and community
services 23%, wholesale and retail trade 20%, manufacturing and
industry 17%, agriculture 6% (1987 est.)

Unemployment rate: 8.5% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $95.69 billion
expenditures : $95.15 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY95/96 est.)

Industries: mining, industrial and transportation equipment, food
processing, chemicals, steel

Industrial production growth rate: 1.2% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 38.83 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 173 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 8,278 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, barley, sugarcane, fruits; cattle,
sheep, poultry

Exports:
total value: $59.5 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities : coal, gold, meat, wool, alumina, iron ore, wheat,
machinery and transport equipment
partners: Japan 24%, South Korea 8%, NZ 7%, US 7%, UK, Taiwan,
Singapore, Hong Kong (1994/95)

Imports:
total value : $59.7 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment, computers and office
machines, telecommunication equipment and parts; crude oil and
petroleum products
partners: US 22%, Japan 17%, UK 6%, China 5%, NZ 5% (1994/95)

Debt - external: $134 billion (June 1996)

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $1.25 billion (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.2835 (January
1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995), 1.3668 (1994), 1.4704 (1993),
1.3600 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Australia:Communications

Telephones: 8.7 million (1987 est.)

Telephone system: good domestic and international service
domestic: domestic satellite system
international: submarine cables to New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, and
Indonesia; satellite earth stations - 10 Intelsat (4 Indian Ocean and
6 Pacific Ocean), 2 Inmarsat (Indian and Pacific Ocean Regions)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 258, FM 67, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 134 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 9.2 million (1992 est.)

@Australia:Transportation

Railways:
total : 38,563 km (2,914 km electrified; 172 km dual gauge)
broad gauge: 6,083 km 1.600-m gauge
standard gauge: 16,752 km 1.435-m gauge
narrow gauge: 15,728 km 1.067-m gauge

Highways:
total : 895,030 km
paved: 345,482 km (including 1,330 km of expressways)
unpaved: 549,548 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 8,368 km; mainly by small, shallow-draft craft

Pipelines: crude oil 2,500 km; petroleum products 500 km; natural gas
5,600 km

Ports and harbors: Adelaide, Brisbane, Cairns, Darwin, Devonport,
Fremantle, Geelong, Hobart (Tasmania), Launceton (Tasmania), Mackay,
Melbourne, Sydney, Townsville

Merchant marine:
total: 69 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,282,084 GRT/3,326,092
DWT
ships by type : bulk 30, cargo 4, chemical tanker 3, combination bulk
1, container 5, liquefied gas tanker 4, oil tanker 14,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 7, short-sea passenger 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 443 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 275
over 3,047 m : 9
2,438 to 3,047 m: 13
1,524 to 2,437 m: 106
914 to 1,523 m: 116
under 914 m : 31 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 168
1,524 to 2,437 m: 22
914 to 1,523 m: 146 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Australian Army, Royal Australian Navy, Royal
Australian Air Force

Military manpower - military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 4,863,007 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 4,200,090 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 127,508 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $7.9 billion (FY96/97)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.9% (FY96/97)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: territorial claim in Antarctica (Australian
Antarctic Territory)

Illicit drugs: Tasmania is one of the world's major suppliers of licit
opiate products; government maintains strict controls over areas of
opium poppy cultivation and output of poppy straw concentrate
______________________________________________________________________

AUSTRIA

@Austria:Geography

Location: Central Europe, north of Italy and Slovenia

Geographic coordinates: 47 20 N, 13 20 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total : 83,850 sq km
land: 82,730 sq km
water : 1,120 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maine

Land boundaries:
total: 2,564 km
border countries: Czech Republic 362 km, Germany 784 km, Hungary 366
km, Italy 430 km, Liechtenstein 37 km, Slovakia 91 km, Slovenia 330
km, Switzerland 164 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; continental, cloudy; cold winters with frequent
rain in lowlands and snow in mountains; cool summers with occasional
showers

Terrain: in the west and south mostly mountains (Alps); along the
eastern and northern margins mostly flat or gently sloping

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Neusiedler See 115 m
highest point: Grossglockner 3,797 m

Natural resources: iron ore, oil, timber, magnesite, lead, coal,
lignite, copper, hydropower

Land use:
arable land: 17%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 24%
forests and woodland: 39%
other : 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 40 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: some forest degradation caused by air
and soil pollution; soil pollution results from the use of
agricultural chemicals; air pollution results from emissions by coal-
and oil-fired power stations and industrial plants and from trucks
transiting Austria between northern and southern Europe

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Tropical Timber 94

Geography - note: landlocked; strategic location at the crossroads of
central Europe with many easily traversable Alpine passes and valleys;
major river is the Danube; population is concentrated on eastern
lowlands because of steep slopes, poor soils, and low temperatures
elsewhere

@Austria:People

Population: 8,132,505 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 17% (male 717,989; female 681,897)
15-64 years: 68% (male 2,777,525; female 2,703,296)
65 years and over : 15% (male 464,802; female 786,996) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: -0.02% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 10.17 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.05 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.34 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.59 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.15 years
male : 73.96 years
female: 80.51 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.37 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Austrian(s)
adjective: Austrian

Ethnic groups: German 99.4%, Croatian 0.3%, Slovene 0.2%, other 0.1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 85%, Protestant 6%, other 9%

Languages: German

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99% (1974 est.)
male: NA%
female: NA%

@Austria:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Austria
conventional short form: Austria
local long form: Republik Oesterreich
local short form: Oesterreich

Data code: AU

Government type: federal republic

National capital: Vienna

Administrative divisions: 9 states (Bundeslaender, singular -
Bundesland); Burgenland, Kaernten, Niederoesterreich, Oberoesterreich,
Salzburg, Steiermark, Tirol, Vorarlberg, Wien

Independence: 1156 (from Bavaria)

National holiday: National Day, 26 October (1955)

Constitution: 1920; revised 1929 (reinstated 1 May 1945)

Legal system: civil law system with Roman law origin; judicial review
of legislative acts by the Constitutional Court; separate
administrative and civil/penal supreme courts; has not accepted
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal; compulsory for presidential
elections

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Thomas KLESTIL (since 8 July 1992)
head of government: Chancellor Viktor KLIMA (since 28 January 1997);
Vice Chancellor Wolfgang SCHUESSEL (since 22 April 1995)
cabinet: Council of Ministers chosen by the president on the advice of
the chancellor
elections : president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
presidential election last held 24 May 1992 (next to be held NA 1998);
chancellor chosen by the president from the majority party in the
National Council; vice chancellor chosen by the president on the
advice of the chancellor
election results: Thomas KLESTIL elected president; percent of vote,
second ballot - Thomas KLESTIL 57%, Rudolf STREICHER 43%

Legislative branch: bicameral Federal Assembly or Bundesversammlung
consists of Federal Council or Bundesrat (63 members; members
represent each of the provinces on the basis of population, but with
each province having at least three representatives) and the National
Council or Nationalrat (183 seats; members elected by direct popular
vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: National Council - last held 17 December 1995 (next to be
held Fall 1999)
election results : National Council - percent of vote by party - SPOe
38.3%, OeVP 28.3%, FPOe 22.1%, Greens 4.6%, LF 5.3%, other 1.4%; seats
by party - SPOe 71, OeVP 53, FPOe 40, Greens 9, LF 10

Judicial branch: Supreme Judicial Court or Oberster Gerichtshof;
Administrative Court or Verwaltungsgerichtshof; Constitutional Court
or Verfassungsgerichtshof

Political parties and leaders: Social Democratic Party of Austria or
SPOe [Viktor KLIMA, chairman]; Austrian People's Party or OeVP
[Wolfgang SCHUESSEL, chairman]; Freedom Movement or FPOe (formerly the
Freedom Party of Austria or FPOe [Joerg HAIDER, chairman]; Communist
Party or KPOe [Walter SILBERMAYER, chairman]; The Greens [Madeleine
PETROVIC]; Liberal Forum or LF [Heide SCHMIDT]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Federal Chamber of Trade and
Commerce; Austrian Trade Union Federation (primarily Socialist) or
OeGB; three composite leagues of the Austrian People's Party or OeVP
representing business, labor, and farmers; OeVP-oriented League of
Austrian Industrialists or VOeI; Roman Catholic Church, including its
chief lay organization, Catholic Action

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB,
Australia Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CEI, CERN, EBRD, ECE, EIB, ESA, EU,
FAO, G- 9, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
MINURSO, MTCR, NACC (observer), NAM (guest), NEA, NSG, OAS (observer),
OECD, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNDOF, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR,
UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOT, UNOMIG, UNTSO, UPU, WCL, WEU
(observer), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Helmut TUERK
chancery : 3524 International Court NW, Washington, DC 20008-3035
telephone: [1] (202) 895-6700
FAX: [1] (202) 895-6750
consulate(s) general: Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Swanee G. HUNT
embassy: Boltzmanngasse 16, A-1091, Vienna
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone : [43] (1) 313-39
FAX: [43] (1) 310-0682

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and red

Economy

Economy - overview: Austria has a well-developed market economy with a
sizable - but falling - proportion of nationalized industry, an
extensive social safety net, and a high standard of living. Austria's
economy is closely integrated with Germany and other EU members -
Austria joined the EU on 1 January 1995. Since the early 1980s, the
Austrian economy has experienced stable growth. EU membership has had
a positive impact on foreign investment and has helped to lower
inflation. In April 1996, the government passed a two-year austerity
budget - including cuts in social allowances, a freeze on civil
servants' wages, and new energy and capital gains taxes - designed to
bring the economy in line with the Maastricht criteria for membership
in the European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). EMU convergence has
become a top priority for Austria. Despite Austria's generally
favorable prospects, the economy faces a number of medium-term
challenges; for example, fiscal tightening is constraining expected
growth, and unemployment is expected to increase.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $157.6 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.1% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $19,700 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 3%
industry: 27%
services : 70% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.8% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 3.648 million (1996)
by occupation: services 56.4%, industry and crafts 35.4%, agriculture
and forestry 8.1%
note : an estimated 200,000 Austrians are employed in other European
countries; foreign laborers in Austria number 177,840, about 5% of
labor force (1988)

Unemployment rate: 6.2% (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $61.2 billion
expenditures: $71 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: food, iron and steel, machines, textiles, chemicals,
electrical, paper and pulp, tourism, mining, motor vehicles

Industrial production growth rate: 0.6% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 17.43 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 56.5 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 5,960 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grains, fruit, potatoes, sugar beets; cattle,
pigs, poultry; sawn wood

Exports:
total value: $55.5 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: machinery and equipment, iron and steel, lumber,
textiles, paper products, chemicals
partners: EU 64.8% (Germany 38.1%, Italy 8.1%), Eastern Europe 11.8%,
Japan 1.6%, US 3.5% (1994)

Imports:
total value : $65.8 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: petroleum, foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, vehicles,
chemicals, textiles and clothing, pharmaceuticals
partners: EU 68.4% (Germany 40%, Italy 8.8%), Eastern Europe 6.55%,
Japan 4.3%, US 4.4% (1994)

Debt - external: $30.2 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $544 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Austrian schilling (AS) = 100 groschen

Exchange rates: Austrian schillings (AS) per US$1 - 11.302 (January
1997), 10.587 (1996), 10.081 (1995), 11.422 (1994), 11.632 (1993),
10.989 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Austria:Communications

Telephones: 3.47 million (1986 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: highly developed and efficient
international : satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic
Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean) and 2 Eutelsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 21 (repeaters 545), shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 47 (repeaters 870)

Televisions: 2,418,584 (1984 est.)

@Austria:Transportation

Railways:
total : 5,624 km
standard gauge: 5,269 km 1.435-m gauge (3,263 km electrified)
narrow gauge: 355 km 1.000-m and 0.760-m gauge (86 km electrified)
(1995)

Highways: 200,000 km
paved: 200,000 km (including 1,596 km of expressways)
unpaved: 0 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 446 km

Pipelines: crude oil 554 km; petroleum products 171 km; natural gas
2,611 km

Ports and harbors: Linz, Vienna

Merchant marine:
total: 28 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 84,623 GRT/116,682 DWT
ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 22, combination bulk 2, container 1,
refrigerated cargo 2 (1996 est.)

Airports: 55 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 51
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m : 5
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m: 41 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 4
914 to 1,523 m : 4 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army (includes Flying Division)

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,107,905 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,754,823 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 46,298 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $2.1 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin and
South American cocaine destined for Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

AZERBAIJAN

Introduction

Current issues: Azerbaijan continues to be plagued by an unresolved
nine-year-old conflict with Armenian separatists over its
Nagorno-Karabakh region. The Karabakh Armenians have declared
independence and seized almost 20% of the country's territory,
creating almost 1 million Azerbaijani refugees in the process. Both
sides have generally observed a Russian-mediated cease-fire in place
since May 1994, and support the OSCE-mediated peace process, now
entering its fifth year. Nevertheless, Baku and Xankandi (Stepanakert,
Nagorno-Karabakh region) remain far apart on most substantive issues
from the placement and composition of a peacekeeping force to the
enclave's ultimate political status, and prospects for a negotiated
settlement remain dim.

@Azerbaijan:Geography

Location: Southwestern Asia, bordering the Caspian Sea, between Iran
and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 40 30 N, 47 30 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
total: 86,600 sq km
land: 86,100 sq km
water: 500 sq km
note: includes the exclave of Naxcivan Autonomous Republic and the
Nagorno-Karabakh region; the region's autonomy was abolished by
Azerbaijani Supreme Soviet on 26 November 1991

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maine

Land boundaries:
total: 2,013 km
border countries : Armenia (with Azerbaijan-proper) 566 km, Armenia
(with Azerbaijan-Naxcivan exclave) 221 km, Georgia 322 km, Iran (with
Azerbaijan-proper) 432 km, Iran (with Azerbaijan-Naxcivan exclave) 179
km, Russia 284 km, Turkey 9 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)
note: Azerbaijan borders the Caspian Sea (800 km, est.)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: dry, semiarid steppe

Terrain: large, flat Kur-Araz Lowland (much of it below sea level)
with Great Caucasus Mountains to the north, Qarabag (Karabakh) Upland
in west; Baku lies on Abseron (Apsheron) Peninsula that juts into
Caspian Sea

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Caspian Sea -28 m
highest point: Bazarduzu Dagi 4,485 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, nonferrous
metals, alumina

Land use:
arable land: 18%
permanent crops: 5%
permanent pastures: 25%
forests and woodland: 11%
other : 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: droughts; some lowland areas threatened by rising
levels of the Caspian Sea

Environment - current issues: local scientists consider the Abseron
(Apsheron) Peninsula (including Baku and Sumqayit) and the Caspian Sea
to be the ecologically most devastated area in the world because of
severe air, water, and soil pollution; soil pollution results from the
use of DDT as a pesticide and also from toxic defoliants used in the
production of cotton

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Climate Change, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity

Geography - note: landlocked

@Azerbaijan:People

Population: 7,797,476 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 33% (male 1,302,759; female 1,247,868)
15-64 years: 61% (male 2,315,272; female 2,446,087)
65 years and over: 6% (male 186,699; female 298,791) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.78% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 22.89 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.32 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -5.75 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.62 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 80.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 63.52 years
male : 59.27 years
female: 67.99 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.77 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Azerbaijani(s)
adjective: Azerbaijani

Ethnic groups: Azeri 90%, Dagestani Peoples 3.2%, Russian 2.5%,
Armenian 2.3%, other 2% (1995 est.)
note: almost all Armenians live in the separatist Nagorno-Karabakh
region

Religions: Muslim 93.4%, Russian Orthodox 2.5%, Armenian Orthodox
2.3%, other 1.8% (1995 est.)
note: religious affiliation is still nominal in Azerbaijan; actual
practicing adherents are much lower

Languages: Azeri 89%, Russian 3%, Armenian 2%, other 6% (1995 est.)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 97%
male: 99%
female: 96% (1989 est.)

@Azerbaijan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Azerbaijani Republic
conventional short form: Azerbaijan
local long form: Azarbaycan Respublikasi
local short form : none
former: Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: AJ

Government type: republic

National capital: Baku (Baki)

Administrative divisions: 59 rayons (rayonlar; rayon - singular), 11
cities* (saharlar; sahar - singular), 1 autonomous republic** (muxtar
respublika); Abseron Rayonu, Agcabadi Rayonu, Agdam Rayonu, Agdas
Rayonu, Agstafa Rayonu, Agsu Rayonu, AliBayramli Sahari*, Astara
Rayonu, Baki Sahari*, Balakan Rayonu, Barda Rayonu, Beylaqan Rayonu,
Bilasuvar Rayonu, Cabrayil Rayonu, Calilabad Rayonu, Daskasan Rayonu,
Davaci Rayonu, Fuzuli Rayonu, Gadabay Rayonu, Ganca Sahari*, Goranboy
Rayonu, Goycay Rayonu, Haciqabul Rayonu, Imisli Rayonu, Ismayilli
Rayonu, Kalbacar Rayonu, Kurdamir Rayonu, Lacin Rayonu, Lankaran
Rayonu, Lankaran Sahari*, Lerik Rayonu, Masalli Rayonu, Mingacevir
Sahari*, Naftalan Sahari*, Naxcivan Muxtar Respublikasi**, Neftcala
Rayonu, Oguz Rayonu, Qabala Rayonu, Qax Rayonu, Qazax Rayonu, Qobustan
Rayonu, Quba Rayonu, Qubadli Rayonu, Qusar Rayonu, Saatli Rayonu,
Sabirabad Rayonu, Saki Rayonu, Saki Sahari*, Salyan Rayonu, Samaxi
Rayonu, Samkir Rayonu, Samux Rayonu, Siyazan Rayonu, Sumqayit Sahari*,
Susa Rayonu, Susa Sahari*, Tartar Rayonu, Tovuz Rayonu, Ucar Rayonu,
Xacmaz Rayonu, Xankandi Sahari*, Xanlar Rayonu, Xizi Rayonu, Xocali
Rayonu, Xocavand Rayonu, Yardimli Rayonu, Yevlax Rayonu, Yevlax
Sahari*, Zangilan Rayonu, Zaqatala Rayonu, Zardab Rayonu

Independence: 30 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 28 May

Constitution: adopted 12 November 1995

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Heydar ALIYEV (since 18 June 1993)
head of government: Prime Minister Artur RASIZADE (since NA November
1996); First Deputy Prime Ministers Abbas ABBASOV (since NA), Samed
SADYKOV (since NA), Vahid AKHMEDOV (since NA), Elchin EFENDIYEV (since
NA)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president and confirmed
by the National Assembly
elections: president elected by popular vote to a five-year term;
election last held 3 October 1993 (next to be held NA 1998); prime
minister and first deputy prime ministers appointed by the president
and confirmed by the National Assembly
election results: Heydar ALIYEV elected president; percent of vote -
Heydar ALIYEV 97%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Milli Mejlis (125
seats; members serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 12 and 26 November 1995 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Azerbaijan Popular Front or APF
[Ebulfez ELCIBEY, chairman]; Musavat Party [Isa GAMBAR, chairman];
National Independence Party [Etibar MAMEDOV, chairman]; Social
Democratic Party or SDP [Araz ALIZADE, chairman]; Communist Party
[Ramiz AKHMEDOV, chairman]; People's Freedom Party [Yunus OGUZ,
chairman]; Independent Social Democratic Party [Arif YUNUSOV and Leila
YUNOSOVA, cochairmen]; New Azerbaijan Party [Heydar ALIYEV, chairman];
Boz Gurd Party [Iskander HAMIDOV, chairman]; Azerbaijan Democratic
Independence Party [Qabil HUSEYNLI, chairman]; Islamic Party of
Azerbaijan [Ali Akram, chairman]; Ana Veten Party [Fazail AGAMALIYEV];
Azerbaijan Democratic Party [Sardar Jalaloglu MAMEDOV]; Azerbaijan
Democratic Party of Proprietors or DPOP [Makhmud MAMEDOV]; Azerbaijan
Patriotic Solidarity Party [Sabir RUSTAMHANLI]; Azerbaijan Republic
Reform Party [Fuad ASADOV]; Communist Party of Azerbaijan
(unregistered) [Sayad SAYADOV]; Equality of the Peoples Party
[Faukhraddin AYDAYEV]; Independent Azerbaijan Party [Nizami
SULEYMANOV]; Labor Party of Azerbaijan [Sabutai HAJIYEV];
Liberal-Democratic Party of Azerbaijan [Lyudmila NIKOLAYEVNA];
National Enlightenment Party [Hajy Osman EFENDIYEV]; National
Liberation Party [Panak SHAKHSEVEV]; Peasant Party [Firuz MUSTAFAYEV];
Radical Party of Azerbaijan [Malik SHARIFOV]; United Azerbaijan Party
[Kerrar ABILOV]; Vetan Adzhagy Party [Zakir TAGIYEV]

Political pressure groups and leaders: self-proclaimed Armenian
Nagorno-Karabakh Republic; Talysh independence movement; Sadval,
Lezgin movement

International organization participation: BSEC, CCC, CE (guest), CIS,
EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NACC, NAM (observer),
OIC, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Hafiz Mir Jalal PASHAYEV
chancery: (temporary) Suite 700, 927 15th Street NW, Washington, DC
20005 or P. O. Box 28790, Washington, DC 20038-8790
telephone : [1] (202) 842-0001
FAX: [1] (202) 842-0004

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Richard D. KAUZLARICH
embassy: Azadliq Prospekti 83, Baku
mailing address : use embassy street address
telephone: [9] (9412) 96-03-35
FAX: [9] (9412) 96-04-69

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), red, and
green; a crescent and eight-pointed star in white are centered in red
band

Economy

Economy - overview: Azerbaijan is less developed industrially than
either Armenia or Georgia, the other Transcaucasian states. It
resembles the Central Asian states in its majority nominally Muslim
population, high structural unemployment, and low standard of living.
The economy's most prominent products are oil, cotton, and gas.
Production from the Caspian oil and gas field has been in decline for
several years, but the November 1994 ratification of the $7.5 billion
oil deal with a consortium of Western companies should generate the
funds needed to spur future industrial development. Azerbaijan shares
all the formidable problems of the ex-Soviet republics in making the
transition from a command to a market economy, but its considerable
energy resources brighten its long-term prospects. Baku has only
recently begun making progress on economic reform, and old economic
ties and structures are slowly being replaced. A major short-term
obstacle to economic progress, including stepped up foreign
investment, is the continuing conflict with Armenia over the ethnic
Armenian-dominated region of Nagorno-Karabakh. Trade with Russia and
the other former Soviet republics is declining in importance while
trade is building up with the nations of Europe, Turkey, Iran and the
UAE.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $11.9 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.2% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,550 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 26%
industry : 30%
services: 44% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 20% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 2.789 million
by occupation: agriculture and forestry 32%, industry and construction
26%, other 42% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 1.1% includes officially registered unemployed;
also large numbers of unregistered unemployed and underemployed
workers (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $565 million
expenditures: $682 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: petroleum and natural gas, petroleum products, oilfield
equipment; steel, iron ore, cement; chemicals and petrochemicals;
textiles

Industrial production growth rate: -8% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 5.24 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 16.63 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,200 kWh (1996 est.)

Agriculture - products: cotton, grain, rice, grapes, fruit,
vegetables, tea, tobacco; cattle, pigs, sheep, goats

Exports:
total value : $700 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: oil and gas, chemicals, oilfield equipment, textiles,
cotton
partners: CIS, European countries, Turkey

Imports:
total value: $900 million (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities : machinery and parts, consumer durables, foodstuffs,
textiles
partners: CIS, European countries, Turkey

Debt - external: $100 million (of which $75 million to Russia)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $14 million (1993)
note: commitments, 1992-95, $1,000 million ($185 million in
disbursements); wheat from Turkey

Currency: 1 manat = 100 gopik

Exchange rates: manats per US$1 - 4,230 (November 1996), 4,375 (April
1996), 4,500 (April 1995), 4,168 (end of December 1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Azerbaijan:Communications

Telephones: 710,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: 202,000 persons waiting for telephone installations
(January 1991 est.)
domestic: telephone service is of poor quality and inadequate; a joint
venture to establish a cellular telephone system in the Baku area is
operational
international: cable and microwave radio relay connections to former
Soviet republics; connection through Moscow international gateway
switch to other countries; satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat and 1
Intersputnik (Intelsat provides service to Turkey and through Turkey
to 200 more countries; Intersputnik provides direct service to New
York)

Radio broadcast stations: 1 state-owned radio broadcast station

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2
note: domestic and Russian TV programs are received locally and
Turkish and Iranian TV is received from an Intelsat satellite through
a receive-only earth station

Televisions: NA

@Azerbaijan:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,125 km in common carrier service; does not include industrial
lines
broad gauge: 2,125 km 1.520-m gauge (1,278 km electrified) (1993)

Highways:
total: 57,770 km
paved: 54,188 km
unpaved: 3,582 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,130 km; petroleum products 630 km; natural gas
1,240 km

Ports and harbors: Baku (Baki)

Airports: 69 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 29
over 3,047 m : 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
1,524 to 2,437 m: 17
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 40
914 to 1,523 m: 7
under 914 m: 33 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Border
Guards

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 1,982,747 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,596,087 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 69,524 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 33.5 billion manats (1994);
note - conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the
current exchange rate could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Armenia supports ethnic Armenians in the
Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan in the longstanding, separatist
conflict against the Azerbaijani Government; Caspian Sea boundaries
are not yet determined among Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakstan, Russia, and
Turkmenistan

Illicit drugs: limited cultivation of cannabis and opium poppy, mostly
for CIS consumption; limited government eradication program;
transshipment point for opiates to Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

THE BAHAMAS

@The Bahamas:Geography

Location: Caribbean, chain of islands in the North Atlantic Ocean,
southeast of Florida

Geographic coordinates: 24 15 N, 76 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 13,940 sq km
land: 10,070 sq km
water : 3,870 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 3,542 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
(measured from the archipelagic straight baselines)
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; moderated by warm waters of Gulf Stream

Terrain: long, flat coral formations with some low rounded hills

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Alvernia 63 m

Natural resources: salt, aragonite, timber

Land use:
arable land : 1%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 32%
other : 67% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hurricanes and other tropical storms that cause
extensive flood and wind damage

Environment - current issues: coral reef decay

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: strategic location adjacent to US and Cuba;
extensive island chain

@The Bahamas:People

Population: 275,941 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 28% (male 39,280; female 38,755)
15-64 years: 66% (male 89,483; female 93,479)
65 years and over : 6% (male 6,209; female 8,735) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.41% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 21.47 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.45 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.88 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.02 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 19.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 73.75 years
male: 70.36 years
female : 77.2 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.36 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Bahamian(s)
adjective: Bahamian

Ethnic groups: black 85%, white 15%

Religions: Baptist 32%, Anglican 20%, Roman Catholic 19%, Methodist
6%, Church of God 6%, other Protestant 12%, none or unknown 3%, other
2%

Languages: English, Creole (among Haitian immigrants)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write but definition of
literacy not available
total population: 98.2%
male: 98.5%
female: 98% (1995 est.)

@The Bahamas:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Commonwealth of The Bahamas
conventional short form: The Bahamas

Data code: BF

Government type: commonwealth

National capital: Nassau

Administrative divisions: 21 districts; Acklins and Crooked Islands,
Bimini, Cat Island, Exuma, Freeport, Fresh Creek, Governor's Harbour,
Green Turtle Cay, Harbour Island, High Rock, Inagua, Kemps Bay, Long
Island, Marsh Harbour, Mayaguana, New Providence, Nicholls Town and
Berry Islands, Ragged Island, Rock Sound, Sandy Point, San Salvador
and Rum Cay

Independence: 10 July 1973 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 10 July (1973)

Constitution: 10 July 1973

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General Sir Orville TURNQUEST (since 2 January
1995)
head of government: Prime Minister Hubert Alexander INGRAHAM (since 19
August 1992) and Deputy Prime Minister Frank WATSON (since December
1994)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the prime
minister's recommendation
elections : none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor general
appointed by the queen; prime minister and deputy prime minister
appointed by the governor general

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
(16-member body appointed by the governor general upon the advice of
the prime minister and the opposition leader for a five-year term) and
the House of Assembly (40 seats; members elected by direct popular
vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 14 March 1997 (next to be held by March 2002)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - FNM
34, PLP 6

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Progressive Liberal Party or PLP [Perry
CHRISTIE]; Free National Movement or FNM [Hubert Alexander INGRAHAM]

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CCC, CDB,
ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Arlington Griffith BUTLER
chancery: 2220 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone : [1] (202) 319-2660
FAX: [1] (202) 319-2668
consulate(s) general : Miami and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Sidney WILLIAMS
embassy: Queen Street, Nassau
mailing address: P. O. Box N-8197, Nassau; American Embassy, Nassau,
P.O. Box 9009, Miami, FL 33159; Nassau, Department of State,
Washington, DC 20521-3370 (pouch)
telephone: [1] (242) 322-1181, 328-2206
FAX: [1] (242) 328-7838

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of aquamarine (top),
gold, and aquamarine with a black equilateral triangle based on the
hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: The Bahamas is a stable, developing nation with an
economy heavily dependent on tourism and offshore banking. Tourism
alone accounts for more than 50% of GDP and directly or indirectly
employs 40% of the archipelago's labor force. A slowdown in the
expansion of the tourism sector - especially stopover travel from
Europe - led to a reduction in the country's GDP growth rate in 1995,
down to an estimated 2% from 3.5% in 1994. The construction sector
benefited from hotel rehabilitation and the government's ongoing
housing development program. Earnings from exports of vegetable and
citrus production have been decreasing since 1993 but were expected to
increase in 1996 due to storm damage to crops in Florida. Overall
growth prospects in the short run will depend heavily on the fortunes
of the tourism sector and continued income growth in the US, which
accounts for the majority of tourist visits.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $4.8 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $18,700 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 3%
industry: 6%
services: 91% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.1% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 136,900 (1993)
by occupation : government 30%, tourism 40%, business services 10%,
agriculture 5% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 15% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $665 million
expenditures: $725 million, including capital expenditures of $94
million (FY95/96 est.)

Industries: tourism, banking, cement, oil refining and transshipment,
salt production, rum, aragonite, pharmaceuticals, spiral-welded steel
pipe

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 267,000 kW (1993)

Electricity - production: 874 million kWh (1993)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,717 kWh (1993)

Agriculture - products: citrus, vegetables; poultry

Exports:
total value: $267.5 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: pharmaceuticals, cement, rum, crawfish, refined petroleum
products
partners: US 24%, Spain 14%, UK 7%, Norway 7%, France 6%, Italy 5%
(1995 est.)

Imports:
total value : $1.17 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: foodstuffs, manufactured goods, crude oil, vehicles,
electronics
partners : US 29%, Finland 10%, Iran 10%, Denmark 8%

Debt - external: $393 million (1995)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Bahamian dollar (B$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Bahamian dollar (B$) per US$1 - 1.00 (February 1997;
fixed rate)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@The Bahamas:Communications

Telephones: 119,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : totally automatic system; highly developed
international: tropospheric scatter and submarine cable to Florida; 3
coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat
(Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 200,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1986 est.)

Televisions: 60,000 (1993 est.)

@The Bahamas:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 2,450 km
paved: 1,406 km
unpaved: 1,044 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Freeport, Matthew Town, Nassau

Merchant marine:
total: 988 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 23,690,478
GRT/37,428,826 DWT
ships by type: bulk 176, cargo 205, chemical tanker 41, combination
bulk 7, combination ore/oil 23, container 56, liquefied gas tanker 21,
oil tanker 184, passenger 47, refrigerated cargo 150, roll-on/roll-off
cargo 53, short-sea passenger 11, vehicle carrier 14
note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 46 countries
among which are Norway 157, Greece 146, UK 128, US 69, Denmark 51,
Sweden 34, Finland 32, Belgium 29, Japan 27, and Monaco 27; Bahamas
owns 10 additional ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 256,379 DWT that
operate under Panamanian and Cypriot registry (1996 est.)

Airports: 54 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 47
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 15
914 to 1,523 m: 12
under 914 m: 17 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 7
914 to 1,523 m: 7 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Bahamas Defense Force (Coast Guard only),
Royal Bahamas Police Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $20 million (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.8% (FY95/96)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana bound for
US and Europe; banking industry vulnerable to money-laundering
______________________________________________________________________

BAHRAIN

@Bahrain:Geography

Location: Middle East, archipelago in the Persian Gulf, east of Saudi
Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 26 00 N, 50 33 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total : 620 sq km
land: 620 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: 3.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 161 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: extending to boundaries to be determined
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: arid; mild, pleasant winters; very hot, humid summers

Terrain: mostly low desert plain rising gently to low central
escarpment

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
highest point: Jabal ad Dukhan 122 m

Natural resources: oil, associated and nonassociated natural gas, fish

Land use:
arable land: 1%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 6%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 92% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts; dust storms

Environment - current issues: desertification resulting from the
degradation of limited arable land, periods of drought, and dust
storms; coastal degradation (damage to coastlines, coral reefs, and
sea vegetation) resulting from oil spills and other discharges from
large tankers, oil refineries, and distribution stations; no natural
fresh water resources so that groundwater and sea water are the only
sources for all water needs

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: close to primary Middle Eastern petroleum sources;
strategic location in Persian Gulf which much of Western world's
petroleum must transit to reach open ocean

@Bahrain:People

Population: 603,318 (July 1997 est.)
note: includes 221,182 non-nationals (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 31% (male 94,330; female 91,532)
15-64 years: 66% (male 240,496; female 160,662)
65 years and over : 3% (male 8,375; female 7,923) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.18% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.01 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 3.27 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.07 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.5 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.06 male(s)/female
total population: 1.32 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 16.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 74.63 years
male: 72.1 years
female : 77.24 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.04 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Bahraini(s)
adjective: Bahraini

Ethnic groups: Bahraini 63%, Asian 13%, other Arab 10%, Iranian 8%,
other 6%

Religions: Shi'a Muslim 75%, Sunni Muslim 25%

Languages: Arabic, English, Farsi, Urdu

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 85.2%
male: 89.1%
female: 79.4% (1995 est.)

@Bahrain:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : State of Bahrain
conventional short form: Bahrain
local long form: Dawlat al Bahrayn
local short form: Al Bahrayn

Data code: BA

Government type: traditional monarchy

National capital: Manama

Administrative divisions: 12 municipalities (manatiq, singular -
mintaqah); Al Hadd, Al Manamah, Al Mintaqah al Gharbiyah, Al Mintaqah
al Wusta, Al Mintaqah ash Shamaliyah, Al Muharraq, Ar Rifa'wa al
Mintaqah al Janubiyah, Jidd Hafs, Madinat Hamad, Madinat 'Isa, Juzur
Hawar, Sitrah
note : all municipalities administered from Manama

Independence: 15 August 1971 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 16 December (1971)

Constitution: 26 May 1973, effective 6 December 1973

Legal system: based on Islamic law and English common law

Suffrage: none

Executive branch:
chief of state : Amir ISA bin Salman Al Khalifa (since 2 November
1961); Heir Apparent HAMAD bin Isa bin Salman Al Khalifa (son of the
Amir, born 28 January 1949)
head of government: Prime Minister KHALIFA bin Salman Al Khalifa
(since 19 January 1970)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the amir
elections: none; the amir is a traditional Arab monarch; prime
minister appointed by the amir

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly was dissolved 26
August 1975 and legislative powers were assumed by the Cabinet;
appointed Advisory Council established 16 December 1992

Judicial branch: High Civil Appeals Court

Political parties and leaders: political parties prohibited

Political pressure groups and leaders: several small, clandestine
leftist and Islamic fundamentalist groups are active; following the
arrest of a popular Shi'a cleric, Shi'a activists have fomented unrest
sporadically since late 1994, demanding the return of an elected
National Assembly and an end to unemployment

International organization participation: ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF,
ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDB, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU,
NAM, OAPEC, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Muhammad ABD AL-GHAFFAR Abdallah
chancery: 3502 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone : [1] (202) 342-0741, 342-0742
FAX: [1] (202) 362-2192
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador David M. RANSOM (scheduled to depart in
June 1997)
embassy : Building No. 979, Road 3119 (next to Al-Ahli Sports Club),
Zinj District, Manama
mailing address: FPO AE 09834-5100; International Mail Box 26431,
Manama (International Mail)
telephone: [973] 273-300
FAX : [973] 275-418

Flag description: red with a white serrated band (eight white points)
on the hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: In Bahrain, petroleum production and processing
account for about 60% of export receipts, 60% of government revenues,
and 30% of GDP. Economic conditions have fluctuated with the changing
fortunes of oil since 1985, for example, during and following the Gulf
crisis of 1990-91. With its highly developed communication and
transport facilities, Bahrain is home to numerous multinational firms
with business in the Gulf. A large share of exports consists of
petroleum products made from imported crude. Construction proceeds on
several major industrial projects. Unemployment, especially among the
young, and the depletion of both oil and underground water resources
are major long-term economic problems.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $7.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $13,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 1%
industry: 38%
services: 61% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 0% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 140,000
by occupation: industry and commerce 85%, agriculture 5%, services 5%,
government 3% (1982)
note: 44.39% of the population in the 15-64 age group is non-national
(July 1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 15% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $1.49 billion
expenditures: $1.67 billion, including capital expenditures of $300
million (1995)

Industries: petroleum processing and refining, aluminum smelting,
offshore banking, ship repairing; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 3.4% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 1.05 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 4.28 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 7,102 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: fruit, vegetables; poultry, dairy products;
shrimp, fish

Exports:
total value: $4.2 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : petroleum and petroleum products 61%, aluminum 7%
partners: India 22%, Japan 12%, Saudi Arabia 6%, US 6%, UAE 5% (1995)

Imports:
total value : $3.5 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: nonoil 63%, crude oil 37%
partners: Saudi Arabia 40%, US 13%, UK 7%, Japan 5%, Switzerland 5%
(1995)

Debt - external: $3.2 billion (1995)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Bahraini dinar (BD) = 1,000 fils

Exchange rates: Bahraini dinars (BD) per US$1 - 0.3760 (fixed rate)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Bahrain:Communications

Telephones: 73,552 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: modern system; good domestic services and excellent
international connections
domestic: NA
international: tropospheric scatter to Qatar and UAE; microwave radio
relay to Saudi Arabia; submarine cable to Qatar, UAE, and Saudi
Arabia; satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1
Indian Ocean) and 1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 320,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1988 est.)

Televisions: 270,000 (1993 est.)

@Bahrain:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 2,740 km
paved: 2,159 km
unpaved: 581 km (1992 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 56 km; petroleum products 16 km; natural gas 32
km

Ports and harbors: Manama, Mina' Salman, Sitrah

Merchant marine:
total: 6 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 117,060 GRT/194,061 DWT
ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 3, chemical tanker 1, oil tanker 1 (1996
est.)

Airports: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
over 3,047 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Ground Force, Navy, Air Force, Coast Guard,
Internal Security Forces

Military manpower - military age: 15 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 216,444 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 119,781 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $256 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 6.4% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: territorial dispute with Qatar over the
Hawar Islands; maritime boundary with Qatar
______________________________________________________________________

BAKER ISLAND

(territory of the US)

@Baker Island:Geography

Location: Oceania, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, about one-half of
the way from Hawaii to Australia

Geographic coordinates: 0 13 N, 176 31 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 1.4 sq km
land: 1.4 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 2.5 times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 4.8 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: equatorial; scant rainfall, constant wind, burning sun

Terrain: low, nearly level coral island surrounded by a narrow
fringing reef

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 8 m

Natural resources: guano (deposits worked until 1891)

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: the narrow fringing reef surrounding the island can
be a maritime hazard

Environment - current issues: no natural fresh water resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: treeless, sparse, and scattered vegetation
consisting of grasses, prostrate vines, and low growing shrubs;
primarily a nesting, roosting, and foraging habitat for seabirds,
shorebirds, and marine wildlife

@Baker Island:People

Population: uninhabited
note : American civilians evacuated in 1942 after Japanese air and
naval attacks during World War II; occupied by US military during
World War II, but abandoned after the war; public entry is by
special-use permit only and generally restricted to scientists and
educators; a cemetery and cemetery ruins are located near the middle
of the west coast

@Baker Island:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Baker Island

Data code: FQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US; administered by
the Fish and Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior as
part of the National Wildlife Refuge system

National capital: none; administered from Washington, DC

Flag description: the flag of the US is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Baker Island:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only; note - there is one
boat landing area along the middle of the west coast

Airports: 1 abandoned World War II runway of 1,665 m

Transportation - note: there is a day beacon near the middle of the
west coast

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US; visited
annually by the US Coast Guard

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

BANGLADESH

@Bangladesh:Geography

Location: Southern Asia, bordering the Bay of Bengal, between Burma
and India

Geographic coordinates: 24 00 N, 90 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total: 144,000 sq km
land: 133,910 sq km
water : 10,090 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Wisconsin

Land boundaries:
total : 4,246 km
border countries: Burma 193 km, India 4,053 km

Coastline: 580 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 18 nm
continental shelf: up to the outer limits of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; cool, dry winter (October to March); hot, humid
summer (March to June); cool, rainy monsoon (June to October)

Terrain: mostly flat alluvial plain; hilly in southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Reng Tlang 957 m

Natural resources: natural gas, arable land, timber

Land use:
arable land: 73%
permanent crops: 2%
permanent pastures : 5%
forests and woodland: 15%
other: 5% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 31,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: droughts, cyclones; much of the country routinely
flooded during the summer monsoon season

Environment - current issues: many people are landless and forced to
live on and cultivate flood-prone land; limited access to potable
water; water-borne diseases prevalent; water pollution especially of
fishing areas results from the use of commercial pesticides;
intermittent water shortages because of falling water tables in the
northern and central parts of the country; soil degradation;
deforestation; severe overpopulation

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test
Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

@Bangladesh:People

Population: 125,340,261 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 38% (male 24,397,316; female 23,417,919)
15-64 years : 59% (male 37,758,378; female 35,715,343)
65 years and over: 3% (male 2,204,445; female 1,846,860) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.82% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 29.8 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.9 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.73 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.19 male(s)/female
total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 100 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 56.26 years
male: 56.35 years
female : 56.16 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.45 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Bangladeshi(s)
adjective: Bangladesh

Ethnic groups: Bengali 98%, Biharis 250,000, tribals less than 1
million

Religions: Muslim 88.3%, Hindu 10.5%, other 1.2%

Languages: Bangla (official), English

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 38.1%
male: 49.4%
female : 26.1% (1995 est.)

@Bangladesh:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: People's Republic of Bangladesh
conventional short form: Bangladesh
former : East Pakistan

Data code: BG

Government type: republic

National capital: Dhaka

Administrative divisions: 4 divisions; Chittagong, Dhaka, Khulna,
Rajshahi
note: there may be two new divisions named Barisal and Sylhet

Independence: 16 December 1971 (from Pakistan)

National holiday: Independence Day, 26 March (1971)

Constitution: 4 November 1972, effective 16 December 1972, suspended
following coup of 24 March 1982, restored 10 November 1986, amended
many times

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Shahabuddin AHMED (since 9 October 1996);
note - the president's duties are normally ceremonial, but with the
13th amendment to the constitution ("Caretaker Government Amendment"),
the president's role becomes significant at times when Parliament is
dissolved and a caretaker government is installed - at presidential
direction - to supervise the elections
head of government: Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina WAJED (since 23 June
1996)
cabinet : Cabinet selected by the prime minister and appointed by the
president
elections: president elected by National Parliament for a five-year
term; election last held 24 July 1996 (next to be held by NA October
2001); following legislative elections, the leader of the party that
wins the most seats is usually appointed prime minister by the
president
election results : Shahabuddin AHMED elected president without
opposition; percent of National Parliament vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Parliament or Jatiya Sangsad
(330 seats; 300 elected by popular vote from single territorial
constituencies, 30 seats reserved for women; members serve five-year
terms)
elections: last held 12 June 1996 (next to be held NA 2001)
election results: percent of vote by party - AL 33.87%, BNP 30.87%;
seats by party - AL 178, BNP 113, JP 33, JI 3, other 2, election still
to be held 1; note - the elections of 12 June 1996 brought to power an
Awami League government for the first time in twenty-one years; held
under a neutral, caretaker administration, the elections were
characterized by a peaceful, orderly process and massive voter
turnout, ending a bitter two-year impasse between the former BNP and
opposition parties that had paralyzed National Parliament and led to
widespread street violence

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, the Chief Justices and other judges
are appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP),
Khaleda ZIAur RAHMAN; Awami League (AL), Sheikh Hasina WAJED; Jatiyo
Party (JP), Hussain Mohammad ERSHAD; Jamaat-E-Islami (JI), Motiur
Rahman NIZAMI; Bangladesh Communist Party (BCP), Saifuddin Ahmed MANIK

International organization participation: AsDB, C, CCC, CP, ESCAP,
FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO,
ITU, MINURSO, NAM, OIC, SAARC, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMIH, UNMOP, UNMOT, UNOMIG, UNOMIL, UNPREDEP,
UNTAES, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador-designate Khwaja Mohammad SHEHABUDDIN
chancery: 2201 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone : [1] (202) 342-8372 through 8376
consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador David N. MERRILL
embassy: Diplomatic Enclave, Madani Avenue, Baridhara, Dhaka 1212
mailing address : G.P.O. Box 323, Dhaka 1000
telephone: [880] (2) 884700 through 884722
FAX: [880] (2) 883-744

Flag description: green with a large red disk slightly to the hoist
side of center; green is the traditional color of Islam

Economy

Economy - overview: Despite sustained domestic and international
efforts to improve economic and demographic prospects, Bangladesh
remains one of the world's poorest, most densely populated, and least
developed nations. Annual GDP growth has averaged over 4% in recent
years from a low base. Its economy is largely agricultural, with the
cultivation of rice the single most important activity in the economy.
Major impediments to growth include frequent cyclones and floods, the
inefficiency of state-owned enterprises, a rapidly growing labor force
that cannot be absorbed by agriculture, delays in exploiting energy
resources (natural gas), inadequate power supplies, and slow
implementation of economic reforms. Frequent strikes that crippled the
economy in 1995 and early 1996 subsided after Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina WAJED's Awami League government assumed power in mid-1996,
allowing a return to normal economic activity. The current government
has made some headway improving the climate for foreign investors and
liberalizing the capital markets; for example, it has negotiated with
foreign firms for oil and gas exploration, better countrywide
distribution of cooking gas, and the construction of natural gas
pipelines and power plants. Progress on other economic reforms has
been halting because of opposition from the bureaucracy, public sector
unions, and other vested interest groups.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $155.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.7% (1996)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,260 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 31%
industry: 18%
services: 51% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4% (FY95/96)

Labor force:
total: 50.1 million
by occupation: agriculture 65%, services 21%, industry and mining 14%
(1989)
note: extensive export of labor to Saudi Arabia, UAE, and Oman (1991)

Unemployment rate: 35.9% (1996)

Budget:
revenues : $4.1 billion
expenditures: $6 billion, including capital expenditures of $3 billion
(FY95/96 est.)

Industries: jute manufacturing, cotton textiles, food processing,
steel, fertilizer

Industrial production growth rate: 5.7% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 2.98 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 10.01 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 76 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, jute, tea, wheat, sugarcane, potatoes;
beef, milk, poultry

Exports:
total value: $3.9 billion (FY95/96 est.)
commodities : garments, jute and jute goods, leather, frozen fish and
seafood
partners: Western Europe 42%, US 30%, Hong Kong 4%, Japan 3% (FY95/96
est.)

Imports:
total value: $6.8 billion (FY95/96 est.)
commodities: capital goods, textiles, food, petroleum products
partners: India 21%, China 10%, Western Europe 8%, Hong Kong 7%,
Singapore 6% (FY95/96 est.)

Debt - external: $17.1 billion (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient : $1.585 billion (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 taka (Tk) = 100 poiska

Exchange rates: taka (Tk) per US$1 - 42.450 (January 1997), 41.794
(1996), 40.278 (1995), 40.212 (1994), 39.567 (1993), 38.951 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Bangladesh:Communications

Telephones: 249,800 (1994 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: poor domestic telephone service
international : satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Indian Ocean);
international radiotelephone communications and landline service to
neighboring countries

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 11

Televisions: 350,000 (1993 est.)

@Bangladesh:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,892 km
broad gauge: 978 km 1.676-m gauge
narrow gauge: 1,914 km 1.000-m gauge (1992)

Highways:
total : 168,513 km
paved: 15,672 km
unpaved: 152,841 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 5,150-8,046 km navigable waterways (includes 2,575-3,058 km
main cargo routes)

Pipelines: natural gas 1,220 km

Ports and harbors: Chittagong, Dhaka, Chalna Port (Mongla)

Merchant marine:
total: 41 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 323,057 GRT/464,090 DWT
ships by type: bulk 3, cargo 32, oil tanker 2, refrigerated cargo 2,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 (1996 est.)

Airports: 15 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 14
over 3,047 m : 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
over 3,047 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary forces
(includes Bangladesh Rifles, Bangladesh Ansars, Armed Police Reserve,
Village Defense Parties, National Cadet Corps)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 32,797,816 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 19,406,790 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $481 million (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.7% (FY95/96)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: a portion of the boundary with India in
dispute; Bangladesh and India signed a treaty 12 December 1996 to
share water from the Ganges

Illicit drugs: transit country for illegal drugs produced in
neighboring countries
______________________________________________________________________

BARBADOS

@Barbados:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island between the Caribbean Sea and the North
Atlantic Ocean, northeast of Venezuela

Geographic coordinates: 13 10 N, 59 32 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 430 sq km
land: 430 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 97 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy season (June to October)

Terrain: relatively flat; rises gently to central highland region

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Hillaby 336 m

Natural resources: petroleum, fish, natural gas

Land use:
arable land: 37%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 5%
forests and woodland : 12%
other: 46% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: infrequent hurricanes; periodic landslides

Environment - current issues: pollution of coastal waters from waste
disposal by ships; soil erosion; illegal solid waste disposal
threatens contamination of aquifers

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of
the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity

Geography - note: easternmost Caribbean island

@Barbados:People

Population: 258,756 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 24% (male 31,025; female 30,197)
15-64 years: 66% (male 83,977; female 87,208)
65 years and over : 10% (male 10,002; female 16,347) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.12% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 15.35 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.25 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -5.87 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.61 male(s)/female
total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 17.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 74.6 years
male : 71.84 years
female: 77.43 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.88 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Barbadian(s)
adjective: Barbadian

Ethnic groups: black 80%, white 4%, other 16%

Religions: Protestant 67% (Anglican 40%, Pentecostal 8%, Methodist 7%,
other 12%), Roman Catholic 4%, none 17%, unknown 3%, other 9% (1980)

Languages: English

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
total population: 97.4%
male: 98%
female: 96.8% (1995 est.)

@Barbados:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Barbados

Data code: BB

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Bridgetown

Administrative divisions: 11 parishes; Christ Church, Saint Andrew,
Saint George, Saint James, Saint John, Saint Joseph, Saint Lucy, Saint
Michael, Saint Peter, Saint Philip, Saint Thomas
note: the city of Bridgetown may be given parish status

Independence: 30 November 1966 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 30 November (1966)

Constitution: 30 November 1966

Legal system: English common law; no judicial review of legislative
acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General Sir Clifford Straughn HUSBANDS (since
1 June 1996)
head of government : Prime Minister Owen Seymour ARTHUR (since 6
September 1994); Deputy Prime Minister Billie MILLER (since 6
September 1994)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
the prime minister
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor general
appointed by the queen; prime minister appointed by the governor
general

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
(21-member body appointed by the governor general) and the House of
Assembly (28 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
serve five-year terms)
elections : House of Assembly - last held 6 September 1994 (next to be
held by January 1999)
election results: House of Assembly - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - BLP 19, DLP 8, NDP 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Judicature, judges are appointed by
the Service Commissions for the Judicial and Legal Service

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Labor Party or DLP [David
THOMPSON]; Barbados Labor Party or BLP [Owen ARTHUR]; National
Democratic Party or NDP [Richard HAYNES]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Barbados Workers Union [Leroy
TROTMAN]; People's Progressive Movement [Eric SEALY]; Workers' Party
of Barbados [Dr. George BELLE]; Clement Payne Labor Union [David
COMMISSIONG]

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CDB, ECLAC,
FAO, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, LAES, NAM,
OAS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Courtney N. BLACKMAN
chancery: 2144 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 939-9218, 9219
FAX: [1] (202) 332-7467
consulate(s) general: Miami and New York
consulate(s): Los Angeles

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Jeanette W. HYDE
embassy : Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce Building, Broad Street,
Bridgetown
mailing address: P. O. Box 302, Bridgetown; FPO AA 34055
telephone : [1] (246) 436-4950
FAX: [1] (246) 429-5246

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side),
gold, and blue with the head of a black trident centered on the gold
band; the trident head represents independence and a break with the
past (the colonial coat of arms contained a complete trident)

Economy

Economy - overview: Historically, the Barbadian economy had been
dependent on sugarcane cultivation and related activities, but in
recent years the production has diversified into manufacturing and
tourism. The start of the Port Charles Marina project in Speightstown
helped the tourism industry continue to expand in 1996. The industry
generated $331.8 million by the end of June and was expected to double
by the end of the year. Prime Minister Owen ARTHUR called for
"prudent" financial management to ensure that economic growth would
continue. As part of his plan, the Prime Minister introduced a
controversial Value Added Tax (VAT) in an effort to reform the tax
administration process. The VAT will be administered at 15% for most
industries and 7% for the tourism industry. The government has also
continued its efforts to promote regional integration initiatives, to
reduce the unacceptably high unemployment rate, and to encourage
direct foreign investment.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $2.65 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $10,300 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 6.4%
industry: 39.3%
services: 54.3% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.8% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 126,000 (1993)
by occupation: services and government 41%, commerce 15%,
manufacturing and construction 18%, transportation, storage,
communications, and financial institutions 8%, agriculture 6%,
utilities 2% (1992 est.)

Unemployment rate: 16.2% (1996)

Budget:
revenues: $550 million
expenditures: $710 million, including capital expenditures of $86
million (FY95/96 est.)

Industries: tourism, sugar, light manufacturing, component assembly
for export

Industrial production growth rate: 7.7% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 153,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 644 million kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,208 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: sugarcane, vegetables, cotton

Exports:
total value: $235 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: sugar and molasses, rum, other foods and beverages,
chemicals, electrical components, clothing
partners: US 13%, UK 10%, Trinidad and Tobago 9%, Windward Islands 8%

Imports:
total value: $763 million (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: consumer goods, machinery, foodstuffs, construction
materials, chemicals, fuel, electrical components
partners: US 36%, UK 11%, Trinidad and Tobago 11%, Japan 3%

Debt - external: $359 million (December 1996)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Barbadian dollar (Bds$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Barbadian dollars (Bds$) per US$1 - 2.0113 (fixed
rate)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Barbados:Communications

Telephones: 87,343 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: island wide automatic telephone system
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
tropospheric scatter to Trinidad and Saint Lucia

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1 pay)

Televisions: 69,350 (1993 est.)

@Barbados:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 1,610 km
paved : 1,542 km
unpaved: 68 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Bridgetown

Merchant marine:
total: 51 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 453,828 GRT/684,470 DWT
ships by type : bulk 16, cargo 27, combination bulk 4, oil tanker 3,
refrigerated cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
over 3,047 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Barbados Defense Force (includes Ground
Forces and Coast Guard), Royal Barbados Police Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 71,547 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 49,446 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: one of many Caribbean transshipment points for
narcotics bound for the US and Europe
______________________________________________________________________

BASSAS DA INDIA

(possession of France)

@Bassas da India:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, islands in the southern Mozambique Channel,
about one-half of the way from Madagascar to Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 21 30 S, 39 50 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 0.2 sq km
land: 0.2 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about one-third the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 35.2 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: a volcanic rock 2.4 meters high

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 3 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
arable land : 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100% (all rock)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: maritime hazard since it is usually under water
during high tide and surrounded by reefs; subject to periodic cyclones

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

@Bassas da India:People

Population: uninhabited

@Bassas da India:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Bassas da India

Data code: BS

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by a high
commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

National capital: none; administered by France from Reunion

Independence: none (possession of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Bassas da India:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claimed by Madagascar
______________________________________________________________________

BELARUS

@Belarus:Geography

Location: Eastern Europe, east of Poland

Geographic coordinates: 53 00 N, 28 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
total: 207,600 sq km
land: 207,600 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Kansas

Land boundaries:
total: 3,098 km
border countries: Latvia 141 km, Lithuania 502 km, Poland 605 km,
Russia 959 km, Ukraine 891 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: cold winters, cool and moist summers; transitional between
continental and maritime

Terrain: generally flat and contains much marshland

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Nyoman River 90 m
highest point: Dzyarzhynskaya Hara 346 m

Natural resources: forests, peat deposits, small quantities of oil and
natural gas

Land use:
arable land : 29%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 15%
forests and woodland: 34%
other: 21% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: soil pollution from pesticide use;
southern part of the country contaminated with fallout from 1986
nuclear reactor accident at Chornobyl' in northern Ukraine

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Biodiversity, Environmental Modification, Marine
Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Climate Change, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: landlocked

@Belarus:People

Population: 10,412,219 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 21% (male 1,092,760; female 1,047,992)
15-64 years : 66% (male 3,346,111; female 3,547,352)
65 years and over: 13% (male 452,267; female 925,737) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.01% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 9.75 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 13.23 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.38 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.49 male(s)/female
total population: 0.89 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 13.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 68.4 years
male: 62.48 years
female: 74.61 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.35 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Belarusian(s)
adjective: Belarusian

Ethnic groups: Byelorussian 77.9%, Russian 13.2%, Polish 4.1%,
Ukrainian 2.9%, other 1.9%

Religions: Eastern Orthodox 80%, other (including Roman Catholic,
Protestant, Jewish, and Muslim) 20% (1997 est.)

Languages: Byelorussian, Russian, other

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98%
male : 99%
female: 97% (1989 est.)

@Belarus:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Belarus
conventional short form: Belarus
local long form: Respublika Byelarus'
local short form: none
former: Belorussian (Byelorussian) Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: BO

Government type: republic

National capital: Minsk

Administrative divisions: 6 voblastsi (singular - voblasts') and one
municipality* (harady, singular - horad); Brestskaya (Brest),
Homyel'skaya (Homyel'), Horad Minsk*, Hrodzyenskaya (Hrodna),
Mahilyowskaya (Mahilyow), Minskaya, Vitsyebskaya (Vitsyebsk)
note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center name
following in parentheses)

Independence: 25 August 1991 (from Soviet Union); the Belarusian
Supreme Soviet issued a proclamation of independence; on 17 July 1990
Belarus issued a declaration of sovereignty

National holiday: Independence Day, 3 July (1990); note - date set by
referendum of November 1996

Constitution: referendum of 27 November 1996 (declared illegitimate by
the international community) adopted a new constitution massing power
in the hands of the president; signed into law on 28 November 1996

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Aleksandr LUKASHENKO (since 20 July 1994)
head of government: Prime Minister Sergey LING (acting since NA
November 1996, confirmed NA February 1997); First Deputy Prime
Minister Pyotr PROKOPOVICH (since NA); Deputy Prime Ministers Vladimir
GARKUN (since NA), Valeriy KOKAREV (since NA), Vladimir RUSAKEVICH
(since NA), Vasyl DALGALYOV (since NA)
cabinet: Council of Ministers
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 24 June and 10 July 1994 (next to be held NA 2001
because of the additional two years provided by the November 1996
referendum); prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Aleksandr LUKASHENKO elected president; percent of
vote - Aleksandr LUKASHENKO 85%, Vyacheslav KEBICH 15%
note: first presidential elections took place in June-July 1994

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament established by the 28
November Constitution consists of the Council of the Republic (64
seats; the president appoints 8 and each oblast plus the Minsk city
government elect 8) and the Chamber of Representatives (110 seats;
note - present members came from the defunct Supreme Soviet)
elections: last held May and November-December 1995 (two rounds, each
with a run-off; next to be held NA 2000)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - KPB
42, Agrarian 33, CAB 9, Party of People's Concord 8, UPNAZ 2, SDPB 2,
BPR 1, Green Party 1, Republican Party of Labor and Justice 1, BSP 1,
NFB 1, Social and Sports Party 1, Ecological Party 1, independents 95,
vacant 62; note - after the November 1996 referendum, seats for the
Chamber of Representatives were filled by former Supreme Soviet
members as follows: PKB 24, Agrarian 14, Party of Peoples Concord 5,
LDPB 1, UPNAZ 1, Green World Party 1, Belarusian Social Sports Party
1, Ecological Party 1, Republican Party of Labor and Justice 1,
independents 60; 58 of the 64 seats in the Council of the Republic
have been appointed/elected

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the president;
Constitutional Court, half of the judges appointed by the president
and half appointed by the Chamber of Representatives

Political parties and leaders: Belarusian Communist Party or KPB
[Yefrem SOKOLOV and Viktor CHIKIN, chairmen]; Agrarian Party
[Aleksandr PAVLOV, chairman]; Civic Accord Bloc (United Civic Party)
or CAB [Stanislav BOGDANKEVICH, chairman]; Party of People's Concord
[Leonid SECHKO, chairman]; Party of All-Belarusian Unity and Concord
or UPNAZ [Dmitriy BULAKOV, chairman]; Belarusian Social-Democrat
Hramada or SDBP [Nikolai STATKEVICH, chairman]; Belarusian Patriotic
Movement (Belarusian Patriotic Party) or BPR [Anatol BARANKEVICH];
Green Party of Belarus [Nikolai KARTASH, chairman]; Republican Party
of Labor and Justice [Anatol NETYLKIN, chairman]; Belarus Peasants or
BSP [Yevgeniy LUGIN, chairman]; Belarusian Popular Front or NFB [Levon
BARSHEVSKIY, acting chairman]; Belarusian Social Sports Party
[Aleksandr ALEKSANDROVICH, chairman]; Ecological Party [Liudmila
YELIZAROVA, chairman]; National Democratic Party of Belarus or NDPB
[Viktor NAUMENKO, chairman]; United Democratic Party of Belarus or
ADPB [Aleksandr DOBROVOLSKIY]; Belarusian Socialist Party or SPB
[Vyacheslav KUZNETSOV]; Slavic Assembly or SAB [Nikolai SYARECHEV];
Liberal-Democratic Party or LDPB [Sergei GAIDUKEVICH, chairman];
Belarusian Christian-Democratic Unity or BKDZ [Petr SILKO]; Polish
Democratic Union or PDZ [Konstantin TARASEVICH]; Party of Beer Lovers
[Yuriy GONCHAR]; Party of Communists Belarusian or PKB [Sergei
KALYAKIN and Vasiliy NOVIKOV, chairmen]; Belarusian Labor Party or BPP
[Aleksandr BUKHVOSTOV]

International organization participation: BIS, CCC, CEI, CIS, EBRD,
ECE, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Inmarsat, Intelsat
(nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, NACC,
OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador-designate Valeriy TSEPKALO
chancery: 1619 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 986-1604
FAX: [1] (202) 986-1805
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Kenneth Spencer YALOWITZ
embassy: Starovilenskaya #46-220002, Minsk
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone: [375] (172) 31-50-00
FAX : [375] (172) 34-78-53

Flag description: red horizontal band (top) and green horizontal band
one-half the width of the red band; a white vertical stripe of white
on the hoist side bears in red the Belarusian national ornament

Economy

Economy - overview: At the time of independence in late 1991, Belarus
was one of the most developed of the former Soviet states, inheriting
a modern - by Soviet standards - machine building sector and robust
agricultural sector. However, the breakup of the Soviet Union and its
traditional trade ties in December 1991, as well as the government's
failure to embrace market reforms, has resulted in a sharp economic
decline. Privatization is virtually nonexistent and the system of
state orders and distribution persists. Although President LUKASHENKO
pronounces his 1995 macro stabilization policies a success - annual
inflation dropped from 2,220% in 1994 to 244% in 1995 - the IMF has
criticized his exchange rate policies and suspended Minsk's $300
million standby program in November 1995. The overvalued ruble has
especially hurt Belarusian exporters, most of which now operate at a
loss. In addition, the January 1995 Customs Union agreement with
Russia - which required Minsk to adjust its foreign trade practices to
mirror Moscow's - has resulted in higher import tariffs for Belarusian
consumers; tariffs rose from 5%-20% to 20%-40%. In general, as of the
beginning of 1997, Belarus has badly lagged in moving away from the
old centrally planned policies of the former USSR.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $51.9 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 21%
industry: 49%
services: 30% (1991 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 33% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 4.731 million
by occupation: industry and construction 36%, agriculture and forestry
19%, services 45% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 3.1% officially registered unemployed (December
1996); large numbers of underemployed workers

Budget:
revenues : $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: tractors, metal-cutting machine tools, off-highway dump
trucks up to 110-metric-ton load capacity, wheel-type earth movers for
construction and mining, eight-wheel-drive, high-flotation trucks with
cargo capacity of 25 metric tons for use in tundra and roadless areas,
equipment for animal husbandry and livestock feeding, motorcycles,
television sets, chemical fibers, fertilizer, linen fabric, wool
fabric, radios, refrigerators, other consumer goods

Industrial production growth rate: 3.2% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 7.21 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 23.7 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,553 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grain, potatoes, vegetables; meat, milk

Exports:
total value: $5.2 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, foodstuffs
partners: Russia, Ukraine, Poland, Germany

Imports:
total value: $6.8 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: fuel, natural gas, industrial raw materials, textiles,
sugar
partners: Russia, Ukraine, Poland, Germany

Debt - external: $2 billion (September 1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $186 million (1993)
note : commitments, $3,930 million ($1,845 million disbursements),
1992-95

Currency: Belarusian ruble (BR)

Exchange rates: Belarusian rubles per US$1 - 16,613 (September monthly
average 1996),15,500 (yearend 1996), 11,500 (yearend 1995), 10,600
(yearend 1994), 699 (yearend 1993), 15 (yearend 1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Belarus:Communications

Telephones: 1.849 million (1991 est.)

Telephone system: telephone service inadequate for the purposes of
either business or the population; about 70% of the telephones are in
homes; over 750,000 applications from households for telephones remain
unsatisfied (1992 est.); new investment centers on international
connections and business needs
domestic : the new NMT-450 analog cellular system is now operating in
Minsk
international: international traffic is carried by the Moscow
international gateway switch and also by satellite; satellite earth
stations - 1 Intelsat (through Canada) and 1 Eutelsat (through the UK)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 35, FM 18, shortwave 0

Radios: 3.17 million (1991 est.) (5,615,000 with multiple speaker
systems for program diffusion)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (one national and one private; the
license of the private station was suspended during the parliamentary
elections of 1994)

Televisions: 3.5 million (1992 est.)

@Belarus:Transportation

Railways:
total: 5,488 km
broad gauge: 5,488 km 1.520-m gauge (873 km electrified) (1993)

Highways:
total: 51,547 km
paved: 50,825 km
unpaved: 722 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: NA km; note - Belarus has extensive and widely used canal
and river systems

Pipelines: crude oil 1,470 km; refined products 1,100 km; natural gas
1,980 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Mazyr

Merchant marine:
note: claims 5% of former Soviet fleet (1995 est.)

Airports: 118 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 36
over 3,047 m : 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 18
1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
under 914 m: 11 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 82
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m : 6
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 9
under 914 m: 62 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Air Force, Air Defense Force, Interior
Ministry Troops, Border Guards

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,659,236 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 2,083,696 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 77,496 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 2.4 trillion rubles (1997);
note - conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the
current exchange rate could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: treaty with Lithuania defining the border
awaits demarcation

Illicit drugs: limited cultivation of opium poppy and cannabis, mostly
for the domestic market; transshipment point for illicit drugs to
Russia and Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

BELGIUM

@Belgium:Geography

Location: Western Europe, bordering the North Sea, between France and
the Netherlands

Geographic coordinates: 50 50 N, 4 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total : 30,510 sq km
land: 30,230 sq km
water: 280 sq km

Area - comparative: about the size of Maryland

Land boundaries:
total: 1,385 km
border countries : France 620 km, Germany 167 km, Luxembourg 148 km,
Netherlands 450 km

Coastline: 64 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf : median line with neighbors
exclusive fishing zone: median line with neighbors (extends about 68
km from coast)
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; mild winters, cool summers; rainy, humid, cloudy

Terrain: flat coastal plains in northwest, central rolling hills,
rugged mountains of Ardennes Forest in southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: North Sea 0 m
highest point : Signal de Botrange 694 m

Natural resources: coal, natural gas

Land use:
arable land : 24%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 20%
forests and woodland: 21%
other: 34%

Irrigated land: 10 sq km including Luxembourg (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding is a threat in areas of reclaimed coastal
land, protected from the sea by concrete dikes

Environment - current issues: Meuse River, a major source of drinking
water, polluted from steel production wastes; other rivers polluted by
animal wastes and fertilizers; industrial air pollution contributes to
acid rain in neighboring countries

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Law of
the Sea

Geography - note: crossroads of Western Europe; majority of West
European capitals within 1,000 km of Brussels which is the seat of
both the EU and NATO

@Belgium:People

Population: 10,165,059 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 17% (male 911,881; female 868,361)
15-64 years: 66% (male 3,385,319; female 3,318,940)
65 years and over : 17% (male 681,432; female 999,126) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.11% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 10.43 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.41 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.08 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.68 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.19 years
male : 73.95 years
female: 80.59 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.5 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Belgian(s)
adjective: Belgian

Ethnic groups: Fleming 55%, Walloon 33%, mixed or other 12%

Religions: Roman Catholic 75%, Protestant or other 25%

Languages: Flemish 56%, French 32%, German 1%, legally bilingual 11%

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99% (1980 est.)
male: NA%
female: NA%

@Belgium:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Kingdom of Belgium
conventional short form: Belgium
local long form: Royaume de Belgique/Koninkrijk Belgie
local short form: Belgique/Belgie

Data code: BE

Government type: federal parliamentary democracy under a
constitutional monarch

National capital: Brussels

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces (French: provinces, singular -
province; Flemish: provincien, singular - provincie); Antwerpen,
Brabant, Hainaut, Liege, Limburg, Luxembourg, Namur, Oost-Vlaanderen,
West-Vlaanderen
note: constitutional reforms passed by Parliament in 1993
theoretically increased the number of provinces to 10 by splitting the
province of Brabant into two new provinces, Flemish Brabant and
Walloon Brabant, but this has not been confirmed by the US Government

Independence: 4 October 1830 (from the Netherlands)

National holiday: National Day, 21 July (ascension of King LEOPOLD to
the throne in 1831)

Constitution: 7 February 1831, last revised 14 July 1993; parliament
approved a constitutional package creating a federal state

Legal system: civil law system influenced by English constitutional
theory; judicial review of legislative acts; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state : King ALBERT II (since 9 August 1993)
head of government: Prime Minister Jean-Luc DEHAENE (since 6 March
1992)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the king and approved by
Parliament
elections: none; the king is a constitutional monarch; prime minister
appointed by the king and then approved by Parliament

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of a Senate or
Senaat in Flemish, Senat in French (71 seats; 40 members are directly
elected, 31 will be indirectly elected at a later date; members serve
four-year terms) and a Chamber of Deputies or Kamer van
Volksvertegenwoordigers in Flemish, Chambre des Representants in
French (150 seats; members are directly elected by proportional
representation to serve four-year terms)
elections: Senate and Chamber of Deputies - last held 21 May 1995
(next to be held by the end of 1999)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - CVP 7, SP 6, VLD 6, VU 2, AGALEV 1, VB 3, PS 5, PRL 5, PSC 3,
ECOLO 2; note - before the 1995 elections, there were 184 seats;
Chamber of Deputies - percent of vote by party - CVP 17.2%, PS 11.9%,
SP 12.6%, VLD 13.1%, PRL 10.3%, PSC 7.7%, VB 7.8%, VU 4.7%, ECOLO
4.0%, AGALEV 4.4%, FN 2.3%; seats by party - CVP 29, PS 21, SP 20, VLD
21, PRL 18, PSC 12, VB 11, VU 5, ECOLO 6, AGALEV 5, FN 2; note -
before the 1995 elections, there were 212 seats
note: as a result of the 1993 constitutional revision that furthered
devolution into a federal state, there are now three levels of
government (federal, regional, and linguistic community) with a
complex division of responsibilities; this reality leaves six
governments each with its own legislative assembly; for other acronyms
of the listed parties see Political parties and leaders

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice or Hof van Cassatie in
Flemish, Cour de Cassation in French, judges are appointed for life by
the Belgian monarch

Political parties and leaders: Flemish Christian Democrats or CVP
(Christian People's Party) [Marc VAN PEEL, president]; Francophone
Christian Democrats or PSC (Social Christian Party) [Gerard DEPREZ,
president]; Flemish Socialist Party or SP [Louis TOBBACK, president];
Francophone Socialist Party or PS [Philippe BUSQUIN, president];
Flemish Liberal Democrats or VLD [Herman DE CROO, president];
Francophone Liberal Reformation Party or PRL [Louis MICHEL,
president]; Francophone Democratic Front or FDF [Olivier MAINGAIN,
president]; Volksunie or VU [Bert ANCIAUX, president]; Vlaams Blok or
VB; National Front or FN [Frank VANHECKE, president]; AGALEV (Flemish
Greens) [no president]; ECOLO (Francophone Greens) [no president];
other minor parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: Christian and Socialist Trade
Unions; Federation of Belgian Industries; numerous other associations
representing bankers, manufacturers, middle-class artisans, and the
legal and medical professions; various organizations represent the
cultural interests of Flanders and Wallonia; various peace groups such
as the Flemish Action Committee Against Nuclear Weapons and Pax
Christi

International organization participation: ACCT, AfDB, AG (observer),
AsDB, Australia Group, Benelux, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, EBRD, ECE, EIB,
ESA, EU, FAO, G- 9, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM,
IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NACC, NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS
(observer), OECD, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
UNMOGIP, UNMOP, UNPREDEP, UNRWA, UNTAES, UNTSO, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Andre ADAM
chancery: 3330 Garfield Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 333-6900
FAX: [1] (202) 333-3079
consulate(s) general : Atlanta, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Alan J. BLINKEN
embassy: 27 Boulevard du Regent, B-1000 Brussels
mailing address: APO AE 09724, PSC 82, Box 002, Brussels
telephone : [32] (2) 508-2111
FAX: [32] (2) 511-2725

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of black (hoist side),
yellow, and red; the design was based on the flag of France

Economy

Economy - overview: This highly developed private enterprise economy
has capitalized on its central geographic location, highly developed
transport network, and diversified industrial and commercial base.
Industry is concentrated mainly in the populous Flemish area in the
north, although the government is encouraging reinvestment in the
southern region of Walloon. With few natural resources, Belgium must
import substantial quantities of raw materials and export a large
volume of manufactures, making its economy unusually dependent on the
state of world markets. Two-thirds of its trade is with other EU
countries. The economy grew at a strong 4% annual pace during the
period 1988-90, slowed to 1% in 1991-92, dropped by 1.5% in 1993,
recovered with moderate 2.3% growth in 1994 and 1995, and fell off
again to 1.4% in 1996, with continued substantial unemployment.
Belgium's public debt has risen to 140% of GDP, and the government is
trying to control its expenditures to bring the figure more into line
with other industrialized countries.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $204.8 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $20,300 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 2%
industry: 28%
services : 70% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.1% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 4.126 million
by occupation: services 69.7%, industry 27.7%, agriculture 2.6% (1992)

Unemployment rate: 14% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: engineering and metal products, motor vehicle assembly,
processed food and beverages, chemicals, basic metals, textiles,
glass, petroleum, coal

Industrial production growth rate: 3.4% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 13.59 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 74.4 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 6,823 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: sugar beets, fresh vegetables, fruits, grain,
tobacco; beef, veal, pork, milk

Exports:
total value: $108 billion (f.o.b., 1994) Belgium-Luxembourg Economic
Union (BLEU)
commodities: iron and steel, transportation equipment, tractors,
diamonds, petroleum products
partners : EU 67.2% (Germany 19%), US 5.8%, former Communist countries
1.4% (1994)

Imports:
total value: $140 billion (c.i.f., 1994) Belgium-Luxembourg Economic
Union
commodities: fuels, grains, chemicals, foodstuffs
partners: EU 68% (Germany 22.1%), US 8.8%, former Communist countries
0.8% (1994)

Debt - external: $31.3 billion (1992 est.)

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $808 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Belgian franc (BF) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Belgian francs (BF) per US$1 - 33.067 (January 1997),
30.962 (1996), 29.480 (1995), 33.456 (1994), 34.597 (1993), 32.150
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Belgium:Communications

Telephones: 5.691 million (1992 est.)

Telephone system: highly developed, technologically advanced, and
completely automated domestic and international telephone and
telegraph facilities
domestic: nationwide cellular telephone system; extensive cable
network; limited microwave radio relay network
international : 5 submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 2
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) and 1 Eutelsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 39, shortwave 0

Radios: 100,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 32 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 3,315,662 (1993 est.)

@Belgium:Transportation

Railways:
total: 3,396 km (2,363 km electrified; 2,563 km double track)
standard gauge : 3,396 km 1.435-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 142,563 km
paved: 142,563 km (including 1,667 km of expressways)
unpaved: 0 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 2,043 km (1,528 km in regular commercial use)

Pipelines: crude oil 161 km; petroleum products 1,167 km; natural gas
3,300 km

Ports and harbors: Antwerp (one of the world's busiest ports), Brugge,
Gent, Hasselt, Liege, Mons, Namur, Oostende, Zeebrugge

Merchant marine:
total: 25 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 102,363 GRT/152,951 DWT
ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 7, chemical tanker 4, combination bulk 2,
liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker 10 (1996 est.)

Airports: 42 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 39
over 3,047 m: 6
2,438 to 3,047 m: 9
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m : 21 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Gendarmerie

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 2,559,951 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 2,122,673 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 63,005 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $4.6 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.7% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: source of precursor chemicals for South American
cocaine processors; transshipment point for cocaine, heroin, hashish,
and marijuana entering Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

BELIZE

@Belize:Geography

Location: Middle America, bordering the Caribbean Sea, between
Guatemala and Mexico

Geographic coordinates: 17 15 N, 88 45 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total : 22,960 sq km
land: 22,800 sq km
water: 160 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Massachusetts

Land boundaries:
total: 516 km
border countries: Guatemala 266 km, Mexico 250 km

Coastline: 386 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm in the north, 3 nm in the south; note - from
the mouth of the Sarstoon River to Ranguana Cay, Belize's territorial
sea is 3 nm; according to Belize's Maritime Areas Act, 1992, the
purpose of this limitation is to provide a framework for the
negotiation of a definitive agreement on territorial differences with
Guatemala

Climate: tropical; very hot and humid; rainy season (May to February)

Terrain: flat, swampy coastal plain; low mountains in south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Victoria Peak 1,160 m

Natural resources: arable land potential, timber, fish

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 2%
forests and woodland: 92%
other: 3% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent, devastating hurricanes (September to
December) and coastal flooding (especially in south)

Environment - current issues: deforestation; water pollution from
sewage, industrial effluents, agricultural runoff

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of the
Sea, Marine Dumping, Ship Pollution, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: national capital moved 80 km inland from Belize City
to Belmopan because of hurricanes; only country in Central America
without a coastline on the North Pacific Ocean

@Belize:People

Population: 224,663 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 48,921; female 47,057)
15-64 years: 54% (male 61,133; female 59,466)
65 years and over: 3% (male 3,965; female 4,121) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.42% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 31.91 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.61 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.12 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.96 male(s)/female
total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 33.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 68.75 years
male: 66.8 years
female: 70.81 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.99 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Belizean(s)
adjective: Belizean

Ethnic groups: mestizo 44%, Creole 30%, Maya 11%, Garifuna 7%, other
8%

Religions: Roman Catholic 62%, Protestant 30% (Anglican 12%, Methodist
6%, Mennonite 4%, Seventh-Day Adventist 3%, Pentecostal 2%, Jehovah's
Witnesses 1%, other 2%), none 2%, other 6% (1980)

Languages: English (official), Spanish, Mayan, Garifuna (Carib)

Literacy:
definition: age 14 and over has ever attended school
total population: 70.3%
male: 70.3%
female: 70.3% (1991 est.)
note : other sources list the literacy rate as high as 75%

@Belize:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Belize
former: British Honduras

Data code: BH

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Belmopan

Administrative divisions: 6 districts; Belize, Cayo, Corozal, Orange
Walk, Stann Creek, Toledo

Independence: 21 September 1981 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 21 September (1981)

Constitution: 21 September 1981

Legal system: English law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General Sir Colville YOUNG (since 17 November
1993)
head of government : Prime Minister Manuel ESQUIVEL (since July 1993);
Deputy Prime Minister Dean BARROW (since NA July 1993)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
the prime minister
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor general
appointed by the queen; prime minister appointed by the governor
general

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly consists of the Senate
(8 members; members are appointed for five-year terms, five on the
advice of the prime minister, two on the advice of the leader of the
opposition, and one after consultation with the Belize Advisory
Council - this council serves as an independent body to advise the
governor general with respect to difficult decisions such as granting
pardons, commutations, stays of execution, the removal of justices of
appeal who appear to be incompetent, etc.) and the National Assembly
(29 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to serve
five-year terms)
elections: National Assembly - last held 30 June 1993 (next to be held
no later than September 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PUP
13, UDP 15, NABR 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, the chief justice is appointed by the
governor general on advice of the prime minister

Political parties and leaders: People's United Party or PUP [Said
MUSA]; United Democratic Party or UDP [Manuel ESQUIVEL, Dean BARROW];
National Alliance for Belizean Rights or NABR [Philip GOLDSON]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Society for the Promotion of
Education and Research or SPEAR [Assad SHOMAN]; United Workers Front

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CDB, ECLAC,
FAO, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer),
ITU, LAES, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO,
WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador James S. MURPHY
chancery: 2535 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 332-9636
FAX : [1] (202) 332-6888
consulate(s) general: Los Angeles
consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador George Charles BRUNO
embassy : Gabourel Lane and Hutson Street, Belize City
mailing address: P. O. Box 286, Unit 7401, APO AA 34025
telephone: [501] (2) 77161 through 77163
FAX: [501] (2) 30802

Flag description: blue with a narrow red stripe along the top and the
bottom edges; centered is a large white disk bearing the coat of arms;
the coat of arms features a shield flanked by two workers in front of
a mahogany tree with the related motto SUB UMBRA FLOREO (I Flourish in
the Shade) on a scroll at the bottom, all encircled by a green garland

Economy

Economy - overview: The small, essentially private enterprise economy
is based primarily on agriculture, agro-based industry, and
merchandising, with tourism and construction assuming increasing
importance. Agriculture accounts for about 20% of GDP and provides 75%
of export earnings, while sugar, the chief crop, accounts for almost
40% of hard currency earnings. The US, Belize's main trading partner,
is assisting in efforts to reduce dependency on sugar with an
agricultural diversification program.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $649 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,960 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 20%
industry: 27%
services : 53% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 6.4% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 51,500
by occupation: agriculture 30%, services 16%, government 15.4%,
commerce 11.2%, manufacturing 10.3%
note: shortage of skilled labor and all types of technical personnel
(1985)

Unemployment rate: 15% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $140 million
expenditures: $180 million, including capital expenditures of NA
(FY96/97 est.)

Industries: garment production, food processing, tourism, construction

Industrial production growth rate: 3.7% (1990)

Electricity - capacity: 34,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: bananas, coca, citrus, sugarcane; lumber;
fish, cultured shrimp

Exports:
total value: $204 million (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: sugar, citrus fruits, bananas, clothing, fish products,
molasses, wood
partners : US 38%, UK, other EU (1994)

Imports:
total value: $264 million (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: machinery and transportation equipment, food,
manufactured goods, fuels, chemicals, pharmaceuticals
partners : US 53%, UK, other EU, Mexico (1994)

Debt - external: $192 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Belizean dollar (Bz$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Belizean dollars (Bz$) per US$1 - 2.00 (fixed rate)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Belize:Communications

Telephones: 29,000 (1996 est.)

Telephone system: above-average system
domestic: trunk network depends primarily on microwave radio relay
international : satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 8, shortwave 1

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2

Televisions: 27,048 (1993 est.)

@Belize:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 2,770 km
paved: 521 km
unpaved : 2,249 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 825 km river network used by shallow-draft craft;
seasonally navigable

Ports and harbors: Belize City, Big Creek, Corozol, Punta Gorda

Merchant marine:
total: 166 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,592,846 GRT/1,087,555
DWT
ships by type: bulk 17, cargo 117, chemical tanker 1, combination bulk
1, container 6, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker 13, passenger-cargo
1, refrigerated cargo 4, roll-on/roll-off cargo 3, specialized tanker
1, vehicle carrier 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 35 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 25
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
under 914 m: 24 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 10
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 9 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Belize Defense Force (includes Army, Navy, Air
Force, and Volunteer Guard), Belize National Police

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 54,163 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 32,176 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 2,471 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $8.1 million (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: border with Guatemala in dispute; talks to
resolve the dispute are ongoing

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine; small-scale illicit
producer of cannabis for the international drug trade; minor
money-laundering center
______________________________________________________________________

BENIN

@Benin:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean, between
Nigeria and Togo

Geographic coordinates: 9 30 N, 2 15 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 112,620 sq km
land: 110,620 sq km
water: 2,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Pennsylvania

Land boundaries:
total: 1,989 km
border countries : Burkina Faso 306 km, Niger 266 km, Nigeria 773 km,
Togo 644 km

Coastline: 121 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north

Terrain: mostly flat to undulating plain; some hills and low mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Tanekas 641 m

Natural resources: small offshore oil deposits, limestone, marble,
timber

Land use:
arable land: 13%
permanent crops: 4%
permanent pastures: 4%
forests and woodland: 31%
other: 48% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dusty harmattan wind may affect north in
winter

Environment - current issues: recent droughts have severely affected
marginal agriculture in north; inadequate supplies of potable water;
poaching threatens wildlife populations; deforestation;
desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography - note: no natural harbors

@Benin:People

Population: 5,902,178 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 48% (male 1,420,335; female 1,411,160)
15-64 years: 50% (male 1,401,360; female 1,530,626)
65 years and over : 2% (male 60,704; female 77,993) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.31% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 46.28 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 13.14 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.78 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 102.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 53.15 years
male: 51.15 years
female: 55.21 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.56 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Beninese (singular and plural)
adjective: Beninese

Ethnic groups: African 99% (42 ethnic groups, most important being
Fon, Adja, Yoruba, Bariba), Europeans 5,500

Religions: indigenous beliefs 70%, Muslim 15%, Christian 15%

Languages: French (official), Fon and Yoruba (most common vernaculars
in south), tribal languages (at least six major ones in north)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 37%
male: 48.7%
female: 25.8% (1995 est.)

@Benin:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Benin
conventional short form: Benin
local long form: Republique du Benin
local short form : Benin
former: Dahomey

Data code: BN

Government type: republic under multiparty democratic rule; dropped
Marxism-Leninism December 1989; democratic reforms adopted February
1990; transition to multiparty system completed 4 April 1991

National capital: Porto-Novo

Administrative divisions: 6 provinces; Atakora, Atlantique, Borgou,
Mono, Oueme, Zou

Independence: 1 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: National Day, 1 August (1990)

Constitution: 2 December 1990

Legal system: based on French civil law and customary law; has not
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Mathieu KEREKOU (since 4 April 1996); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Mathieu KEREKOU (since 4 April 1996);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government; Prime Minister Adrien HOUNGBEDJI (since 9 April 1996) acts
as assistant to the president; a prime minister is not provided for in
the constitution but was appointed by President KEREKOU with the
permission of the constitutional court
cabinet: Council of Ministers headed by the prime minister; all are
appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 18 March 1996 (next to be held March 2001)
election results: Mathieu KEREKOU elected president; percent of vote -
Mathieu KEREKOU 52.49%, Nicephore SOGLO 47.51%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
Nationale (83 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 28 March 1995 (next to be held NA 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - RB
20, PRD 19, FARD-ALAFIA 10, PSD 7, NCC 3, RDL-VIVOTEN 3, Communist
Party 2, Alliance Chameleon 1, RDP 1, other 17

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court or Cour Constitutionnelle,
Supreme Court or Cour Supreme, High Court of Justice

Political parties and leaders: Alliance of the National Party for
Democracy and Development or PNDD and the Democratic Renewal Party or
PRD [Pascal Chabi KAO]; Action for Renewal and Development or
FARD-ALAFIA [Mathieu KEREKOU]; Alliance of the Social Democratic Party
or PSD and the National Union for Solidarity and Progress or UNSP
[Bruno AMOUSSOU]; Alliance Chameleon; Alliance for Democracy and
Progress or ADP [Adekpedjon AKINDES]; Alliance for Social Democracy or
ASD [Robert DOSSOU]; Assembly of Liberal Democrats for National
Reconstruction or RDL [Severin ADJOVI]; Communist Party of Benin,
[Pascal FATONDJI, First Secretary]; Our Common Cause or NCC [Albert
TEVOEDJRE]; Rally for Democracy and Progress or RDP; The Renaissance
Party of Benin or RB [Nicephore SOGLO]
note: as of February 1996, more than 80 political parties were
officially recognized

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, ECA,
ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM,
OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Lucien Edgar TONOUKOUIN
chancery : 2737 Cathedral Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 232-6656, 6657, 6658
FAX : [1] (202) 265-1996

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador John M. YATES
embassy: Rue Caporal Bernard Anani, Cotonou
mailing address: B. P. 2012, Cotonou
telephone : [229] 30-06-50, 30-05-13, 30-17-92
FAX: [229] 30-14-39, 30-19-74

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of yellow (top) and red
with a vertical green band on the hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy of Benin remains underdeveloped and
dependent on subsistence agriculture, cotton production, and regional
trade. Growth in real output, which had averaged a sound 4% in
1990-95, rose to 5.5% in 1996. Rapid population growth offset much of
this growth in output. Inflation jumped to 55% in 1994 (compared to 3%
in 1993) following the 50% currency devaluation in January 1994, but
has subsided gradually over the past two years, with 14.5% inflation
in 1995 and a target of 4.5% inflation in 1996. Commercial and
transport activities, which make up a large part of GDP, are extremely
vulnerable to developments in Nigeria as evidenced by decreased
reexport trade in 1994 due to a severe contraction in Nigerian demand.
Support by the Paris Club and official bilateral creditors has eased
the external debt situation in recent years. The government, still
burdened with money-losing state enterprises and a bloated civil
service, has been gradually implementing a World Bank supported
structural adjustment program since 1991.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $8.2 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,440 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 36.8%
industry: 12.6%
services : 50.6% (1993)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 14.5% (1995)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $272 million (1993 est.)
expenditures: $375 million, including capital expenditures of $84
million (1993 est.)

Industries: textiles, cigarettes; beverages, food; construction
materials, petroleum

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 28,000 kW (1992)

Electricity - production: 10 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 45 kWh (1994 est.)

Agriculture - products: corn, sorghum, cassava (tapioca), yams, beans,
rice, cotton, palm oil, peanuts; poultry, livestock

Exports:
total value : $300 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: cotton, crude oil, palm products, cocoa
partners: Brazil 18%, Portugal 14%, Morocco, Libya, France

Imports:
total value: $380 million (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities : foodstuffs, beverages, tobacco, petroleum products,
intermediate goods, capital goods, light consumer goods
partners: France 27%, Thailand 9%, China, Hong Kong

Debt - external: $1.6 billion (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note: beginning 12 January 1994 the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100
per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Benin:Communications

Telephones: 16,200 (1986 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: fair system of open wire and microwave radio relay
international : satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
submarine cable

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2

Televisions: 20,000 (1993 est.)

@Benin:Transportation

Railways:
total: 578 km (single track)
narrow gauge: 578 km 1.000-m gauge (1995 est.)

Highways:
total: 8,460 km
paved: 2,656 km
unpaved: 5,804 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: navigable along small sections, important only locally

Ports and harbors: Cotonou, Porto-Novo

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 5 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Armed Forces (includes Army, Navy, Air Force),
National Gendarmerie

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 1,261,059
females age 15-49: 1,333,966 (1997 est.)
note: both sexes are liable for military service

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 645,660 (1997 est.)
females: 675,243 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 64,028
females: 63,056 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $33 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.2% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for narcotics associated with
Nigerian trafficking organizations and most commonly destined for
Western Europe and the US
______________________________________________________________________

BERMUDA

(dependent territory of the UK)

@Bermuda:Geography

Location: North America, group of islands in the North Atlantic Ocean,
east of North Carolina (US)

Geographic coordinates: 32 20 N, 64 45 W

Map references: North America

Area:
total : 50 sq km
land: 50 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 103 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: subtropical; mild, humid; gales, strong winds common in
winter

Terrain: low hills separated by fertile depressions

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Town Hill 76 m

Natural resources: limestone, pleasant climate fostering tourism

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops : NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: 20%
other: 80% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hurricanes (June to November)

Environment - current issues: asbestos disposal; water pollution

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified : NA

Geography - note: consists of about 360 small coral islands with ample
rainfall, but no rivers or freshwater lakes; some reclaimed land was
leased by US Government from 1941 to 1995

@Bermuda:People

Population: 62,569 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 0.75% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 14.92 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.3 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.13 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 13.16 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 75.03 years
male : 73.36 years
female: 76.97 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.79 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Bermudian(s)
adjective: Bermudian

Ethnic groups: black 61%, white and other 39%

Religions: Anglican 28%, Roman Catholic 15%, African Methodist
Episcopal (Zion) 12%, Seventh-Day Adventist 6%, Methodist 5%, other
34% (1991)

Languages: English

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98%
male : 98%
female: 99% (1970 est.)

@Bermuda:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form : Bermuda

Data code: BD

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK

Government type: NA

National capital: Hamilton

Administrative divisions: 9 parishes and 2 municipalities*;
Devonshire, Hamilton, Hamilton*, Paget, Pembroke, Saint George*, Saint
Georges, Sandys, Smiths, Southampton, Warwick

Independence: none (dependent territory of the UK)

National holiday: Bermuda Day, 24 May

Constitution: 8 June 1968

Legal system: English law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor John MASEFIELD (since June 1997)
head of government: Premier Pamela GORDON (since 25 March 1997);
Deputy Premier Jerome DILL (since 1 September 1995)
cabinet: Cabinet nominated by the premier, appointed by the governor
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor appointed
by the queen; premier appointed by the governor

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (an
11-member body appointed by the governor) and the House of Assembly
(40 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year
terms)
elections: last held 5 October 1993 (next to be held by NA October
1998)
election results : percent of vote by party - UBP 50%, PLP 46%,
independents 4%; seats by party - UBP 22, PLP 18

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: United Bermuda Party or UBP [Pamela
GORDON]; Progressive Labor Party or PLP [Jennifer SMITH]; National
Liberal Party or NLP [Charles JEFFERS]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Bermuda Industrial Union or BIU
[Derrick BURGESS]

International organization participation: Caricom (observer), CCC,
ICFTU, Interpol (subbureau), IOC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Consul General Robert A. FARMER
consulate(s) general: Crown Hill, 16 Middle Road, Devonshire, Hamilton
mailing address: P. O. Box HM325, Hamilton HMBX; American Consulate
General Hamilton, Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-5300
telephone: [1] (441) 295-1342
FAX: [1] (441) 295-1592

Flag description: red with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
quadrant and the Bermudian coat of arms (white and blue shield with a
red lion holding a scrolled shield showing the sinking of the ship Sea
Venture off Bermuda in 1609) centered on the outer half of the flag

Economy

Economy - overview: Bermuda enjoys one of the highest per capita
incomes in the world, having successfully exploited its location by
providing financial services for international firms and luxury
tourist facilities for 200,000 visitors annually. The tourist industry
attracts 91% of its business from North America. The industrial sector
is small, and agriculture is severely limited by a lack of suitable
land. About 80% of food needs are imported. International business
contributes over 60% of Bermuda's economic output; a failed
independence vote in late 1995 can be partially attributed to
Bermudian's fear of scaring away foreign firms.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.8 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $29,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.5% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 34,133
by occupation: clerical 23%, services 23%, laborers 17%, professional
and technical 16%, administrative and managerial 12%, sales 7%,
agriculture and fishing 2% (1995)

Unemployment rate: NEGL% (1995)

Budget:
revenues: $406.2 million
expenditures : $405.9 million, including capital expenditures of $34.5
million (FY94/95 est.)

Industries: tourism, finance, insurance, structural concrete products,
paints, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, ship repairing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 145,000 kW (1996)

Electricity - production: 527,526,728 kWh (1996)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 7,856 kWh (1996)

Agriculture - products: bananas, vegetables, citrus, flowers; dairy
products

Exports:
total value: $54 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: semitropical produce, light manufactures, reexports of
pharmaceuticals
partners : Netherlands 50%, Brazil 13%, Canada 6% (1996)

Imports:
total value: $550 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: miscellaneous manufactured articles, machinery and
transport equipment, food and live animals, chemicals
partners: US 73%, UK 5%, Canada 5% (1995 est.)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Bermudian dollar (Bd$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Bermudian dollar (Bd$) per US$1 - 1.0000 (February
1997; fixed rate)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Bermuda:Communications

Telephones: 54,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : modern, fully automatic telephone system
international: 3 submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 2
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 78,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3

Televisions: 57,000 (1992 est.)

@Bermuda:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 225 km
paved: 225 km
unpaved : 0 km (1997 est.)
note: in addition, there are 400 km of paved and unpaved roads that
are privately owned

Ports and harbors: Hamilton, Saint George

Merchant marine:
total: 76 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,416,667 GRT/5,163,435
DWT
ships by type: bulk 9, cargo 1, container 15, liquefied gas tanker 14,
oil tanker 16, refrigerated cargo 12, roll-on/roll-off cargo 4,
short-sea passenger 2, specialized tanker 1, vehicle carrier 1,
livestock carrier 1
note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 11 countries
among which are UK 26, Canada 12, US 9, Norway 7, Hong Kong 4, Nigeria
4, Sweden 4, Switzerland 2, Mexico 1, and Romania 1; Bermuda owns 48
additional ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,911,678 DWT that
operate under Australian, Bahamian, Hong Kong, Liberian, Panamanian
and Singaporean registry (1996 est.)

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Bermuda Regiment, Bermuda Police Force, Bermuda
Reserve Constabulary

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

BHUTAN

@Bhutan:Geography

Location: Southern Asia, between China and India

Geographic coordinates: 27 30 N, 90 30 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total: 47,000 sq km
land: 47,000 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about half the size of Indiana

Land boundaries:
total: 1,075 km
border countries: China 470 km, India 605 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: varies; tropical in southern plains; cool winters and hot
summers in central valleys; severe winters and cool summers in
Himalayas

Terrain: mostly mountainous with some fertile valleys and savanna

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Dangme Chu 97 m
highest point: Khula Kangri I 7,553 m

Natural resources: timber, hydropower, gypsum, calcium carbide

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 6%
forests and woodland: 66%
other: 26% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 340 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: violent storms coming down from the Himalayas are the
source of the country's name which translates as Land of the Thunder
Dragon; frequent landslides during the rainy season

Environment - current issues: soil erosion; limited access to potable
water

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Nuclear Test Ban
signed, but not ratified : Law of the Sea

Geography - note: landlocked; strategic location between China and
India; controls several key Himalayan mountain passes

@Bhutan:People

Population: 1,865,191 (July 1997 est.)
note: other estimates range as low as 600,000

Age structure:
0-14 years: 40% (male 387,721; female 359,857)
15-64 years: 56% (male 536,797; female 507,551)
65 years and over: 4% (male 37,249; female 36,016) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.3% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 37.91 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 14.94 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 1.03 male(s)/female
total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 114 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 51.88 years
male: 52.37 years
female: 51.37 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.27 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Bhutanese (singular and plural)
adjective: Bhutanese

Ethnic groups: Bhote 50%, ethnic Nepalese 35%, indigenous or migrant
tribes 15%

Religions: Lamaistic Buddhism 75%, Indian- and Nepalese-influenced
Hinduism 25%

Languages: Dzongkha (official), Bhotes speak various Tibetan dialects,
Nepalese speak various Nepalese dialects

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 42.2%
male: 56.2%
female: 28.1% (1995 est.)

People - note: refugee issue over the presence in Nepal of
approximately 100,000 Bhutanese refugees, 90% of whom are in seven
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
camps

@Bhutan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Kingdom of Bhutan
conventional short form: Bhutan

Data code: BT

Government type: monarchy; special treaty relationship with India

National capital: Thimphu

Administrative divisions: 18 districts (dzongkhag, singular and
plural); Bumthang, Chhukha, Chirang, Daga, Geylegphug, Ha, Lhuntshi,
Mongar, Paro, Pemagatsel, Punakha, Samchi, Samdrup Jongkhar, Shemgang,
Tashigang, Thimphu, Tongsa, Wangdi Phodrang

Independence: 8 August 1949 (from India)

National holiday: National Day, 17 December (1907) (Ugyen WANGCHUCK
became first hereditary king)

Constitution: no written constitution or bill of rights
note: Bhutan uses 1953 Royal decree for the Constitution of the
National Assembly

Legal system: based on Indian law and English common law; has not
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: each family has one vote in village-level elections

Executive branch:
chief of state: King Jigme Singye WANGCHUCK (since 24 July 1972); note
- the king is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: King Jigme Singye WANGCHUCK (since 24 July 1972);
note - the king is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Council of Ministers (Lhengye Shungtsog) appointed by the
king
note: there is also a Royal Advisory Council (Lodoi Tsokde), members
nominated by the king
elections : none; the king is a hereditary monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Tshogdu (150
seats; 105 elected from village constituencies, 12 represent religious
bodies, and 33 are designated by the king to represent government and
other secular interests; members serve three-year terms)
elections: last held NA (next to be held NA)
election results: NA

Judicial branch: the Supreme Court of Appeal is the king; High Court,
judges appointed by the king

Political parties and leaders: no legal parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: Buddhist clergy; Indian
merchant community; ethnic Nepalese organizations leading militant
antigovernment campaign

International organization participation: AsDB, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77,
IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IMF, Intelsat, IOC, ITU, NAM, SAARC, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; note - Bhutan has a
Permanent Mission to the UN, headed by Ugyen TSERING; address: 2
United Nations Plaza, 27th Floor, New York, NY 10017; telephone [1]
(212) 826-1919; the Bhutanese mission to the UN has consular
jurisdiction in the US
consulate(s) general: New York
honorary consulate(s): San Francisco; Washington, DC

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US and Bhutan have no
formal diplomatic relations, although informal contact is maintained
between the Bhutanese and US Embassy in New Delhi (India)

Flag description: divided diagonally from the lower hoist side corner;
the upper triangle is yellow and the lower triangle is orange;
centered along the dividing line is a large black and white dragon
facing away from the hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy, one of the world's smallest and least
developed, is based on agriculture and forestry, which provide the
main livelihood for 90% of the population and account for about 40% of
GDP. Agriculture consists largely of subsistence farming and animal
husbandry. Rugged mountains dominate the terrain and make the building
of roads and other infrastructure difficult and expensive. The economy
is closely aligned with India's through strong trade and monetary
links. The industrial sector is small and technologically backward,
with most production of the cottage industry type. Most development
projects, such as road construction, rely on Indian migrant labor.
Bhutan's hydropower potential and its attraction for tourists are key
resources; however, the government limits the number of tourists to
4,000 per year to minimize foreign influence. The Bhutanese Government
has made some progress in expanding the nation's productive base and
improving social welfare, but growth continues to be constrained by
the government's desire to protect the country's environment and
cultural traditions. Growth picked up in 1995 and the country's
balance of payments remained strong with comfortable reserves. The
cautious fiscal stance planned for FY95/96 suggests continued economic
stability in 1996. However, excessive controls and uncertain policies
in areas like industrial licensing, trade, labor, and finance continue
to hamper foreign investment.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.3 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6.9% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $730 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 42%
industry: 31%
services : 27%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 8.6% (FY94/95 est.)

Labor force: NA
by occupation : agriculture 93%, services 5%, industry and commerce 2%
note: massive lack of skilled labor

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $52 million
expenditures: $150 million, including capital expenditures of $95
million (FY93/94 est.)
note: the government of India finances nearly three-fifths of Bhutan's
budget expenditures

Industries: cement, wood products, processed fruits, alcoholic
beverages, calcium carbide

Industrial production growth rate: 7.6% (1992 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 351,000 kW (1989)

Electricity - production: 1.67 billion kWh (1994)
note: exports electricity to India

Electricity - consumption per capita: 79 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, corn, root crops, citrus, foodgrains;
dairy products, eggs

Exports:
total value: $70.9 million (f.o.b., FY94/95 est.)
commodities: cardamom, gypsum, timber, handicrafts, cement, fruit,
electricity (to India), precious stones, spices
partners: India 94%, Bangladesh

Imports:
total value: $113.6 million (c.i.f., FY94/95 est.)
commodities : fuel and lubricants, grain, machinery and parts,
vehicles, fabrics, rice
partners: India 77%, Japan, UK, Germany, US

Debt - external: $141 million (October 1994)

Economic aid:
recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 ngultrum (Nu) = 100 chetrum; note - Indian currency is
also legal tender

Exchange rates: ngultrum (Nu) per US$1 - 35.872 (January 1997), 35.433
(1996), 32.427 (1995), 31.374 (1994), 30.493 (1993), 25.918 (1992);
note - the Bhutanese ngultrum is at par with the Indian rupee

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Bhutan:Communications

Telephones: 4,620 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: domestic telephone service is very poor with very few
telephones in use
international : international telephone and telegraph service is by
landline through India; a satellite earth station was planned (1990)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0 (1990)

Radios: 23,000 (1989 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1990 est.)

Televisions: 200 (1985 est.)

@Bhutan:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 2,210 km
paved: 0 km
unpaved : 2,210 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Bhutan Army, Palace Guard, Militia

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 455,556 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 243,156 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 18,290 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

BOLIVIA

@Bolivia:Geography

Location: Central South America, southwest of Brazil

Geographic coordinates: 17 00 S, 65 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total: 1,098,580 sq km
land: 1,084,390 sq km
water : 14,190 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Montana

Land boundaries:
total : 6,743 km
border countries: Argentina 832 km, Brazil 3,400 km, Chile 861 km,
Paraguay 750 km, Peru 900 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: varies with altitude; humid and tropical to cold and semiarid

Terrain: rugged Andes Mountains with a highland plateau (Altiplano),
hills, lowland plains of the Amazon Basin

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Rio Paraguay 90 m
highest point: Cerro Illimani 6,882 m

Natural resources: tin, natural gas, petroleum, zinc, tungsten,
antimony, silver, iron, lead, gold, timber

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 24%
forests and woodland : 53%
other: 21% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,750 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: cold, thin air of high plateau is obstacle to
efficient fuel combustion, as well as to physical activity by those
unaccustomed to it from birth; flooding in the northeast (March-April)

Environment - current issues: the clearing of land for agricultural
purposes and the international demand for tropical timber are
contributing to deforestation; soil erosion from overgrazing and poor
cultivation methods (including slash-and-burn agriculture);
desertification; loss of biodiversity; industrial pollution of water
supplies used for drinking and irrigation

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Tropical
Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification, Marine Dumping,
Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection

Geography - note: landlocked; shares control of Lago Titicaca, world's
highest navigable lake (elevation 3,805 m), with Peru

@Bolivia:People

Population: 7,669,868 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 40% (male 1,543,641; female 1,511,579)
15-64 years: 56% (male 2,081,792; female 2,184,876)
65 years and over : 4% (male 158,409; female 189,571) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.04% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 32.14 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.18 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.56 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.84 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 65.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 60.34 years
male: 57.46 years
female : 63.38 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.18 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Bolivian(s)
adjective: Bolivian

Ethnic groups: Quechua 30%, Aymara 25%, mestizo (mixed white and
Amerindian ancestry) 25%-30%, white 5%-15%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%, Protestant (Evangelical Methodist)

Languages: Spanish (official), Quechua (official), Aymara (official)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 83.1%
male: 90.5%
female: 76% (1995 est.)

@Bolivia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Bolivia
conventional short form: Bolivia
local long form: Republica de Bolivia
local short form : Bolivia

Data code: BL

Government type: republic

National capital: La Paz (seat of government); Sucre (legal capital
and seat of judiciary)

Administrative divisions: 9 departments (departamentos, singular -
departamento); Chuquisaca, Cochabamba, Beni, La Paz, Oruro, Pando,
Potosi, Santa Cruz, Tarija

Independence: 6 August 1825 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 6 August (1825)

Constitution: 2 February 1967; revised in August 1994

Legal system: based on Spanish law and Napoleonic Code; has not
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age, universal and compulsory (married); 21
years of age, universal and compulsory (single)

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Gonzalo SANCHEZ DE LOZADA Bustamente (since
6 August 1993); Vice President Victor Hugo CARDENAS Conde (since 6
August 1993); note - the president is both the chief of state and head
of government
head of government: President Gonzalo SANCHEZ DE LOZADA Bustamente
(since 6 August 1993); Vice President Victor Hugo CARDENAS Conde
(since 6 August 1993); note - the president is both the chief of state
and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president from a panel of candidates
proposed by the Senate
elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 6 June 1993 (next
to be held June 1997); Constitutional reforms extend presidential and
vice presidential terms to 5 years beginning in 1997
election results: Gonzalo SANCHEZ DE LOZADA elected president; percent
of vote - Gonzalo SANCHEZ DE LOZADA (MNR) 34%, Hugo BANZER Suarez
(ADN/MIR alliance) 20%, Carlos PALENQUE Aviles (CONDEPA) 14%, Max
FERNANDEZ Rojas (UCS) 13%, Antonio ARANIBAR Quiroga (MBL) 5%; no
candidate received a majority of the popular vote; Gonzalo SANCHEZ DE
LOZADA won a congressional runoff election on 4 August 1993 after
forming a coalition with Max FERNANDEZ and Antonio ARANIBAR; FERNANDEZ
died in a plane crash 26 November 1995

Legislative branch: bicameral National Congress or Congreso Nacional
consists of Chamber of Senators or Camara de Senadores (27 seats;
members are directly elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
and Chamber of Deputies or Camara de Diputados (130 seats; members are
directly elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: Chamber of Senators and Chamber of Deputies - last held 6
June 1993 (next to be held June 1997); Constitutional reforms extend
congressional terms to 5 years beginning in 1997
election results: Chamber of Senators - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - MNR 17, ADN 4, MIR 4, CONDEPA 1, UCS 1; Chamber of
Deputies - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - MNR 52, UCS
20, ADN 17, MIR 17, CONDEPA 13, MBL 7, ARBOL 1, ASD 1, EJE 1, PDC 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), judges appointed for a
10-year term by National Congress

Political parties and leaders:
Left Parties: Free Bolivia Movement or MBL [Antonio ARANIBAR];
Patriotic Axis of Convergence or EJE-P [Ramiro BARRANECHEA]; April 9
Revolutionary Vanguard or VR-9 [Carlos SERRATE]; Alternative of
Democratic Socialism or ASD [Jerjes JUSTINIANO]; Revolutionary Front
of the Left or FRI [Oscar ZAMORA]; Bolivian Communist Party or PCB
[Marcos DOMIC]; United Left or IU [Marcos DOMIC]; Assembly for the
Sovereignty of the People or ASP [Evo MORALES]; Front of National
Salvation or FSN [Manual MORALES Davila]; Socialist Party One or PS-1;
Bolivian Socialist Falange or FSB; Socialist Unzaguista Movement or
MAS
Center-Left Parties: Movement of the Revolutionary or MIR [Jaime PAZ
ZAMORA]; Christian Democrat or PDC [Benjamin MIGUEL]; New Youth Force
[Alfonso SAAVEDRA Bruno]
Center Party: Nationalist Revolutionary Movement or MNR [Gonzalo
SANCHEZ DE LOZADA]
Center-Right Parties : Nationalist Democratic Action or ADN [Hugo
BANZER]; New Republican Force or NFR [Manfred REYES VILLA]
Populist Parties: Civic Solidarity Union or UCS [Johnny FERNANDEZ];
Conscience of the Fatherland or CONDEPA [Remedios LOZA Alvarado];
Solidarity and Democracy or SYD; Unity and Progress Movement or MUP
[Ivo KULJIS]; Popular Patriotic Movement or MPP [Julio MANTILLA]
Evangelical Party : Bolivian Renovating Alliance or ARBOL [Marcelo
FERNANDEZ, Hugo VILLEGAS]
Indigenous Parties: Tupac Katari Revolutionary Liberation Movement or
MRTK-L [Victor Hugo CARDENAS Conde]; Nationalist Katarista Movement or
MKN [Fernando UNTOJA]; Front of Katarista Unity or FULKA [Genaro
FLORES]; Katarismo National Unity or KND [Filepe KITTELSON]

International organization participation: AG, ECLAC, FAO, G-11, G-77,
IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO (subscriber), ITU, LAES, LAIA, NAM,
OAS, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Fernando Alvaro COSSIO
chancery: 3014 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 483-4410 through 4412
FAX : [1] (202) 328-3712
consulate(s) general: Los Angeles, Miami, New York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Curtis Warren KAMMAN
embassy: Avenida Arce 2780, San Jorge, La Paz
mailing address: P. O. Box 425, La Paz; APO AA 34032
telephone : [591] (2) 430251
FAX: [591] (2) 433900

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), yellow,
and green with the coat of arms centered on the yellow band; similar
to the flag of Ghana, which has a large black five-pointed star
centered in the yellow band

Economy

Economy - overview: With its long history of semifeudal social
controls, dependence on volatile prices for its mineral exports, and
bouts of hyperinflation, Bolivia has remained one of the poorest and
least developed Latin American countries. However, Bolivia has
experienced generally improving economic conditions since the PAZ
Estenssoro administration (1985-89) introduced market-oriented
policies which reduced inflation from 11,700% in 1985 to about 20% in
1988. PAZ Estenssoro was followed as president by Jaime PAZ Zamora
(1989-93) who continued the free-market policies of his predecessor,
despite opposition from his own party and from Bolivia's once powerful
labor movement. By maintaining fiscal discipline, PAZ Zamora helped
reduce inflation to 9.3% in 1993, while GDP grew by an annual average
of 3.25% during his tenure. Inaugurated in August 1993, President
SANCHEZ DE LOZADA has vowed to advance the market-oriented economic
reforms he helped launch as PAZ Estenssoro's planning minister. His
successes include the signing of a free trade agreement with Mexico
and the Southern Cone Common Market (Mercosur) as well as the
privatization of the state airline, phone company, railroad, electric
power company, and oil company. Furthermore, SANCHEZ DE LOZADA
sponsored legislation creating private social security accounts for
all adult Bolivians and capitalized these new accounts with the
state's remaining 50% share in the privatized companies.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $21.5 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.9% (1996)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 17%
industry: 31%
services : 52% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 8% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 2.3 million
by occupation: agriculture NA%, services and utilities NA%,
manufacturing, mining and construction NA%

Unemployment rate: 18.8% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $3.75 billion
expenditures : $3.75 billion, including capital expenditures of $556.2
million (1995 est.)

Industries: mining, smelting, petroleum, food and beverages, tobacco,
handicrafts, clothing

Industrial production growth rate: 4% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 804,300 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 3.02 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 334 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, coca, cotton, corn, sugarcane, rice,
potatoes; timber

Exports:
total value: $1.1 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: metals 39%, natural gas 9%, soybeans 11%, jewelry 11%,
wood 8%
partners: US 26%, Argentina 17%, UK 15%, Peru 14% (1995)

Imports:
total value : $1.4 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: capital goods 48%, chemicals 11%, petroleum 5%, food 5%
(1993 est.)
partners: US 18%, Brazil 15%, Japan 13%, Argentina 8% (1995)

Debt - external: $4.3 billion (November 1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $362 million (1993)

Currency: 1 boliviano ($B) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: bolivianos ($B) per US$1 - 5.1720 (November 1996),
4.8003 (1995), 4.6205 (1994), 4.2651 (1993), 3.9005 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Bolivia:Communications

Telephones: 144,300 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: new subscribers face bureaucratic difficulties; most
telephones are concentrated in La Paz and other cities
domestic : microwave radio relay system being expanded
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 129, FM 0, shortwave 68

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 43

Televisions: 500,000 (1993 est.)

@Bolivia:Transportation

Railways:
total : 3,691 km (single track)
narrow gauge: 3,652 km 1.000-m gauge; 39 km 0.760-m gauge (13 km
electrified) (1995)

Highways:
total: 55,487 km
paved: 2,663 km (including 27 km of expressways)
unpaved : 52,824 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 10,000 km of commercially navigable waterways

Pipelines: crude oil 1,800 km; petroleum products 580 km; natural gas
1,495 km

Ports and harbors: none; however, Bolivia has free port privileges in
the maritime ports of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Paraguay

Merchant marine:
total : 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,214 GRT/6,390 DWT
(1996 est.)

Airports: 941 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 693
over 3,047 m : 4
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
under 914 m: 683 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 248
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 68
914 to 1,523 m: 178 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army (Ejercito Boliviano), Navy (Fuerza Naval
Boliviana, includes Marines), Air Force (Fuerza Aerea Boliviana),
National Police Force (Policia Nacional de Bolivia)

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 1,811,952 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,178,259 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 80,606 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $145 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.9% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: has wanted a sovereign corridor to the South
Pacific Ocean since the Atacama area was lost to Chile in 1884;
dispute with Chile over Rio Lauca water rights

Illicit drugs: world's third-largest cultivator of coca (after Peru
and Colombia) with an estimated 48,100 hectares under cultivation in
1996, a one percent decrease in overall cultivation of coca over 1995
levels; Bolivia, however, is the second-largest producer of coca leaf;
even so, voluntary and forced eradication programs resulted in leaf
production dropping from 85,000 metric tons in 1995 to 75,100 tons in
1996; government considers all but 12,000 hectares illicit;
intermediate coca products and cocaine exported to or through Colombia
and Brazil to the US and other international drug markets; alternative
crop program aims to reduce illicit coca cultivation
______________________________________________________________________

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

Introduction

Current issues: On 21 November 1995, in Dayton, Ohio, the former
Yugoslavia's three warring parties signed a peace agreement that
brought to a halt over three years of interethnic civil strife in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (the final agreement was signed in Paris on 14
December 1995). The Dayton Agreement, signed by Bosnian President
IZETBEGOVIC, Croatian President TUDJMAN, and Serbian President
MILOSEVIC, divides Bosnia and Herzegovina roughly equally between the
Muslim/Croat Federation and the Bosnian Serbs while maintaining
Bosnia's currently recognized borders. In 1995-96, a NATO-led
international peacekeeping force (IFOR) of 60,000 troops served in
Bosnia to implement and monitor the military aspects of the agreement.
IFOR was succeeded by a smaller, NATO-led Stabilization Force (SFOR)
whose mission is to deter renewed hostilities. SFOR will remain in
place until June 1998. A High Representative appointed by the UN
Security Council is responsible for civilian implementation of the
accord, including monitoring implementation, facilitating any
difficulties arising in connection with civilian implementation, and
coordinating activities of the civilian organizations and agencies in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Bosnian conflict began in the spring of
1992 when the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina held a referendum
on independence and the Bosnian Serbs - supported by neighboring
Serbia - responded with armed resistance aimed at partitioning the
republic along ethnic lines and joining Serb-held areas to form a
"greater Serbia." In March 1994, Bosnia's Muslims and Croats reduced
the number of warring factions from three to two by signing an
agreement in Washington creating their joint Muslim/Croat Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Federation, formed by the Muslims and
Croats in March 1994, is one of two entities (the other being the
Bosnian Serb-led Republika Srpska) that comprise Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

@Bosnia and Herzegovina:Geography

Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Adriatic Sea and Croatia

Geographic coordinates: 44 00 N, 18 00 E

Map references: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Europe

Area:
total: 51,233 sq km
land: 51,233 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
total: 1,459 km
border countries: Croatia 932 km, Serbia and Montenegro 527 km (312 km
with Serbia, 215 km with Montenegro)

Coastline: 20 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: hot summers and cold winters; areas of high elevation have
short, cool summers and long, severe winters; mild, rainy winters
along coast

Terrain: mountains and valleys

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Adriatic Sea 0 m
highest point: Maglic 2,386 m

Natural resources: coal, iron, bauxite, manganese, forests, copper,
chromium, lead, zinc

Land use:
arable land: 14%
permanent crops : 5%
permanent pastures: 20%
forests and woodland: 39%
other: 22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent and destructive earthquakes

Environment - current issues: air pollution from metallurgical plants;
sites for disposing of urban waste are limited; widespread casualties,
water shortages, and destruction of infrastructure because of the
1992-95 civil strife

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: within Bosnia and Herzegovina's recognized borders,
the country is divided into a joint Muslim-Croat Federation (about 51%
of the territory) and a Serb Republic, The Republika Srpska [RS]
(about 49% of the territory); the region called Herzegovina is
contiguous to Croatia and traditionally has been settled by an ethnic
Croat majority

@Bosnia and Herzegovina:People

Population: 3,222,584 (July 1997 est.)
note: all data dealing with population is subject to considerable
error because of the dislocations caused by military action and ethnic
cleansing

Age structure:
0-14 years: 18% (male 301,637; female 284,694)
15-64 years: 70% (male 1,123,477; female 1,140,604)
65 years and over: 12% (male 145,711; female 226,461) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 5.09% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 8.29 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 13.88 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 56.51 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.07 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.64 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 37 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 59.42 years
male : 54.58 years
female: 64.59 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.09 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Bosnian(s), Herzegovinian(s)
adjective: Bosnian, Herzegovinian

Ethnic groups: Serb 40%, Muslim 38%, Croat 22% (est.)

Religions: Muslim 40%, Orthodox 31%, Catholic 15%, Protestant 4%,
other 10%

Languages: Serbo-Croatian (often called Bosnian) 99%

Literacy: NA

@Bosnia and Herzegovina:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Bosnia and Herzegovina
local long form : none
local short form: Bosna i Hercegovina

Data code: BK

Government type: emerging democracy

National capital: Sarajevo

Administrative divisions: there are no first-order administrative
divisions approved by the US Government, but it has been reported that
the Muslim/Croat Federation is comprised of 10 cantons called by
either number or name - Goradzde (5), Livno (10), Middle Bosnia (6),
Neretva (7), Posavina (2), Sarajevo (9), Tuzla Podrinje (3), Una Sana
(1), West Herzegovina (8), Zenica Doboj (4)

Independence: NA April 1992 (from Yugoslavia)

National holiday: Republika Srpska - "Republic Day", 9 January;
Independence Day, 1 March; Bosnia - "Republic Day", 25 November

Constitution: the Dayton Agreement, signed 14 December 1995, included
a new constitution now in force

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 16 years of age, if employed; 18 years of age, universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : Chairman of the Presidency Alija IZETBEGOVIC (since
14 September 1996); other members of the three-member rotating
presidency: Kresimir ZUBAK (since 14 September 1996 - Croat) and
Momcilo KRAJISNIK (since 14 September 1996 - Serb)
head of government: Cochairman of the Council of Ministers Haris
SILAJDZIC (since NA January 1997); Cochairman of the Council of
Ministers Boro BOSIC (since NA January 1997) NA
cabinet: Council of Ministers nominated by the council chairmen
note: president of the Muslim-Croat Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina: Vladimir SOLJIC (since March 1997); president of the
Republika Srpska: Biljana PLAVSIC (since September 1996)
elections: the three presidency members (one each Muslim, Croat, Serb)
are elected by direct election (first election for a two-year term,
thereafter for a four-year term); the president with the most votes
becomes the chairman; election last held 14 September 1996 (next to be
held September 1998); the cochairmen are nominated by the presidency
election results: Alija IZETBEGOVIC elected chairman of the collective
presidency with the highest number of votes; percent of vote - Alija
IZETBEGOVIC received 80% of the Muslim vote to Haris SILAJDZIC's 14%;
Kresimir ZUBAK received 88% of the Croat vote to Ivo KOMSIC's 11%;
Momcilo KRAJISNIK received 68% of the Serb vote to Mladen IVANIC's 30%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliamentary Assembly or Skupstina
consists of the National House of Representatives or Vijece Opcina (42
seats - 14 Serb, 14 Croat, and 14 Muslim; members serve NA-year terms)
and the House of Peoples or Vijece Gradanstvo (15 seats - 5 Muslim, 5
Croat, 5 Serb; members serve NA-year terms)
elections: National House of Representatives - elections last held 14
September 1996 (next to be held NA); note - the House of Peoples are
elected by the Muslim-Croat Federation's 140-seat House of
Representatives (two-thirds) and the Bosnian Serb Republic's 83-seat
National Assembly (one-third)
election results: National House of Representatives: two-thirds chosen
from the Muslim-Croat Federation: percent of vote by party - NA; seats
by party - SDA 16, HDZ-BiH 7, Joint List of Social Democrats 3, Party
for Bosnia and Herzegovina 2; one-third chosen from the Bosnian Serb
Republic: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - SDS 9, SDA
3, Democratic Patriotic Front/Union for Peace and Progress 2
note: the Muslim-Croat Federation has a House of Representatives with
140 seats: seats by party - SDA 80, HDZ-BiH 33, Party for Bosnia and
Herzegovina 11, Joint List of Social Democrats 10, other 6; the
Republika Srpska has a National Assembly with 83 seats: seats by party
- SDS 50, Democratic Patriotic Front/Union for Peace and Progress 10,
Serb Radical Party 7, SDA 6, other 10

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Constitutional Court

Political parties and leaders: Party of Democratic Action or SDA
[Alija IZETBEGOVIC]; Croatian Democratic Union of BiH or HDZ-BiH [Bozo
RAJIC]; Serb Democratic Party or SDS [Alexander BUHA, acting
president]; Party for Bosnia [Haris SILAJDZIC]; Joint List of Social
Democrats; Democratic Patriotic Front/Union for Peace and Progress;
Civic Democratic Party or GDS [Ibrahim SPAHIC]; Croatian Peasants'
Party of BiH or HSS [Stanko STISKOVIC]; Independent Serbian Democratic
Party or NSDS [Milorad DODIK]; Liberal Bosniak Organization or LBO
[Muhamed FILIPOVIC]; Liberal Party or LS [Rasim KADIC, president];
Muslim-Bosniac Organization or MBO [Adil ZULFIKARPASIC]; Republican
Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina [Stjepan KLJUIC]; Serb Civic Council
or SGV [Mirko PEJANOVIC]; Serb Consultative Council [Ljubomir
BERBEROVIC]; Social Democratic Party or SDP (formerly the Democratic
Party of Socialists or DSS) [Zlatko LAGUMOZIJA, president]; Socialist
Party of Republika Srpska [Zivko RADISIC]; Union of Social Democrats
or SSDB [Selim BESLAGIC]; United Left of the Bosnian Serb Republic or
ULRS [Mile IVOSEVIC]; Yugoslav United Left or JUL [CAREVIC]; Social
Liberal Party [Miodrag ZIVANOVIC]; Serb Radical Party [Miodrag RAKIC];
Serb Patriotic Party [Slavko ZUPLJANIN]; Serb Homeland Party; Party of
Serbian Unity; Republik Srpska Independent Social Democrats [Branko
DOKIC, president]; Serb Party of Posavina and Krajina [Predrag
LAZAREVIC]; National Democratic Union [Fikret ABDIC]
note : 82 parties are registered for the September 1997 municipal
elections

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: CE (guest), CEI, ECE, FAO,
IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol,
IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, NAM (guest), OIC (observer), OSCE, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Sven ALKALAJ
chancery: Suite 760, 1707 L Street NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 833-3612, 3613, 3615
FAX: [1] (202) 833-2061
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Robert
BEECROFT
embassy: 43 Ul. Djure Djakovica, Sarajevo
mailing address: American Embassy Sarajevo, US Department of State,
Washington, DC 20521-7130
telephone: [387] (71) 445-700
FAX: [387] (71) 659-722

Flag description: white with a large blue shield; the shield contains
white fleurs-de-lis with a white diagonal band running from the upper
hoist corner to the lower outer side

Government - note: Until declaring independence in spring 1992, Bosnia
and Herzegovina existed as a republic in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Bosnia was partitioned by fighting during 1992-95 and
governed by competing ethnic factions. Bosnia's current governing
structures were created by the Dayton Accords, the 1995 peace
agreement which was officially signed in Paris on 14 December 1995 by
Bosnian President IZETBEGOVIC, Croatian President TUDJMAN, and Serbian
President MILOSEVIC. This agreement retained Bosnia's exterior border
and created a joint multi-ethnic and democratic government. This
national government - based on proportional representation similar to
that which existed in the former socialist regime - is charged with
conducting foreign, economic, and fiscal policy. The Dayton Accords
also recognized a second tier of government, comprised of two entities
- a joint Muslim-Croat Federation and the Bosnian Serb Republika
Srpska (RS) - each presiding over roughly one-half the territory.
These Federation and RS governments are charged with overseeing
internal functions. As mandated by the Dayton Accords, the Bosnians on
14 September 1996 participated in the first post-war elections of
national, entity, and cantonal leaders. The Bosnians have been slow to
form and install new joint institutions. A new Federation cabinet was
sworn in 18 December 1996 and the new Bosnian central government
cabinet was confirmed on 3 January 1997.

Economy

Economy - overview: Bosnia and Herzegovina ranked next to The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia as the poorest republic in the old
Yugoslav federation. Although agriculture has been almost all in
private hands, farms have been small and inefficient, and the republic
traditionally has been a net importer of food. Industry has been
greatly overstaffed, one reflection of the rigidities of communist
central planning and management. TITO had pushed the development of
military industries in the republic with the result that Bosnia hosted
a large share of Yugoslavia's defense plants. The bitter interethnic
warfare in Bosnia caused production to plummet by perhaps 90% since
1990, unemployment to soar, and human misery to multiply. No reliable
economic statistics for 1992-96 are available, although output almost
certainly is well below $1,000 per head. In the Federation,
unemployment remains in the 40%-50% range and inflation is low. By
contrast, growth in the Republika Srpska in 1996 was flat and
inflation surpassed 30%. The country receives substantial amounts of
humanitarian aid from the international community. Wide regional
differences in war damage and access to the outside world have
resulted in substantial variations in living conditions among local
areas.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.9 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $600 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 1,026,254
by occupation: NA%

Unemployment rate: officially about 70% but probably much lower,
perhaps 40%-50% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: steel, coal, iron ore, lead, zinc, manganese, bauxite,
vehicle assembly, textiles, tobacco products, wooden furniture, tank
and aircraft assembly, domestic appliances, oil refining; much of
capacity damaged or shut down (1995)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 3.991 million kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 1.87 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 475 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, corn, fruits, vegetables; livestock

Exports:
total value: $152 million (1995 est.)
commodities: NA
partners: NA

Imports:
total value : $1.1 billion (1995 est.)
commodities: NA
partners: NA

Debt - external: $3.5 billion (yearend 1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $600 million (1996 est.)

Currency: 1 dinar = 100 para; Croatian kuna used in Croat-held area;
old and new Serbian dinars used in Serb-held area; the deutsche mark
(DM) has supplanted local currencies throughout Bosnia

Exchange rates: NA

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Bosnia and Herzegovina:Communications

Telephones: 727,000

Telephone system: telephone and telegraph network is in need of
modernization and expansion; many urban areas are below average when
compared with services in other former Yugoslav republics
domestic: NA
international : no satellite earth stations

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 840,000

Television broadcast stations: 6

Televisions: 1,012,094

@Bosnia and Herzegovina:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,021 km (electrified 795 km; operating as diesel or steam
until grids are repaired)
standard gauge: 1,021 km 1.435-m gauge (1995); note - some segments
need repair and/or reconstruction

Highways:
total : 21,168 km
paved: 11,436 km
unpaved: 9,732 km (1991 est.)
note: roads need maintenance and repair

Waterways: NA km; Sava blocked by downed bridges

Pipelines: crude oil 174 km; natural gas 90 km (1992); note -
pipelines now disrupted

Ports and harbors: Bosanski Brod (access to Ploce, Croatia)

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 24 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 14
2,438 to 3,047 m : 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 7 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 10
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 9 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 865,763 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 696,202 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 23,771 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: disputes with Serbia over Serbian populated
areas

Illicit drugs: transit point for minor regional marijuana trafficking
routes
______________________________________________________________________

BOTSWANA

@Botswana:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, north of South Africa

Geographic coordinates: 22 00 S, 24 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 600,370 sq km
land: 585,370 sq km
water: 15,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 4,013 km
border countries : Namibia 1,360 km, South Africa 1,840 km, Zimbabwe
813 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: semiarid; warm winters and hot summers

Terrain: predominately flat to gently rolling tableland; Kalahari
Desert in southwest

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : junction of the Limpopo and Shashe Rivers 513 m
highest point: Tsodilo Hill 1,489 m

Natural resources: diamonds, copper, nickel, salt, soda ash, potash,
coal, iron ore, silver

Land use:
arable land : 1%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 46%
forests and woodland: 47%
other: 6% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts; seasonal August winds blow from
the west, carrying sand and dust across the country, which can obscure
visibility

Environment - current issues: overgrazing; desertification; limited
fresh water resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked; population concentrated in eastern part
of the country

@Botswana:People

Population: 1,500,765 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 42% (male 319,920; female 312,104)
15-64 years: 54% (male 384,533; female 428,157)
65 years and over : 4% (male 21,949; female 34,102) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.48% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 32.65 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 17.9 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.9 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.64 male(s)/female
total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 54.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 44.52 years
male: 43.52 years
female: 45.55 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.14 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Motswana (singular), Batswana (plural)
adjective: Motswana (singular), Batswana (plural)

Ethnic groups: Batswana 95%, Kalanga, Basarwa, and Kgalagadi 4%, white
1%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 50%, Christian 50%

Languages: English (official), Setswana

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 69.8%
male: 80.5%
female: 59.9% (1995 est.)

@Botswana:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Botswana
conventional short form: Botswana
former : Bechuanaland

Data code: BC

Government type: parliamentary republic

National capital: Gaborone

Administrative divisions: 10 districts and four town councils*;
Central, Chobe, Francistown*, Gaborone*, Ghanzi, Kgalagadi, Kgatleng,
Kweneng, Lobatse*, Ngamiland, North-East, Selebi-Phikwe*, South-East,
Southern

Independence: 30 September 1966 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 30 September (1966)

Constitution: March 1965, effective 30 September 1966

Legal system: based on Roman-Dutch law and local customary law;
judicial review limited to matters of interpretation; has not accepted
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Sir Ketumile MASIRE (since 13 July 1980);
Vice President Festus MOGAE (since 9 March 1992); note - the president
is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Sir Ketumile MASIRE (since 13 July
1980); Vice President Festus MOGAE (since 9 March 1992); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
elections : president elected by the National Assembly for a five-year
term; election last held 15 October 1994 (next to be held NA October
1999); vice president appointed by the president
election results: Sir Ketumile MASIRE elected president; percent of
National Assembly vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the House of
Chiefs (a largely advisory 15-member body consisting of the chiefs of
the eight principal tribes, four elected subchiefs, and three members
selected by the other 12) and the National Assembly (44 seats, 40
members are directly elected by popular vote and 4 appointed by the
majority party; members serve five-year terms)
elections: National Assembly - elections last held 15 October 1994
(next to be held October 1999)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - BDP
27, BNF 13

Judicial branch: High Court; Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: Botswana Democratic Party or BDP [Sir
Ketumile MASIRE]; Botswana Freedom Party or BFP [leader NA]; Botswana
National Front or BNF [Kenneth KOMA]; Botswana People's Party or BPP
[Knight MARIPE]; Independence Freedom Party or IFP [Motsamai MPHO]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Archibald Mooketsa MOGWE
chancery: Suite 7M, 3400 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 244-4990, 4991
FAX: [1] (202) 244-4164

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Robert C. KRUEGER (14 June 1996)
embassy: address NA, Gaborone
mailing address: P. O. Box 90, Gaborone
telephone: [267] 353982
FAX: [267] 356947

Flag description: light blue with a horizontal white-edged black
stripe in the center

Economy

Economy - overview: Agriculture still provides a livelihood for more
than 80% of the population but supplies only about 50% of food needs
and accounts for only 4% of GDP. Subsistence farming and cattle
raising predominate. The sector is plagued by erratic rainfall and
poor soils. Substantial mineral deposits were found in the 1970s and
the mining sector grew from 25% of GDP in 1980 to 33% in 1995. The
unemployment rate remains a problem at 21%. On the plus side is the
substantial positive trade balance.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $4.6 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,100 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 4%
industry: 43%
services : 53% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 9.8% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 428,000 (1992)
by occupation: 220,000 formal sector employees, including 14,300 who
are employed in various mines in South Africa; most others are engaged
in cattle raising and subsistence agriculture (1992 est.)

Unemployment rate: 21% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $1.8 billion
expenditures: $1.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $613
million (FY95/96)

Industries: diamonds, copper, nickel, coal, salt, soda ash, potash;
livestock processing

Industrial production growth rate: 4.6% (FY92/93)

Electricity - capacity: 197,000 kW (1993)

Electricity - production: 950 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 747 kWh (1993 est.)

Agriculture - products: sorghum, maize, millet, pulses, groundnuts
(peanuts), beans, cowpeas, sunflower seed; livestock

Exports:
total value: $2.1 billion (f.o.b. 1995 est.)
commodities: diamonds 71%, copper and nickel 5%, meat 3%
partners: Europe 81%, Southern African Customs Union (SACU) 14%,
Zimbabwe 3%

Imports:
total value: $1.5 billion (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, vehicles and transport equipment, textiles,
petroleum products
partners: Southern African Customs Union (SACU) 78%, Europe 8%,
Zimbabwe 6%

Debt - external: $691 million (1994)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $189 million (1993)

Currency: 1 pula (P) = 100 thebe

Exchange rates: pula (P) per US$1 - 3.6417 (January 1997), 3.3014
(1996), 2.7716 (1995), 2.6831 (1994), 2.4190 (1993), 2.1327 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Botswana:Communications

Telephones: 19,109 (1985 est.)

Telephone system: sparse system
domestic: small system of open-wire lines, microwave radio relay
links, and a few radiotelephone communication stations
international: microwave radio relay links to Zambia, Zimbabwe and
South Africa; satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 13, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1988 est.)

Televisions: 13,800 (1993 est.)

@Botswana:Transportation

Railways:
total: 971 km
narrow gauge: 971 km 1.067-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 11,800 km
paved : 1,676 km
unpaved: 10,124 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 80 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 34
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 9
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 22 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 46
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m : 43 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Botswana Defense Force (includes Army and Air
Wing), Botswana National Police

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 343,929 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 180,692 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 17,632 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $199 million (FY93/94)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 5.2% (FY93/94)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: quadripoint with Namibia, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and Zimbabwe is in disagreement; dispute with
Namibia over uninhabited Kasikili (Sidudu) Island in Linyanti (Chobe)
River remained unresolved in January 1996 and the parties have agreed
to refer the matter to the ICJ
______________________________________________________________________

BOUVET ISLAND

(territory of Norway)

@Bouvet Island:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, island in the South Atlantic Ocean,
south-southwest of the Cape of Good Hope (South Africa)

Geographic coordinates: 54 26 S, 3 24 E

Map references: Antarctic Region

Area:
total: 58 sq km
land : 58 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 29.6 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 4 nm

Climate: antarctic

Terrain: volcanic; maximum elevation about 800 meters; coast is mostly
inaccessible

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 780 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100% (all ice)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: covered by glacial ice

@Bouvet Island:People

Population: uninhabited

@Bouvet Island:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Bouvet Island

Data code: BV

Dependency status: territory of Norway

Flag description: the flag of Norway is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity; declared a nature reserve

@Bouvet Island:Communications

Communications - note: automatic meteorological station

@Bouvet Island:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Norway

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

BRAZIL

@Brazil:Geography

Location: Eastern South America, bordering the Atlantic Ocean

Geographic coordinates: 10 00 S, 55 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total: 8,511,965 sq km
land : 8,456,510 sq km
water: 55,455 sq km
note: includes Arquipelago de Fernando de Noronha, Atol das Rocas,
Ilha da Trindade, Ilhas Martin Vaz, and Penedos de Sao Pedro e Sao
Paulo

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than the US

Land boundaries:
total: 14,691 km
border countries: Argentina 1,224 km, Bolivia 3,400 km, Colombia 1,643
km, French Guiana 673 km, Guyana 1,119 km, Paraguay 1,290 km, Peru
1,560 km, Suriname 597 km, Uruguay 985 km, Venezuela 2,200 km

Coastline: 7,491 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf : 200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly tropical, but temperate in south

Terrain: mostly flat to rolling lowlands in north; some plains, hills,
mountains, and narrow coastal belt

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Pico da Neblina 3,014 m

Natural resources: bauxite, gold, iron ore, manganese, nickel,
phosphates, platinum, tin, uranium, petroleum, hydropower, timber

Land use:
arable land : 5%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 22%
forests and woodland: 58%
other : 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 28,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring droughts in northeast; floods and
occasional frost in south

Environment - current issues: deforestation in Amazon Basin destroys
the habitat and endangers the existence of a multitude of plant and
animal species indigenous to the area; air and water pollution in Rio
de Janeiro, Sao Paulo, and several other large cities; land
degradation and water pollution caused by improper mining activities

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
Timber 83, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Tropical Timber 94

Geography - note: largest country in South America; shares common
boundaries with every South American country except Chile and Ecuador

@Brazil:People

Population: 164,511,366 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 30% (male 25,018,597; female 24,164,894)
15-64 years: 65% (male 53,217,683; female 54,215,461)
65 years and over : 5% (male 3,181,539; female 4,713,192) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.1% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 20.43 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.42 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.68 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 53.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 61.42 years
male: 56.78 years
female: 66.3 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.29 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Brazilian(s)
adjective: Brazilian

Ethnic groups: white (includes Portuguese, German, Italian, Spanish,
Polish) 55%, mixed white and black 38%, black 6%, other (includes
Japanese, Arab, Amerindian) 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic (nominal) 70%

Languages: Portuguese (official), Spanish, English, French

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 83.3%
male: 83.3%
female : 83.2% (1995 est.)

@Brazil:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Federative Republic of Brazil
conventional short form: Brazil
local long form : Republica Federativa do Brasil
local short form: Brasil

Data code: BR

Government type: federal republic

National capital: Brasilia

Administrative divisions: 26 states (estados, singular - estado) and 1
federal district* (distrito federal); Acre, Alagoas, Amapa, Amazonas,
Bahia, Ceara, Distrito Federal*, Espirito Santo, Goias, Maranhao, Mato
Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Para, Paraiba, Parana,
Pernambuco, Piaui, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do Norte, Rio Grande do
Sul, Rondonia, Roraima, Santa Catarina, Sao Paulo, Sergipe, Tocantins

Independence: 7 September 1822 (from Portugal)

National holiday: Independence Day, 7 September (1822)

Constitution: 5 October 1988

Legal system: based on Roman codes; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: voluntary between 16 and 18 years of age and over 70;
compulsory over 18 and under 70 years of age

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Fernando Henrique CARDOSO (since 1 January
1995); Vice President Marco MACIEL (since 1 January 1995); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Fernando Henrique CARDOSO (since 1
January 1995); Vice President Marco MACIEL (since 1 January 1995);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 3 October 1994
(next to be held NA October 1998)
election results: Fernando Henrique CARDOSO elected president; percent
of vote - Fernando Henrique CARDOSO 53%, Luis Inacio LULA da Silva
26%, Eneas CARNEIRO 7%, Orestes QUERCIA 4%, Leonel BRIZOLA 3%,
Espiridiao AMIN 3%; note - second direct presidential election since
1960

Legislative branch: bicameral National Congress or Congresso Nacional
consists of the Federal Senate or Senado Federal (81 seats; three
members from each state or federal district elected according to the
principle of majority to serve eight-year terms; one-third elected
after a four year period, two-thirds elected after the next four-year
period ) and the Chamber of Deputies or Camara dos Deputados (513
seats; members are elected by proportional representation to serve
four-year terms)
elections: Federal Senate - last held 3 October 1994 for two-thirds of
Senate (next to be held October 1998 for one-third of the Senate);
Chamber of Deputies - last held 3 October 1994 (next to be held
October 1998)
election results: Federal Senate - percent of vote by party - PMBD
28%, PFL 22%, PSDB 12%, PPR 7%, PDT 7%, PT 6%, PTB 6%, other 12%;
seats by party - NA; Chamber of Deputies - percent of vote by party -
PMDB 21%, PFL 18%, PDT 7%, PSDB 12%, PPR 10%, PTB 6%, PT 10%, other
16%; seats by party - NA
note: party totals since the fall of 1994 have changed considerably
due to extensive party-switching

Judicial branch: Supreme Federal Tribunal, judges are appointed for
life by the president and confirmed by the Senate

Political parties and leaders: Brazilian Democratic Movement Party or
PMDB [Paes DE ANDRADE, president]; Liberal Front Party or PFL [Jose
JORGE, president]; Workers' Party or PT [Jose DIRCEU, president];
Brazilian Workers' Party or PTB [Rodrigues PALMA, president];
Democratic Labor Party or PDT [Leonel BRIZOLA, president]; Brazilian
Progressive Party or PPB [Espiridiao AMIN, president]; Brazilian
Social Democracy Party or PSDB [Artur DA TAVOLA, president]; Popular
Socialist Party or PPS [Roberto FREIRE, president]; Communist Party of
Brazil or PCdoB [Joao AMAZONAS, chairman]; Liberal Party or PL [Alvaro
VALLE, president]; Progressive Reform Party or PPR [Esperido AMIN,
president]

Political pressure groups and leaders: left wing of the Catholic
Church and labor unions allied to leftist Workers' Party are critical
of government's social and economic policies

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), BIS
(pending member), CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-11, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IADB,
IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU,
LAES, LAIA, Mercosur, MTCR, NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN,
UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UNU, UPU,
WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Paulo Tarso FLECHA de LIMA
chancery: 3006 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 238-2700
FAX: [1] (202) 238-2827
consulate(s) general : Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
New York, San Juan (Puerto Rico), and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Melvyn LEVITSKY
embassy: Avenida das Nacoes, Lote 3, Brasilia, Distrito Federal
mailing address: Unit 3500, APO AA 34030
telephone: [55] (61) 321-7272
FAX : [55] (61) 225-9136
consulate(s) general: Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo
consulate(s): Recife

Flag description: green with a large yellow diamond in the center
bearing a blue celestial globe with 27 white five-pointed stars (one
for each state and the Federal District) arranged in the same pattern
as the night sky over Brazil; the globe has a white equatorial band
with the motto ORDEM E PROGRESSO (Order and Progress)

Economy

Economy - overview: Possessing large and well-developed agricultural,
mining, manufacturing, and service sectors, Brazil's economy outweighs
that of all other South American countries and is expanding its
presence in world markets. Prior to the institution of a stabilization
plan - the Plano Real (Real Plan) - in mid-1994, stratospheric
inflation rates had disrupted economic activity and discouraged
foreign investment. Since then, tight monetary policy has brought
inflation under control - consumer prices increased by only 10% in
1996 compared to more than 1,000% in 1994. At the same time, GDP
growth slowed from 5.7% in 1994 to 2.9% in 1996 due to tighter credit.
The steadily appreciating currency has also encouraged imports,
contributing to a growing trade deficit, and depressed export growth.
Brazil's more stable economy allowed it to weather the fallout in 1995
from the Mexican peso crisis relatively well, and record levels of
foreign investment have since flowed in, helping to swell official
foreign exchange reserves to $60 billion in 1996; stock markets
reflected this increased investor confidence, gaining 53% in dollar
terms. President CARDOSO remains committed to further reducing
inflation in 1997 and putting Brazil on track for expanded economic
growth, but he faces several key challenges. Fiscal reforms requiring
constitutional amendments are stalled in the Brazilian legislature; in
their absence, the government is continuing to run deficits and has
limited room to relax its interest and exchange rate policies much if
it wants to keep inflation under control. High interest rates have
made servicing domestic debt dramatically more burdensome for both
public and private sector entities, contributing to federal and state
budget problems and a surge in bankruptcies.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.022 trillion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.9% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,300 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 13%
industry: 38%
services: 49% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 10% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 57 million (1989 est.)
by occupation: services 42%, agriculture 31%, industry 27%

Unemployment rate: 5.2% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $86 billion
expenditures: $90 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995)

Industries: textiles, shoes, chemicals, cement, lumber, iron ore, tin,
steel, aircraft, motor vehicles and parts, other machinery and
equipment

Industrial production growth rate: 3.5% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 59.036 million kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 268.874 billion kWh (1995)
note: imports some electricity from Paraguay

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,572 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, soybeans, wheat, rice, corn,
sugarcane, cocoa, citrus; beef

Exports:
total value: $47.7 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: iron ore, soybean bran, orange juice, footwear, coffee,
motor vehicle parts
partners: EU 26%, Latin America 22%, US 23%, Argentina 11% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $53.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: crude oil, capital goods, chemical products, foodstuffs,
coal
partners : EU 26%, US 24%, Argentina 11%, Japan 5% (1995)

Debt - external: $176 billion (December 1996)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $107 million (1993)

Currency: 1 real (R$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: R$ per US$1 - 1.043 (January 1997), 1.005 (1996),
0.918 (1995), 0.639 (1994); CR$ per US$1 - 390.845 (January 1994),
88.449 (1993), 4.513 (1992)
note: on 1 August 1993 the cruzeiro real (CR$), equal to 1,000
cruzeiros, was introduced; another new currency, the real (R$) was
introduced on 1 July 1994, equal to 2,750 cruzeiro reais

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Brazil:Communications

Telephones: 14,426,673 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: good working system
domestic: extensive microwave radio relay system and a domestic
satellite system with 64 earth stations
international: 3 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth stations -
3 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean), 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean Region East)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1,223, FM 0, shortwave 151

Radios: 60 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 112
note: Brazil has the world's fourth largest television broadcasting
system

Televisions: 30 million (1993 est.)

@Brazil:Transportation

Railways:
total: 27,418 km (1,750 km electrified)
broad gauge: 5,730 km 1.600-m gauge
standard gauge : 194 km 1.440-m gauge
narrow gauge: 20,958 km 1.000-m gauge; 13 km 0.760-m gauge
dual gauge: 523 km 1.000-m and 1.600-m gauges

Highways:
total: 1.939 million km
paved: 178,388 km
unpaved: 1,760,612 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 50,000 km navigable

Pipelines: crude oil 2,000 km; petroleum products 3,804 km; natural
gas 1,095 km

Ports and harbors: Belem, Fortaleza, Ilheus, Imbituba, Manaus,
Paranagua, Porto Alegre, Recife, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande, Salvador,
Santos, Vitoria

Merchant marine:
total : 193 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,475,748 GRT/7,175,061
DWT
ships by type: bulk 42, cargo 26, chemical tanker 10, combination
ore/oil 11, container 13, liquefied gas tanker 11, multifunction
large-load carrier 1, oil tanker 62, passenger-cargo 5, refrigerated
cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 11
note: Brazil owns 16 additional ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
1,270,275 DWT that operate under Bahamian, Liberian, Panamanian, and
St. Vincent and the Grenadines registry (1996 est.)

Airports: 2,871 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1,658
over 3,047 m: 5
2,438 to 3,047 m : 19
1,524 to 2,437 m: 125
914 to 1,523 m: 304
under 914 m: 1,205 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 1,213
1,524 to 2,437 m: 67
914 to 1,523 m: 1,146 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Brazilian Army, Brazilian Navy (includes Marines),
Brazilian Air Force, Federal Police (paramilitary)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 45,876,084 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 30,843,947 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 1,756,732 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $6.736 billion (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.1% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: short section of the boundary with Paraguay,
just west of Salto das Sete Quedas (Guaira Falls) on the Rio Parana,
has not been precisely delimited; two short sections of boundary with
Uruguay are in dispute - Arroio Invernada (Arroyo de la Invernada)
area of the Rio Quarai (Rio Cuareim) and the islands at the confluence
of the Rio Quarai and the Uruguay River

Illicit drugs: limited illicit producer of cannabis, minor coca
cultivation in the Amazon region, mostly used for domestic
consumption; government has a large-scale eradication program to
control cannabis; important transshipment country for Bolivian and
Colombian cocaine headed for the US and Europe
______________________________________________________________________

BRITISH INDIAN OCEAN TERRITORY
Territory]

(dependent territory of the UK)

@British Indian Ocean Territory:Geography

Location: Southern Asia, archipelago in the Indian Ocean, about
one-half the way from Africa to Indonesia

Geographic coordinates: 6 00 S, 71 30 E

Map references: World

Area:
total: 60 sq km
land : 60 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes the entire Chagos Archipelago

Area - comparative: about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 698 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical marine; hot, humid, moderated by trade winds

Terrain: flat and low (up to four meters in elevation)

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location on Diego Garcia 15 m

Natural resources: coconuts, fish

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures : NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: archipelago of 2,300 islands; Diego Garcia, largest
and southernmost island, occupies strategic location in central Indian
Ocean; island is site of joint US-UK military facility

@British Indian Ocean Territory:People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants
note: there are UK-US military personnel and civilian contractors;
civilian inhabitants, known as the Ilois, evacuated to Mauritius
before construction of UK-US military facilities

@British Indian Ocean Territory:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: British Indian Ocean Territory
conventional short form : none
abbreviation: BIOT

Data code: IO

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK; administered by a
commissioner, resident in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in
London

National capital: none

Independence: none (dependent territory of the UK)

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952)
head of government: Commissioner David Ross MACLENNAN (since NA 1994);
Administrator Don CAIRNS (since NA); note - both reside in the UK
cabinet: NA
elections : none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; commissioner and
administrator appointed by the queen

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (dependent territory of
the UK)

Flag description: white with the flag of the UK in the upper
hoist-side quadrant and six blue wavy horizontal stripes bearing a
palm tree and yellow crown centered on the outer half of the flag

Economy

Economy - overview: All economic activity is concentrated on the
largest island of Diego Garcia, where joint UK-US defense facilities
are located. Construction projects and various services needed to
support the military installations are done by military and contract
employees from the UK, Mauritius, the Philippines, and the US. There
are no industrial or agricultural activities on the islands.

Electricity - capacity: NA kW
note : electricity supplied by the US military

Electricity - production: NA kWh
note: electricity supplied by the US military

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

@British Indian Ocean Territory:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system: facilities for military needs only
domestic: NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: NA

@British Indian Ocean Territory:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: NA km
paved: short stretch of paved road of NA km between port and airfield
on Diego Garcia
unpaved : NA km

Ports and harbors: Diego Garcia

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 1
over 3,047 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: the island of Diego Garcia is claimed by
Mauritius
______________________________________________________________________

BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS

(dependent territory of the UK)

@British Virgin Islands:Geography

Location: Caribbean, between the Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic
Ocean, east of Puerto Rico

Geographic coordinates: 18 30 N, 64 30 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 150 sq km
land: 150 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note : includes the island of Anegada

Area - comparative: about 0.9 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 80 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 3 nm

Climate: subtropical; humid; temperatures moderated by trade winds

Terrain: coral islands relatively flat; volcanic islands steep, hilly

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Mount Sage 521 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land: 20%
permanent crops: 7%
permanent pastures: 33%
forests and woodland: 7%
other : 33% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hurricanes and tropical storms (July to October)

Environment - current issues: limited natural fresh water resources
(except for a few seasonal streams and springs on Tortola, most of the
islands' water supply comes from wells and rainwater catchment)

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: strong ties to nearby US Virgin Islands and Puerto
Rico

@British Virgin Islands:People

Population: 13,368 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years : NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 1.32% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 20.13 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.03 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.9 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years : NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 18.99 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 72.83 years
male: 70.99 years
female: 74.8 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.25 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: British Virgin Islander(s)
adjective: British Virgin Islander

Ethnic groups: black 90%, white, Asian

Religions: Protestant 86% (Methodist 45%, Anglican 21%, Church of God
7%, Seventh-Day Adventist 5%, Baptist 4%, Jehovah's Witnesses 2%,
other 2%), Roman Catholic 6%, none 2%, other 6% (1981)

Languages: English (official)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 97.8% (1991 est.)
male: NA%
female: NA%

@British Virgin Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: British Virgin Islands
abbreviation: BVI

Data code: VI

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK

Government type: NA

National capital: Road Town

Administrative divisions: none (dependent territory of the UK)

Independence: none (dependent territory of the UK)

National holiday: Territory Day, 1 July

Constitution: 1 June 1977

Legal system: English law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor David MACKILLIGIN (since NA June 1995)
head of government : Chief Minister Ralph T. O'NEAL (since 15 May
1995; appointed after the death of former Chief Minister H. Lavity
STOUTT)
cabinet: Executive Council appointed by the governor from members of
the Legislative Council
elections : none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor
appointed by the queen; chief minister appointed by the governor from
among the members of the Legislative Council

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council (13 seats; members
are elected by direct popular vote, 1 member from each of 9 electoral
districts, 4 at large members; members serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 20 February 1995 (next to be held NA February
2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - VIP
6, CCM 2, UP 2, independents 3

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court, one judge of the
Supreme Court is a resident of the islands and presides over the High
Court

Political parties and leaders: United Party or UP [Conrad MADURO];
Virgin Islands Party or VIP [Ralph T. O'NEAL]; Concerned Citizens
Movement or CCM [E. Walwyln BREWLEY]; Independent People's Movement or
IPM [Omar HODGE and Allen O'NEAL]

International organization participation: Caricom (associate), CDB,
ECLAC (associate), Interpol (subbureau), IOC, OECS (associate), UNESCO
(associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (dependent territory of
the UK)

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
quadrant and the Virgin Islander coat of arms centered in the outer
half of the flag; the coat of arms depicts a woman flanked on either
side by a vertical column of six oil lamps above a scroll bearing the
Latin word VIGILATE (Be Watchful)

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy, one of the most prosperous in the
Caribbean, is highly dependent on tourism, which generates an
estimated 45% of the national income. In 1985, the government began
offering offshore registration to companies wishing to incorporate in
the islands, and incorporation fees now generate substantial revenues.
The adoption of a comprehensive insurance law in late 1994, which
provides a blanket of confidentiality with regulated statutory
gateways for investigation of criminal offenses, is expected to make
the British Virgin Islands even more attractive to international
business. Livestock raising is the most important agricultural
activity; poor soils limit the islands' ability to meet domestic food
requirements. Because of traditional close links with the US Virgin
Islands, the British Virgin Islands have used the dollar as their
currency since 1959.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $135 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $10,200 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 3%
industry: 14%
services: 83% (1989)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.5% (1990 est.)

Labor force:
total: 4,911 (1980)
by occupation: tourism NA%

Unemployment rate: 3% (1995)

Budget:
revenues: $77.1 million
expenditures : $76.4 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY93/94)

Industries: tourism, light industry, construction, rum, concrete
block, offshore financial center

Industrial production growth rate: 4% (1985)

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: fruits, vegetables; livestock, poultry; fish

Exports:
total value: $3.4 million (f.o.b., 1990)
commodities : rum, fresh fish, fruits, animals; gravel, sand
partners: Virgin Islands (US), Puerto Rico, US

Imports:
total value: $11.5 million (c.i.f., 1988)
commodities: building materials, automobiles, foodstuffs, machinery
partners: Virgin Islands (US), Puerto Rico, US

Debt - external: $4.5 million (1985)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@British Virgin Islands:Communications

Telephones: 6,291 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: worldwide telephone service
domestic: NA
international: submarine cable to Bermuda

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 3, shortwave 0 (1995)

Radios: 9,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 4,000 (1992 est.)

@British Virgin Islands:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 113 km (1995 est.)
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Road Town

Merchant marine: none (1995 est.)

Airports: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
914 to 1,523 m : 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

BRUNEI

@Brunei:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, bordering the South China Sea and
Malaysia

Geographic coordinates: 4 30 N, 114 40 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 5,770 sq km
land : 5,270 sq km
water: 500 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Delaware

Land boundaries:
total: 381 km
border countries: Malaysia 381 km

Coastline: 161 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm or to median line
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid, rainy

Terrain: flat coastal plain rises to mountains in east; hilly lowland
in west

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : South China Sea 0 m
highest point: Bukit Pagon 1,850 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, timber

Land use:
arable land : 1%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 1%
forests and woodland: 85%
other: 12% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: typhoons, earthquakes, and severe flooding are very
rare

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection,
Ship Pollution, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: close to vital sea lanes through South China Sea
linking Indian and Pacific Oceans; two parts physically separated by
Malaysia; almost an enclave of Malaysia

@Brunei:People

Population: 307,616 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 33% (male 52,239; female 50,025)
15-64 years: 63% (male 101,326; female 90,941)
65 years and over: 4% (male 7,207; female 5,878) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.5% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 25.2 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.13 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 4.89 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.11 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.23 male(s)/female
total population: 1.1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 23.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 71.54 years
male: 70 years
female: 73.16 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.37 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Bruneian(s)
adjective: Bruneian

Ethnic groups: Malay 64%, Chinese 20%, other 16%

Religions: Muslim (official) 63%, Buddhism 14%, Christian 8%,
indigenous beliefs and other 15% (1981)

Languages: Malay (official), English, Chinese

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 88.2%
male: 92.6%
female: 83.4% (1995 est.)

@Brunei:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Negara Brunei Darussalam
conventional short form: Brunei

Data code: BX

Government type: constitutional sultanate

National capital: Bandar Seri Begawan

Administrative divisions: 4 districts (daerah-daerah, singular -
daerah); Belait, Brunei and Muara, Temburong, Tutong

Independence: 1 January 1984 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 23 February (1984)

Constitution: 29 September 1959 (some provisions suspended under a
State of Emergency since December 1962, others since independence on 1
January 1984)

Legal system: based on Islamic law

Suffrage: none

Executive branch:
chief of state: Sultan and Prime Minister His Majesty Paduka Seri
Baginda Sultan Haji HASSANAL Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah (since 5
October 1967); note - the sultan is both the chief of state and head
of government
head of government: Sultan and Prime Minister His Majesty Paduka Seri
Baginda Sultan Haji HASSANAL Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah (since 5
October 1967); note - the sultan is both the chief of state and head
of government
cabinet: Council of Cabinet Ministers appointed and presided over by
the sultan; deals with executive matters
note: there is also a Religious Council (members appointed by the
sultan) that advises on religious matters, a Privy Council (members
appointed by the sultan) that deals with constitutional matters, and
the Council of Succession (members appointed by the sultan) that
determines the succession to the throne if the need arises
elections: none; the sultan is a traditional Islamic monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council or Majlis Masyuarat
Megeri (a privy council that serves only in a consultative capacity;
NA seats; members appointed by the sultan)
elections: last held in March 1962
note: in 1970 the Council was changed to an appointive body by decree
of the sultan; an elected Legislative Council is being considered as
part of constitutional reform, but elections are unlikely for several
years

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chief justice and judges are sworn in
by the sultan for three-year terms

Political parties and leaders: Brunei United National Party
(inactive), Anak HASANUDDIN, chairman; Brunei National Solidarity
Party (the first legal political party and now banned), Mohamad HATTA
bin Maji Zainal Abidin, secretary general; Brunei Peoples Party
(banned), Sheik A. M. AZAHARI, leader; Brunei National Democratic
Party or BNDP (deregistered), Haji Abdul LATIF bin Abdul Hamad,
president

International organization participation: APEC, ASEAN, C, CCC, ESCAP,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDB, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
ISO (correspondent), ITU, Mekong Group, NAM, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UPU,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador-designate Pengiran Anak Dato Haji PUTEH
chancery: Watergate, Suite 300, 3rd floor, 2600 Virginia Avenue NW,
Washington, DC 20037
telephone: [1] (202) 342-0159
FAX: [1] (202) 342-0158

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Glen Robert RASE
embassy: Third Floor, Teck Guan Plaza, Jalan Sultan, Bandar Seri
Begawan
mailing address : American Embassy Box B, Bandar Seri Begawan, APO AP
96440
telephone: [673] (2) 229670
FAX: [673] (2) 225293

Flag description: yellow with two diagonal bands of white (top, almost
double width) and black starting from the upper hoist side; the
national emblem in red is superimposed at the center; the emblem
includes a swallow-tailed flag on top of a winged column within an
upturned crescent above a scroll and flanked by two upraised hands

Economy

Economy - overview: This small, wealthy economy is a mixture of
foreign and domestic entrepreneurship, government regulation and
welfare measures, and village tradition. It is almost totally
supported by exports of crude oil and natural gas, with revenues from
the petroleum sector accounting for perhaps half of GDP. Per capita
GDP is among the highest in the Third World, and substantial income
from overseas investment supplements income from domestic production.
The government provides for all medical services and subsidizes food
and housing. The government is beginning to show progress on its basic
policy of diversifying the economy away from oil and gas. Brunei's
leaders are concerned that steadily increased integration in the world
economy will undermine internal social cohesion.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $4.6 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $15,800 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 3%
industry: 46%
services: 51% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.5% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 119,000 (1993 est.); note - includes members of the Army
by occupation: government 48%, production of oil, natural gas,
services, and construction 42%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing 4%,
other 6% (1986 est.)
note : 33% of labor force is foreign (1988)

Unemployment rate: 4.8% (1994 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $2.5 billion
expenditures : $2.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $768
million (1995 est.)

Industries: petroleum, petroleum refining, liquefied natural gas,
construction

Industrial production growth rate: 2% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 344,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 1.24 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 4,003 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, cassava (tapioca), bananas; water
buffalo, pigs

Exports:
total value : $2.7 billion (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: crude oil, liquefied natural gas, petroleum products
partners: Japan 50%, UK 19%, Thailand 10%, Singapore 9% (1994 est.)

Imports:
total value: $2 billion (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities : machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods,
food, chemicals
partners: Singapore 29%, UK 19%, US 13%, Malaysia 9%, Japan 5% (1994
est.)

Debt - external: $0

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Bruneian dollar (B$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Bruneian dollars (B$) per US$1 - 1.4061 (January
1997), 1.4100 (1996), 1.4174 (1995), 1.5274 (1994), 1.6158 (1993),
1.6290 (1992); note - the Bruneian dollar is at par with the Singapore
dollar

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Brunei:Communications

Telephones: 76,900 (1993)

Telephone system: service throughout country is adequate for present
needs; international service good to adjacent Malaysia
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
and 1 Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 115,000 (1993)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1984 est.)

Televisions: 78,000 (1993 est.)

@Brunei:Transportation

Railways:
total: 13 km (private line)
narrow gauge: 13 km 0.610-m gauge

Highways:
total: 1,120 km
paved: 388 km
unpaved : 732 km (1995)

Waterways: 209 km; navigable by craft drawing less than 1.2 m

Pipelines: crude oil 135 km; petroleum products 418 km; natural gas
920 km

Ports and harbors: Bandar Seri Begawan, Kuala Belait, Muara, Seria,
Tutong

Merchant marine:
total: 7 liquefied gas tankers (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 348,476
GRT/340,635 DWT (1996 est.)

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
over 3,047 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 3 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Land Forces, Navy, Air Force, Royal Brunei Police

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 85,327 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 49,466 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 3,014 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $312 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 6.2% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: may wish to purchase the Malaysian salient
that divides the country; all of the Spratly Islands are claimed by
China, Taiwan, and Vietnam; parts of them are claimed by Malaysia and
the Philippines; in 1984, Brunei established an exclusive fishing zone
that encompasses Louisa Reef, but has not publicly claimed the island
______________________________________________________________________

BULGARIA

@Bulgaria:Geography

Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Black Sea, between
Romania and Turkey

Geographic coordinates: 43 00 N, 25 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total : 110,910 sq km
land: 110,550 sq km
water: 360 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Tennessee

Land boundaries:
total: 1,808 km
border countries: Greece 494 km, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia 148 km, Romania 608 km, Serbia and Montenegro 318 km (all
with Serbia), Turkey 240 km

Coastline: 354 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: temperate; cold, damp winters; hot, dry summers

Terrain: mostly mountains with lowlands in north and southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Black Sea 0 m
highest point: Musala 2,925 m

Natural resources: bauxite, copper, lead, zinc, coal, timber, arable
land

Land use:
arable land: 37%
permanent crops: 2%
permanent pastures: 16%
forests and woodland: 35%
other: 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 12,370 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: earthquakes, landslides

Environment - current issues: air pollution from industrial emissions;
rivers polluted from raw sewage, heavy metals, detergents;
deforestation; forest damage from air pollution and resulting acid
rain; soil contamination from heavy metals from metallurgical plants
and industrial wastes

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law
of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol

Geography - note: strategic location near Turkish Straits; controls
key land routes from Europe to Middle East and Asia

@Bulgaria:People

Population: 8,290,988 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 17% (male 720,499; female 685,258)
15-64 years: 67% (male 2,769,288; female 2,823,431)
65 years and over: 16% (male 558,028; female 734,484) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.63% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 8.05 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 13.38 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.94 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 13.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 71.65 years
male: 68.06 years
female: 75.44 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.14 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Bulgarian(s)
adjective: Bulgarian

Ethnic groups: Bulgarian 85.3%, Turk 8.5%, Gypsy 2.6%, Macedonian
2.5%, Armenian 0.3%, Russian 0.2%, other 0.6%

Religions: Bulgarian Orthodox 85%, Muslim 13%, Jewish 0.8%, Roman
Catholic 0.5%, Uniate Catholic 0.2%, Protestant, Gregorian-Armenian,
and other 0.5%

Languages: Bulgarian, secondary languages closely correspond to ethnic
breakdown

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98%
male: 99%
female: 97% (1992 est.)

@Bulgaria:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Bulgaria
conventional short form: Bulgaria

Data code: BU

Government type: emerging democracy

National capital: Sofia

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces (oblasti, singular - oblast);
Burgas, Grad Sofiya, Khaskovo, Lovech, Montana, Plovdiv, Ruse, Sofiya,
Varna

Independence: 22 September 1908 (from Ottoman Empire)

National holiday: Independence Day, 3 March (1878)

Constitution: adopted 12 July 1991

Legal system: based on civil law system with Soviet law influence;
accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Petar STOYANOV (since 22 January 1997); Vice
President Todor KAVALDZHIEV (since 22 January 1997)
head of government: Chairman of the Council of Ministers (Prime
Minister) Ivan Kostov (since 19 May 1997); Deputy Prime Ministers
Aleksandur BOZHKOV (since 12 February 1997 Evgeniy BAKURDZHIEV (since
21 May 1997), Veselin METODIEV (since 21 May 1997)
cabinet: Council of Ministers elected by the National Assembly
elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 27 October and 3
November 1996 (next to be held NA 2001); chairman of the Council of
Ministers (prime minister) appointed by the president
election results: Petar STOYANOV elected president; percent of vote -
Petar STOYANOV 59.73%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Narodno Sobranie
(240 seats; members are popularly elected to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 19 April 1997 (next to be held NA 2001)
election results : percent of vote by party - UDF 52%, BSP 22%, ANS
7%, Euro-left 5.5%, BBB 4.95%; seats by party - UDF 137, BSP 58, ANS
19, Euro-left 14, BBB 12

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chairman appointed for a seven-year
term by the president; Constitutional Court, 12 justices appointed or
elected for a nine-year term

Political parties and leaders: Bulgarian Socialist Party or BSP
[Georgi PURVANOV, chairman]; Union of Democratic Forces or UDF (an
alliance of pro-Democratic parties) [Ivan KOSTOV]; Euro-left
[Alexander TOMOV]; Alliance for National Salvation or ANS (coalition
led mainly by Movement for Rights and Freedoms or MRF [Ahmed DOGAN]);
Bulgarian Business Bloc or BBB [George GANCHEV]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Democratic Alliance for the
Republic or DAR; New Union for Democracy or NUD; Ecoglasnost; Podkrepa
Labor Confederation; Fatherland Union; Bulgarian Communist Party or
BCP; Confederation of Independent Trade Unions of Bulgaria or KNSB;
Bulgarian Agrarian National Union - United or BZNS; Bulgarian
Democratic Center; "Nikola Petkov" Bulgarian Agrarian National Union;
Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization - Union of Macedonian
Societies or IMRO-UMS; numerous regional, ethnic, and national
interest groups with various agendas

International organization participation: ACCT, BIS, BSEC, CCC, CE,
CEI, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, G- 9, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
ICRM, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, NACC, NAM (guest), NSG, OSCE,
PCA, PFP, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNMOT, UPU,
WEU (associate partner), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Snezhana Damianova BOTUSHAROVA
chancery: 1621 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone : [1] (202) 387-7969
FAX: [1] (202) 234-7973
consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Avis T. BOHLEN (22 July 1996)
embassy : 1 Saborna Street, Sofia
mailing address: Embassy Sofia, Department of State, Washington, DC
50521-5740
telephone: [359] (2) 980-52-41 through 48
FAX: [359] (2) 981-89-77

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of white (top), green,
and red; the national emblem formerly on the hoist side of the white
stripe has been removed - it contained a rampant lion within a wreath
of wheat ears below a red five-pointed star and above a ribbon bearing
the dates 681 (first Bulgarian state established) and 1944 (liberation
from Nazi control)

Economy

Economy - overview: One of the poorest countries of central Europe,
Bulgaria has slowly continued the process of moving from its old
command economy towards a market-oriented economy. Slow advancement on
economic reforms pitched the economy into crisis in 1996, marked by a
banking system in turmoil, a depreciating currency, inflation of 311%
and contracting production and foreign trade. Foreign exchange
reserves dwindled to extremely low levels ($518 million), while
dramatically hiked interest rates added to the domestic debt burden
and stifled growth. GDP fell by 10% in 1996, after experiencing 2.6%
growth in 1995. Privatization of state-owned industries stagnated,
although the first auction of a mass privatization program was
undertaken in late 1996. Lagging progress on structural reforms led to
postponement of IMF disbursements under a $580 million standby loan
agreed to in July. In November 1996, the IMF proposed a currency board
as Bulgaria's best chance to restore confidence in the lev, eliminate
discretionary spending, and avoid hyperinflation. The government has
pledged to sell some of the country's most attractive state assets to
the highest foreign bidders in 1997. The Bulgarian economy is
projected to have another year of negative growth (minus 5%), and
inflation near 700% in 1997, assuming introduction of a currency board
in July of 1997.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $39.9 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -10% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $4,630 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 12.6%
industry: 35.7%
services: 51.7% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 311% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 3.57 million (1996 est.)
by occupation : industry 41%, agriculture 18%, other 41% (1992)

Unemployment rate: 12.5% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $3 billion
expenditures : $4.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: machine building and metal working, food processing,
chemicals, textiles, construction materials, ferrous and nonferrous
metals

Industrial production growth rate: -6.5% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 12.09 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 36.07 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 4,491 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grain, oilseed, vegetables, fruits, tobacco;
livestock

Exports:
total value: $4.2 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : machinery and equipment 12.8%; agriculture and food
21.9%; textiles and apparel 14%; metals and ores 19.7%; chemicals
16.9%; minerals and fuels 9.3% (1995)
partners: OECD 50.0% (EU 37.2%); CIS and Central and Eastern Europe
32.4%; Arab countries 5.8%; other 11.8% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $4.1 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: fuels, minerals, and raw materials 30.1%; machinery and
equipment 23.6%; textiles and apparel 11.6%; agricultural products
10.8%; metals and ores 6.8%; chemicals 12.3%; other 4.8% (1995)
partners : OECD 45.5% (EU 38.1%); CIS and Central and Eastern European
countries 41.1%; Arab countries 1.8%; other 11.6% (1995)

Debt - external: $9.3 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid: NA

Currency: 1 lev (Lv) = 100 stotinki

Exchange rates: leva (Lv) per US$1 - 483.4 (1996), 70.7 (1995), 54.2
(1994), 27.1 (1993), 23.3 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Bulgaria:Communications

Telephones: 2,773,293 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: almost two-thirds of the lines are residential; 67%
of Sofia households have telephones (November 1988 est.)
domestic: extensive but antiquated transmission system of coaxial
cable and microwave radio relay; telephone service is available in
most villages
international : direct dialing to 36 countries; satellite earth
stations - 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean Region); Intelsat available
through a Greek earth station

Radio broadcast stations: AM 20, FM 15, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 29 (Russian repeater in Sofia 1)

Televisions: 2.1 million (May 1990 est.)

@Bulgaria:Transportation

Railways:
total : 4,292 km
standard gauge: 4,047 km 1.435-m gauge (2,650 km electrified; 917
double track)
other gauge: 245 km 0.760-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 36,777 km
paved: 33,798 km (including 314 km of expressways)
unpaved : 2,979 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 470 km (1987)

Pipelines: crude oil 193 km; petroleum products 525 km; natural gas
1,400 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Burgas, Lom, Nesebur, Ruse, Varna, Vidin

Merchant marine:
total: 99 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,063,367 GRT/1,596,438
DWT
ships by type: bulk 45, cargo 25, chemical tanker 4, container 2, oil
tanker 12, passenger-cargo 1, railcar carrier 2, refrigerated cargo 1,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 6, short-sea passenger 1
note : Bulgaria owns an additional 6 ships (1,000 GRT or over)
totaling 151,855 DWT operating under the registries of Liberia and
Malta (1996 est.)

Airports: 355 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 116
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m : 17
1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
under 914 m: 88 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 239
2,438 to 3,047 m : 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 10
under 914 m: 226 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Border
Troops, Internal Troops

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,052,731 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,711,729 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 62,908 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $418.6 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.0% to 2.5% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: major European transshipment point for Southwest Asian
heroin and, to a lesser degree, South American cocaine for the
European market; limited producer of precursor chemicals; significant
producer of amphetamines, much of which are consumed in the Middle
East
______________________________________________________________________

BURKINA FASO

@Burkina Faso:Geography

Location: Western Africa, north of Ghana

Geographic coordinates: 13 00 N, 2 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 274,200 sq km
land : 273,800 sq km
water: 400 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Colorado

Land boundaries:
total: 3,192 km
border countries: Benin 306 km, Ghana 548 km, Cote d'Ivoire 584 km,
Mali 1,000 km, Niger 628 km, Togo 126 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; warm, dry winters; hot, wet summers

Terrain: mostly flat to dissected, undulating plains; hills in west
and southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Black Volta River 200 m
highest point: Tena Kourou 749 m

Natural resources: manganese, limestone, marble; small deposits of
gold, antimony, copper, nickel, bauxite, lead, phosphates, zinc,
silver

Land use:
arable land: 13%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 22%
forests and woodland: 50%
other : 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 200 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring droughts

Environment - current issues: recent droughts and desertification
severely affecting agricultural activities, population distribution,
and the economy; overgrazing; soil degradation; deforestation

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography - note: landlocked

@Burkina Faso:People

Population: 10,891,159 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 48% (male 2,636,509; female 2,602,984)
15-64 years : 49% (male 2,515,266; female 2,799,542)
65 years and over: 3% (male 146,267; female 190,591) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.45% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 46.43 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 20.33 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.58 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.9 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.77 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 116.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 42.29 years
male: 42.45 years
female : 42.12 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.72 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Burkinabe (singular and plural)
adjective: Burkinabe

Ethnic groups: Mossi about 24%, Gurunsi, Senufo, Lobi, Bobo, Mande,
Fulani

Religions: indigenous beliefs 40%, Muslim 50%, Christian (mainly Roman
Catholic) 10%

Languages: French (official), tribal languages belonging to Sudanic
family, spoken by 90% of the population

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 19.2%
male: 29.5%
female: 9.2% (1995 est.)

@Burkina Faso:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Burkina Faso
former: Upper Volta

Data code: UV

Government type: parliamentary

National capital: Ouagadougou

Administrative divisions: 30 provinces; Bam, Bazega, Bougouriba,
Boulgou, Boulkiemde, Ganzourgou, Gnagna, Gourma, Houe, Kadiogo,
Kenedougou, Komoe, Kossi, Kouritenga, Mouhoun, Namentenga, Naouri,
Oubritenga, Oudalan, Passore, Poni, Sanguie, Sanmatenga, Seno,
Sissili, Soum, Sourou, Tapoa, Yatenga, Zoundweogo

Independence: 5 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Revolution, 4 August (1983)

Constitution: 2 June 1991

Legal system: based on French civil law system and customary law

Suffrage: none

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Captain Blaise COMPAORE (since 15 October
1987)
head of government: Prime Minister Kadre' De'sire' OUE'DRAOGO (since 6
February 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
recommendation of the prime minister
elections: president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
election last held 1 December 1991 (next to be held NA 1998); prime
minister appointed by the president with the consent of the
legislature
election results: Blaise COMPAORE elected president with 90.4% percent
of the votes of those who voted (the abstention rate was 74.7%)

Legislative branch: unicameral Assembly of People's Deputies or
Assemblee des Deputes Populaires (111 seats; members are popularly
elected to serve five-year terms)
elections : last held 11 May 1997 (next to be held NA 2002)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - CDP
97, PDP 6, RDA 2, ADF 2; note - 4 contested seats are to be filled in
special election on 19 June 1997 by order of the Supreme Court
note: the current law also provides for a second consultative chamber,
which has not been formally constituted

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Appeals Court

Political parties and leaders: Organization for People's Democracy -
Labor Movement or ODP-MT (ruling party at time of 1992 elections but
was subsumed, with about a dozen smaller parties, into the powerful
CDP in February 1996); African Democratic Assembly or RDA [Gerard
Kango OUEDRAOGO]; Alliance for Democracy and Federation or ADF [Herman
YAMEOGO]; Burkinabe Socialist Bloc or BSB [Earnest Nongma OUEDRAOGO,
president]; Burkinabe Environmentalist Party or UVDB; Congress for
Democracy and Progress or CDP [Din Salif SAWADAGO] (the strongest
party in the 1997 legislative elections); Front for Social Forces or
FFS [Fide'le KIENTEGA]; National Convention of Progressive
Patriots-Social Democratic Party or CNPP-PSD [Moussa BOLY] (not
prominent in 1997); Party for Democracy and Progress or PDP [Joseph
KI-ZERBO]; Party for Progress and Social Development or PPDS; Party
for African Independence or PAI

Political pressure groups and leaders: committees for the defense of
the revolution; watchdog/political action groups throughout the
country in both organizations and communities

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA,
ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM,
OAU, OIC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Gaetan R. OUEDRAOGO
chancery: 2340 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 332-5577, 6895

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Sharon P. WILKINSON (16 July 1996)
embassy: Avenue Raoul Follerau, Ouagadougou
mailing address: 01 B. P. 35, Ouagadougou
telephone: [226] 306723 through 306725
FAX : [226] 303890

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and green
with a yellow five-pointed star in the center; uses the popular
pan-African colors of Ethiopia

Economy

Economy - overview: One of the poorest countries in the world,
landlocked Burkina Faso has a high population density and a high
population growth rate, few natural resources, and a fragile soil.
Over 80% of the population is engaged in subsistence agriculture which
is highly vulnerable to variations in rainfall. Industry remains
dominated by unprofitable government-controlled corporations.
Following the African franc currency devaluation in January 1994 the
government updated its development program in conjunction with
international agencies, and exports and economic growth have
increased.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $8 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $740 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 31%
industry: 25%
services: 44% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7.8% (1995)

Labor force: NA (most adults are employed in subsistence agriculture)
by occupation: agriculture 80%, industry 15%, commerce, services, and
government 5%
note: 20% of male labor force migrates annually to neighboring
countries for seasonal employment (1984)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $483 million
expenditures : $548 million, including capital expenditures of $189
million (1992)

Industries: cotton lint, beverages, agricultural processing, soap,
cigarettes, textiles, gold

Industrial production growth rate: 1% (1994)

Electricity - capacity: 121,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 320 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 28 kWh (1992 est.)

Agriculture - products: peanuts, shea nuts, sesame, cotton, sorghum,
millet, corn, rice; livestock

Exports:
total value : $298 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: cotton, gold, animal products
partners: Cote d'Ivoire, France, Italy, Thailand

Imports:
total value: $500 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities : machinery, food products, petroleum
partners: Cote d'Ivoire, France, Togo, Nigeria

Debt - external: $1.1 billion (December 1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note: beginning 12 January 1994 the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100
per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Burkina Faso:Communications

Telephones: 21,000 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: all services only fair
domestic: microwave radio relay, open wire, and radiotelephone
communication stations
international : satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 49,000 (1991 est.)

@Burkina Faso:Transportation

Railways:
total: 622 km (517 km from Ouagadougou to the Cote d'Ivoire border and
105 km from Ouagadougou to Kaya)
narrow gauge: 622 km 1.000-m gauge (1995 est.)

Highways:
total: 12,506 km
paved : 2,001 km
unpaved: 10,505 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 22 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 10
over 3,047 m : 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m: 8 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 12
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 9 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Air Force, National Gendarmerie, National
Police, People's Militia

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,219,544 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,137,882 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $104 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 6.4% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

BURMA

@Burma:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, bordering the Andaman Sea and the Bay of
Bengal, between Bangladesh and Thailand

Geographic coordinates: 22 00 N, 98 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total : 678,500 sq km
land: 657,740 sq km
water: 20,760 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 5,876 km
border countries: Bangladesh 193 km, China 2,185 km, India 1,463 km,
Laos 235 km, Thailand 1,800 km

Coastline: 1,930 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical monsoon; cloudy, rainy, hot, humid summers
(southwest monsoon, June to September); less cloudy, scant rainfall,
mild temperatures, lower humidity during winter (northeast monsoon,
December to April)

Terrain: central lowlands ringed by steep, rugged highlands

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Andaman Sea 0 m
highest point : Hkakabo Razi 5,881 m

Natural resources: petroleum, timber, tin, antimony, zinc, copper,
tungsten, lead, coal, some marble, limestone, precious stones, natural
gas

Land use:
arable land : 15%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 1%
forests and woodland: 49%
other: 34% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10,680 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: destructive earthquakes and cyclones; flooding and
landslides common during rainy season (June to September); periodic
droughts

Environment - current issues: deforestation; industrial pollution of
air, soil, and water; inadequate sanitation and water treatment
contribute to disease

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test
Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
Tropical Timber 94
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: strategic location near major Indian Ocean shipping
lanes

@Burma:People

Population: 46,821,943 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 37% (male 8,743,108; female 8,410,224)
15-64 years: 59% (male 13,878,541; female 13,859,783)
65 years and over : 4% (male 873,670; female 1,056,617) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.81% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 29.54 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 11.41 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female
total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 78.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 56.62 years
male: 54.89 years
female: 58.45 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.76 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Burmese (singular and plural)
adjective: Burmese

Ethnic groups: Burman 68%, Shan 9%, Karen 7%, Rakhine 4%, Chinese 3%,
Mon 2%, Indian 2%, other 5%

Religions: Buddhist 89%, Christian 4% (Baptist 3%, Roman Catholic 1%),
Muslim 4%, animist beliefs 1%, other 2%

Languages: Burmese, minority ethnic groups have their own languages

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 83.1%
male: 88.7%
female: 77.7% (1995 est.)

@Burma:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Union of Burma
conventional short form: Burma
local long form: Pyidaungzu Myanma Naingngandaw (translated by the US
Government as Union of Myanma and by the Burmese as Union of Myanmar)
local short form: Myanma Naingngandaw
former: Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma

Data code: BM

Government type: military regime

National capital: Rangoon (regime refers to the capital as Yangon)

Administrative divisions: 7 divisions* (yin-mya, singular - yin) and 7
states (pyine-mya, singular - pyine); Chin State, Ayeyarwady*, Bago*,
Kachin State, Kayin State, Kayah State, Magway*, Mandalay*, Mon State,
Rakhine State, Sagaing*, Shan State, Tanintharyi*, Yangon*

Independence: 4 January 1948 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 4 January (1948)

Constitution: 3 January 1974 (suspended since 18 September 1988);
national convention started on 9 January 1993 to draft a new
constitution; chapter headings and three of 15 sections have been
approved

Legal system: does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Prime Minister and Chairman of the State Law and Order
Restoration Council Gen. THAN SHWE (since 23 April 1992); note - the
prime minister is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government : Prime Minister and Chairman of the State Law and
Order Restoration Council Gen. THAN SHWE (since 23 April 1992); note -
the prime minister is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: State Law and Order Restoration Council; military junta which
assumed power 18 September 1988
elections: none; the prime minister assumed power upon resignation of
the former prime minister

Legislative branch: unicameral People's Assembly or Pyithu Hluttaw
(485 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 27 May 1990, but Assembly never convened
election results: percent of vote by party - NLD 82%; seats by party -
NLD 396, NUP 10, other 79

Judicial branch: limited; remnants of the British-era legal system in
place, but there is no guarantee of a fair public trial; the judiciary
is not independent of the executive

Political parties and leaders: Union Solidarity and Development
Association (USDA, proregime), THAN AUNG, general secretary; National
Unity Party (NUP, proregime), THA KYAW; National League for Democracy
(NLD), AUNG SAN SUU KYI, general secretary; and eight minor legal
parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Coalition Government
of the Union of Burma (NCGUB), headed by Dr. SEIN WIN - consists of
individuals legitimately elected to the People's Assembly but not
recognized by the military regime; the group fled to a border area and
joined with insurgents in December 1990 to form a parallel government;
Kachin Independence Army (KIA); United Wa State Army (UWSA); Karen
National Union (KNU); several Shan factions, including the Mong Tai
Army (MTA); All Burma Student Democratic Front (ABSDF)

International organization participation: AsDB, ASEAN (observer), CCC,
CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU,
Mekong Group, NAM, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador TIN WINN
chancery: 2300 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 332-9044, 9045
FAX : [1] (202) 332-9046
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Kent M.
WIEDEMANN
embassy: 581 Merchant Street, Rangoon (GPO 521)
mailing address : Box B, APO AP 96546
telephone: [95] (1) 282055, 282182 (operator assistance required)
FAX: [95] (1) 280409

Flag description: red with a blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side
corner bearing, all in white, 14 five-pointed stars encircling a
cogwheel containing a stalk of rice; the 14 stars represent the 14
administrative divisions

Economy

Economy - overview: Burma has a mixed economy with private activity
dominant in agriculture, light industry, and transport, and with
substantial state-controlled activity, mainly in energy, heavy
industry, and the rice trade. Government policy in the last eight
years, 1989-96, has aimed at revitalizing the economy after three
decades of tight central planning. Thus, private activity has markedly
increased; foreign investment has been encouraged, so far with
moderate success; and efforts continue to increase the efficiency of
state enterprises. Published estimates of Burma's foreign trade are
greatly understated because of the volume of black-market trade. A
major ongoing problem is the failure to achieve monetary and fiscal
stability. Although Burma remains a poor Asian country, its rich
resources furnish the potential for substantial long-term increases in
income, exports, and living standards.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $51.5 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,120 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 63%
industry: 9%
services : 28% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 30%-40% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 16.007 million (1992)
by occupation: agriculture 65.2%, industry 14.3%, trade 10.1%,
government 6.3%, other 4.1% (FY88/89 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $5.3 billion
expenditures : $10 billion, including capital expenditures of $3
billion (1995 est.)

Industries: agricultural processing; textiles and footwear; wood and
wood products; copper, tin, tungsten, iron; construction materials;
pharmaceuticals; fertilizer

Industrial production growth rate: 8.9% (FY94/95 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 1.21 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 3.37 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 73 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: paddy rice, corn, oilseed, sugarcane, pulses;
hardwood

Exports:
total value: $1.1 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: rice, pulses and beans, teak, rubber, hardwood
partners: Singapore, China, Thailand, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Japan

Imports:
total value : $2 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: machinery, transport equipment, construction materials,
food products, consumer goods
partners: Singapore, Hong Kong, Japan, China, Malaysia, Thailand

Debt - external: $5.5 billion (FY94/95 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $61 million (1993)

Currency: 1 kyat (K) = 100 pyas

Exchange rates: kyats (K) per US$1 - 6.0600 (1997), 5.9176 (1996),
5.6670 (1995), 5.9749 (1994), 6.1570 (1993), 6.1045 (1992); unofficial
- 160-170 (1996)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Burma:Communications

Telephones: 122,195 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: meets minimum requirements for local and intercity
service for business and government; international service is good
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 1, shortwave 0 (1985 est.)
note: radiobroadcast coverage is limited to the most populous areas

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1988 est.)

Televisions: 88,000 (1992 est.)

@Burma:Transportation

Railways:
total : 3,569 km
narrow gauge: 3,569 km 1.000-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 27,600 km
paved: 3,340 km
unpaved : 24,260 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 12,800 km; 3,200 km navigable by large commercial vessels

Pipelines: crude oil 1,343 km; natural gas 330 km

Ports and harbors: Bassein, Bhamo, Chauk, Mandalay, Moulmein,
Myitkyina, Rangoon, Akyab (Sittwe), Tavoy

Merchant marine:
total: 52 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 657,498 GRT/901,418 DWT
ships by type : bulk 16, cargo 18, chemical tanker 5, container 2, oil
tanker 5, passenger-cargo 3, refrigerated cargo 1, vehicle carrier 2
(1996 est.)

Airports: 73 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 54
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 13
914 to 1,523 m : 9
under 914 m: 28 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 19
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 16 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 12,037,009
females age 15-49: 11,846,381 (1997 est.)
note: both sexes liable for military service

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 6,434,452 (1997 est.)
females: 6,317,112 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 480,893
females: 462,314 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $135 million (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: world's largest illicit producer of opium (2,560 metric
tons in 1996 - a 9% increase over 1995) and a minor producer of
cannabis for the international drug trade; surrender of drug warlord
KHUN SA's Mong Tai Army in January 1996 was hailed by Rangoon as a
major counternarcotics success, but lack of serious government
commitment and resources continue to hinder the overall antidrug
effort; growing role in the production of methamphetamines for
regional consumption
______________________________________________________________________

BURUNDI

Introduction

Current issues: in a number of waves since October 1993, hundreds of
thousands of refugees have fled the ethnic violence between the Hutu
and Tutsi factions in Burundi and crossed into Rwanda, Tanzania, and
Democratic Republic of the Congo, formerly Zaire; since October 1996,
an estimated 92,000 Burundi Hutus who fled to Zaire have been forced
to return to Burundi by Tutsi rebel forces in Zaire, leaving an
estimated 35,000 still dispersed there; in Burundi, the ethnic
violence between the Hutus and the Tutsis continued in 1996, causing
an estimated additional 150,000 Burundi Hutus to flee to Tanzania,
thus raising their numbers in that country to about 250,000

@Burundi:Geography

Location: Central Africa, east of Democratic Republic of the Congo

Geographic coordinates: 3 30 S, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 27,830 sq km
land: 25,650 sq km
water: 2,180 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
total: 974 km
border countries: Democratic Republic of the Congo 233 km, Rwanda 290
km, Tanzania 451 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: equatorial; high plateau with considerable altitude variation
(772 m to 2,760 m); average annual temperature varies with altitude
from 23 to 17 degrees centigrade but is generally moderate as the
average altitude is about 1,700 m; average annual rainfall is about
150 cm; wet seasons from February to May and September to November,
and dry seasons from June to August and December to January

Terrain: hilly and mountainous, dropping to a plateau in east, some
plains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Lake Tanganyika 772 m
highest point: Mount Heha 2,760 m

Natural resources: nickel, uranium, rare earth oxides, peat, cobalt,
copper, platinum (not yet exploited), vanadium

Land use:
arable land: 44%
permanent crops: 9%
permanent pastures : 36%
forests and woodland: 3%
other : 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 140 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding, landslides

Environment - current issues: soil erosion as a result of overgrazing
and the expansion of agriculture into marginal lands; deforestation
(little forested land remains because of uncontrolled cutting of trees
for fuel); habitat loss threatens wildlife populations

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Endangered Species
signed, but not ratified : Biodiversity, Climate Change,
Desertification, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography - note: landlocked; straddles crest of the Nile-Congo
watershed

@Burundi:People

Population: 6,052,614 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 47% (male 1,425,071; female 1,418,957)
15-64 years : 50% (male 1,490,426; female 1,558,362)
65 years and over: 3% (male 63,225; female 96,573) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.11% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 42.33 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 15.12 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -6.12 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.66 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 100.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 49 years
male: 47.91 years
female : 50.12 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.48 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Burundian(s)
adjective: Burundi

Ethnic groups: Hutu (Bantu) 85%, Tutsi (Hamitic) 14%, Twa (Pygmy) 1%,
Europeans 3,000, South Asians 2,000

Religions: Christian 67% (Roman Catholic 62%, Protestant 5%),
indigenous beliefs 32%, Muslim 1%

Languages: Kirundi (official), French (official), Swahili (along Lake
Tanganyika and in the Bujumbura area)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 35.3%
male: 49.3%
female: 22.5% (1995 est.)

@Burundi:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Burundi
conventional short form: Burundi
local long form: Republika y'u Burundi
local short form : Burundi

Data code: BY

Government type: republic

National capital: Bujumbura

Administrative divisions: 15 provinces; Bubanza, Bujumbura, Bururi,
Cankuzo, Cibitoke, Gitega, Karuzi, Kayanza, Kirundo, Makamba,
Muramvya, Muyinga, Ngozi, Rutana, Ruyigi

Independence: 1 July 1962 (from UN trusteeship under Belgian
administration)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 July (1962)

Constitution: 13 March 1992; provides for establishment of a plural
political system

Legal system: based on German and Belgian civil codes and customary
law; does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Pierre BUYOYA (interim president since 27
September 1996) note - former President NTIBANTUNGANYA was overthrown
in a coup on 25 July 1996 and has taken refuge in the US ambassador's
residence in Bujumbura; former Major (retired) Pierre BUYOYA has not
been recognized as president of Burundi by the US or most other
governments
head of government: Prime Minister Pascal-Firmin NDIMIRA (since 31
July 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by prime minister
elections : NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
Nationale (81 seats; members are popularly elected on a proportional
basis to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 29 June 1993 (next to be held NA 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - FRODEBU 71%, UPRONA
21.4%; seats by party - (81 total) FRODEBU 65, UPRONA 16; other
parties won too small shares of the vote to win seats in the assembly

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Cour Supreme

Political parties and leaders: Unity for National Progress or UPRONA
[Charles MUKASI, president]; Burundi Democratic Front or FRODEBU [Jean
MINANI, president]; Organization of the People of Burundi or RPB
[Sylvestre SINDAYIGAYA]; Socialist Party of Burundi or PSB; People's
Reconciliation Party or PRP [Mathias HITIMANA, leader]; opposition
parties, legalized in March 1992, include Burundi African Alliance for
the Salvation or ABASA, Rally for Democracy and Economic and Social
Development or RADDES [Cyrille SIGEJEJE, chairman], and Party for
National Redress or PARENA [Jean-Baptiste BAGAZA, leader]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEEAC,
CEPGL, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ISO (subscriber),
ITU, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Severin NTAHOMVUKIYE
chancery: Suite 212, 2233 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone: [1] (202) 342-2574

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Morris N. HUGHES, Jr. (27 June l996)
embassy : Avenue des Etats-Unis, Bujumbura
mailing address: B. P. 1720, Bujumbura
telephone : [257] (2) 23454
FAX: [257] (2) 22926

Flag description: divided by a white diagonal cross into red panels
(top and bottom) and green panels (hoist side and outer side) with a
white disk superimposed at the center bearing three red six-pointed
stars outlined in green arranged in a triangular design (one star
above, two stars below)

Economy

Economy - overview: Burundi is a landlocked, resource-poor country in
an early stage of economic development. The economy is predominately
agricultural with roughly 90% of the population dependent on
subsistence agriculture. Its economic health depends on the coffee
crop, which accounts for 80% of foreign exchange earnings. The ability
to pay for imports therefore rests largely on the vagaries of the
climate and the international coffee market. As part of its economic
reform agenda, launched in February 1991 with IMF and World Bank
support, Burundi is trying to diversify its agricultural exports,
attract foreign investment in industry, and modernize government
budgetary practices. Since October 1993 the nation has suffered from
massive ethnic-based violence which has resulted in the death of
perhaps 100,000 persons and the displacement of a million others.
Production continued to fall in 1996; foods, medicines, and
electricity are in extremely short supply. An impoverished and
disorganized government can hardly implement the needed reform
programs.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $4 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -3.7% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $600 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 56%
industry: 18%
services: 26% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 40% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1.9 million
by occupation: agriculture 93.0%, government 4.0%, industry and
commerce 1.5%, services 1.5% (1983 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $222 million
expenditures: $258 million, including capital expenditures of $92
million (1995 est.)

Industries: light consumer goods such as blankets, shoes, soap;
assembly of imported components; public works construction; food
processing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 55,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 105 million kWh (1991)
note: imports some electricity from Democratic Republic of the Congo

Electricity - consumption per capita: 18 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, cotton, tea, corn, sorghum, sweet
potatoes, bananas, manioc (tapioca); meat, milk, hides

Exports:
total value: $117 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: coffee 81%, tea, cotton, hides
partners : EU 60%, US 7%, Asia 1%

Imports:
total value: $234 million (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: capital goods 26%, petroleum products, foodstuffs,
consumer goods
partners: EU 47%, Asia 25%, US 6%

Debt - external: $1.1 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Burundi franc (FBu) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Burundi francs (FBu) per US$1 - 268.13 (November
1995), 249.76 (1995), 252.66 (1994), 242.78 (1993), 208.30 (1992),
181.51 (1991)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Burundi:Communications

Telephones: 7,200 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: primitive system
domestic: sparse system of open wire, radiotelephone communications,
and low-capacity microwave radio relay
international : satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 4,500 (1993 est.)

@Burundi:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 14,480 km
paved : 1,028 km
unpaved: 13,452 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: Lake Tanganyika

Ports and harbors: Bujumbura

Airports: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 1
over 3,047 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army (includes naval and air units), paramilitary
Gendarmerie

Military manpower - military age: 16 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,346,737 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 700,914 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 70,013 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $25 million (1993)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.6% (1993)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

CAMBODIA

@Cambodia:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, bordering the Gulf of Thailand, between
Thailand and Vietnam

Geographic coordinates: 13 00 N, 105 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 181,040 sq km
land: 176,520 sq km
water: 4,520 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Oklahoma

Land boundaries:
total : 2,572 km
border countries: Laos 541 km, Thailand 803 km, Vietnam 1,228 km

Coastline: 443 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy, monsoon season (May to November); dry season
(December to April); little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: mostly low, flat plains; mountains in southwest and north

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Gulf of Thailand 0 m
highest point: Phnum Aoral 1,810 m

Natural resources: timber, gemstones, some iron ore, manganese,
phosphates, hydropower potential

Land use:
arable land: 13%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 11%
forests and woodland: 66%
other : 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 920 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: monsoonal rains (June to November); flooding;
occasional droughts

Environment - current issues: logging activities throughout the
country and strip mining for gems in the western region along the
border with Thailand are resulting in habitat loss and declining
biodiversity (in particular, destruction of mangrove swamps threatens
natural fisheries); deforestation; soil erosion; in rural areas, a
majority of the population does not have access to potable water

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Marine Life Conservation,
Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 94
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of
the Sea, Marine Dumping

Geography - note: a land of paddies and forests dominated by the
Mekong River and Tonle Sap

@Cambodia:People

Population: 11,163,861 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 45% (male 2,573,135; female 2,497,776)
15-64 years : 52% (male 2,668,089; female 3,084,009)
65 years and over: 3% (male 144,001; female 196,851) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.72% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 42.63 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 15.39 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.86 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.73 male(s)/female
total population: 0.93 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 106 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 50.25 years
male: 48.79 years
female : 51.79 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.81 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Cambodian(s)
adjective: Cambodian

Ethnic groups: Khmer 90%, Vietnamese 5%, Chinese 1%, other 4%

Religions: Theravada Buddhism 95%, other 5%

Languages: Khmer (official), French

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 35%
male: 48%
female : 22% (1990 est.)

@Cambodia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Kingdom of Cambodia
conventional short form: Cambodia
local long form: Preahreacheanachakr Kampuchea
local short form: Kampuchea

Data code: CB

Government type: multiparty liberal democracy under a constitutional
monarchy established in September 1993

National capital: Phnom Penh

Administrative divisions: 22 provinces (khett, singular and plural)
and 1 municipality* (krong, singular and plural); Banteay Mean Cheay,
Batdambang, Kampong Cham, Kampong Chhnang, Kampong Spoe, Kampong Thum,
Kampot, Kandal, Kaoh Kong, Keb*, Kracheh, Mondol Kiri, Otdar Mean
Cheay, Phnum Penh, Pouthisat, Preah Seihanu (Sihanoukville), Preah
Vihear, Prey Veng, Rotanah Kiri, Siem Reab, Stoeng Treng, Svay Rieng,
Takev

Independence: 9 November 1949 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 9 November 1949

Constitution: promulgated 21 September 1993

Legal system: currently being defined

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: King Norodom SIHANOUK (reinstated 24 September 1993)
head of government: power shared between First Prime Minister Prince
Norodom RANARIDDH (since NA 1993) and Second Prime Minister HUN SEN
(since NA 1993)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the king
elections : none; the king is a constitutional monarch; prime
ministers appointed by the king

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (120 seats; members
elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 23 May 1993 (next to be held NA 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
FUNCINPEC 58, CPP 51, BLDP 10, MOLINAKA 1
note : the May 1993 elections were for the Constituent Assembly which
became the National Assembly after the new constitution was
promulgated in September 1993

Judicial branch: Supreme Court provided for by the constitution has
not yet been established and the future judicial system is yet to be
defined by law

Political parties and leaders: National United Front for an
Independent, Neutral, Peaceful, and Cooperative Cambodia (FUNCINPEC),
Prince NORODOM RANARIDDH; Cambodian Pracheachon Party or Cambodian
People's Party (CPP), CHEA SIM; Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party
(BLDP), SON SANN faction; Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party (BLDP),
IENG MOULY faction; Democratic Kampuchea (DK, also known as the Khmer
Rouge), KHIEU SAMPHAN; Movement Pour La Liberation Nationale Khmere
(MOLINAKA), PROM NEAKAREACH; Khmer Nation Party (KNP), SAM RAINSY

International organization participation: ACCT, AsDB, ASEAN
(observer), CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC,
ISO, ITU, Mekong Group, NAM, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador VAR HUOTH
chancery: 4500 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011
telephone: [1] (202) 726-7742
FAX : [1] (202) 726-8381

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Kenneth M. QUINN
embassy: 27 EO Street 240, Phnom Penh
mailing address: Box P, APO AP 96546
telephone: [855] (23) 426436, 426438
FAX: [855] (23) 426811

Flag description: three horizontal bands of blue (top), red (double
width), and blue with a white three-towered temple representing Angkor
Wat outlined in black in the center of the red band

Economy

Economy - overview: The Cambodian economy - virtually destroyed by
decades of war - is slowly recovering. Government leaders are moving
toward restoring fiscal and monetary discipline and have established
good working relations with international financial institutions.
Growth, starting from a low base, has been strong in 1991-96. Despite
such positive developments, the reconstruction effort faces many tough
challenges because of the persistence of internal political divisions
and the related lack of confidence of foreign investors. Rural
Cambodia, where 90% of about 9.5 million Khmer live, remains mired in
poverty. The almost total lack of basic infrastructure in the
countryside will hinder development and will contribute to a growing
imbalance in growth between urban and rural areas over the near term.
Moreover, the government's lack of experience in administering
economic and technical assistance programs and rampant corruption
among officials will slow the growth of critical public sector
investment. The decline of inflation from the 1992 rate of more than
50% is one of the bright spots.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $7.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $710 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 51%
industry: 14%
services: 35%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5% (1996 est.)

Labor force: 2.5 million to 3 million
by occupation : agriculture 80% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $261 million
expenditures: $496 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: rice milling, fishing, wood and wood products, rubber,
cement, gem mining, textiles

Industrial production growth rate: 7.9% (1993 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 100,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 180 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 17 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, rubber, corn, vegetables

Exports:
total value: $464 million (1996 est.)
commodities: timber, rubber, soybeans, sesame
partners : Singapore, Japan, Thailand, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia

Imports:
total value: $1.4 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: cigarettes, construction materials, petroleum products,
machinery, motor vehicles
partners : Singapore, Vietnam, Japan, Australia, Hong Kong, Indonesia

Debt - external: $1.9 billion (1994)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA
note: international donors pledged a total of $1.8 billion in 1995 and
1996

Currency: 1 new riel (CR) = 100 sen

Exchange rates: riels (CR) per US$1 - 2,723.0 (January 1997), 2,624.1
(1996), 2,450.8 (1995), 2,545.3 (1994), 2,689.0 (1993), 1,266.6 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Cambodia:Communications

Telephones: 7,000 (1981 est.)

Telephone system: service barely adequate for government requirements
and virtually nonexistent for general public
domestic: NA
international: landline international service limited to Vietnam and
other adjacent countries; satellite earth station - 1 Intersputnik
(Indian Ocean Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 5

Televisions: 70,000 (1993 est.)

@Cambodia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 603 km
narrow gauge: 603 km 1.000-m gauge

Highways:
total : 35,769 km
paved: 2,683 km
unpaved : 33,086 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 3,700 km navigable all year to craft drawing 0.6 m; 282 km
navigable to craft drawing 1.8 m

Ports and harbors: Kampong Saom (Sihanoukville), Kampot, Krong Kaoh
Kong, Phnom Penh

Merchant marine:
total: 27 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 187,652 GRT/256,929 DWT
ships by type : bulk 4, cargo 20, passenger-cargo 1, refrigerated
cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 14 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 6
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 8
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 7 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Khmer Royal Armed Forces (KRAF) - created in 1993
by the merger of the Cambodian People's Armed Forces and the two
noncommunist resistance armies; note - the KRAF is also known as the
Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF); Resistance forces - National Army
of Democratic Kampuchea (Khmer Rouge)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,418,916 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,348,065 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 97,361 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $160 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: offshore islands and sections of the
boundary with Vietnam are in dispute; maritime boundary with Vietnam
not defined; parts of border with Thailand in dispute; maritime
boundary with Thailand not clearly defined

Illicit drugs: transshipment country for Golden Triangle heroin en
route to West; possibly becoming money-laundering center; high-level
narcotics-related corruption reportedly involving government,
military, and police; possible small-scale opium, heroin, and
amphetamine production; large producer of cannabis for the
international market
______________________________________________________________________

CAMEROON

@Cameroon:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the Bight of Biafra, between
Equatorial Guinea and Nigeria

Geographic coordinates: 6 00 N, 12 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 475,440 sq km
land: 469,440 sq km
water: 6,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries:
total : 4,591 km
border countries: Central African Republic 797 km, Chad 1,094 km,
Republic of the Congo 523 km, Equatorial Guinea 189 km, Gabon 298 km,
Nigeria 1,690 km

Coastline: 402 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 50 nm

Climate: varies with terrain, from tropical along coast to semiarid
and hot in north

Terrain: diverse, with coastal plain in southwest, dissected plateau
in center, mountains in west, plains in north

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Fako 4,095 m

Natural resources: petroleum, bauxite, iron ore, timber, hydropower
potential

Land use:
arable land: 13%
permanent crops: 2%
permanent pastures: 4%
forests and woodland: 78%
other : 3% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 210 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recent volcanic activity with release of poisonous
gases

Environment - current issues: water-borne diseases are prevalent;
deforestation; overgrazing; desertification; poaching; overfishing

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of
the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber
94
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography - note: sometimes referred to as the hinge of Africa

@Cameroon:People

Population: 14,677,510 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 46% (male 3,387,450; female 3,356,237)
15-64 years: 51% (male 3,712,809; female 3,736,245)
65 years and over: 3% (male 219,975; female 264,894) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.86% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 42.22 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 13.64 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.83 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 77.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 52.27 years
male: 51.22 years
female: 53.35 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.93 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Cameroonian(s)
adjective: Cameroonian

Ethnic groups: Cameroon Highlanders 31%, Equatorial Bantu 19%, Kirdi
11%, Fulani 10%, Northwestern Bantu 8%, Eastern Nigritic 7%, other
African 13%, non-African less than 1%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 51%, Christian 33%, Muslim 16%

Languages: 24 major African language groups, English (official),
French (official)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 63.4%
male: 75%
female: 52.1% (1995 est.)

@Cameroon:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Cameroon
conventional short form: Cameroon
former: French Cameroon

Data code: CM

Government type: unitary republic; multiparty presidential regime
(opposition parties legalized 1990)

National capital: Yaounde

Administrative divisions: 10 provinces; Adamaoua, Centre, Est,
Extreme-Nord, Littoral, Nord, Nord-Ouest, Ouest, Sud, Sud-Ouest

Independence: 1 January 1960 (from UN trusteeship under French
administration)

National holiday: National Day, 20 May (1972)

Constitution: 20 May 1972

Legal system: based on French civil law system, with common law
influence; does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Paul BIYA (since 6 November 1982)
head of government: Prime Minister Peter Mafany MUSONGA (since 19
September 1996)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
elections : president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 11 October 1992 (next to be held NA October 1997);
prime minister appointed by the president
election results: President Paul BIYA reelected; percent of vote -
Paul BIYA 40%, SDF candidate John FRU NDI 36%, UNDP candidate Bello
Bouba MAIGARI 19%; note - election held amid widespread allegations of
fraud

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
Nationale (180 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
serve five-year terms; note - the president can either lengthen or
shorten the term of the legislature)
elections: last held 11 May 1997 (next to be held NA 2002)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
CDPM 109, SDF 43, UNDP 13, UDC 5, UPC-K 1, MDR 1, MLJC I; note - 7
contested seats will be filled in an election at a time to be set by
the Supreme Court

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: Cameroon People's Democratic Movement
or CPDM (government-controlled and the only party until legalization
of opposition parties in 1990) [Paul BIYA, president]
major opposition parties: Cameroonian Democratic Union or UDC [Adamou
NDAM NJOYA]; Movement for the Defense of the Republic or MDR [Dakole
DAISSALA, leader]; National Union for Democracy and Progress or UNDP
[Maigari BELLO BOUBA, chairman]; Social Democratic Front or SDF [John
FRU NDI, leader]; Union of Cameroonian Populations or UPC [Ndeh
NTUMAZAH, leader]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Alliance for Change or FAC;
Cameroon Anglophone Movement or CAM

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC, C,
CCC, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-19, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, PCA, UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNIDO, UNITAR, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Jerome MENDOUGA
chancery : 2349 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 265-8790 through 8794

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Charles H. TWINING
embassy: Rue Nachtigal, Yaounde
mailing address : B. P. 817, Yaounde; Pouch American Embassy DOS,
Washington, DC 20521-2520
telephone: [237] 23-40-14, 23-05-12
FAX: [237] 23-07-53

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side),
red, and yellow with a yellow five-pointed star centered in the red
band; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia

Economy

Economy - overview: Because of its offshore oil resources and
favorable agricultural conditions, Cameroon has one of the
best-endowed primary commodity economies in sub-Saharan Africa. Still,
it faces many of the serious problems facing other underdeveloped
countries, such as political instability, a top-heavy civil service,
and a generally unfavorable climate for business enterprise. The
development of the oil sector led to rapid economic growth between
1970 and 1985. Growth came to an abrupt halt in 1986, precipitated by
steep declines in the prices of major exports: coffee, cocoa, and
petroleum. Export earnings were cut by almost one-third, and
inefficiencies in fiscal management were exposed. Since 1990, the
government has embarked on various IMF and World Bank programs
designed to spur business investment, increase efficiency in
agriculture, improve trade and recapitalize the nation's banks.
Political instability, following suspect elections in 1992, has
limited the effectiveness of aid programs. Currently, Cameroon
receives only minimal assistance from the IMF and the World Bank.
Although the 50% devaluation of the currency of 12 January 1994
improved the potential for export growth, mismanagement remains and is
the main barrier to economic improvement. The devaluation led to a
spurt in inflation to 48% in 1994, but it moderated in 1995-96.
Progress toward privatization of remaining state industry remains
slow.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $17.5 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,230 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 29%
industry: 25%
services: 46% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 6% (FY96/97 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $2.23 billion
expenditures: $2.23 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY96/97 est.)

Industries: petroleum production and refining, food processing, light
consumer goods, textiles, lumber

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 630,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 2.71 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 186 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, cocoa, cotton, rubber, bananas,
oilseed, grains, root starches; livestock; timber

Exports:
total value: $1.9 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: crude oil and petroleum products, lumber, aluminum, cocoa
beans, coffee, cotton
partners: EU (particularly France) about 50%, African countries

Imports:
total value : $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: machines and electrical equipment, food, consumer goods,
transport equipment, petroleum products
partners: EU (France 42%, Germany), African countries, US 4%

Debt - external: $8.2 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992), 282.11 (1991)
note: beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF
100 per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since
1948

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Cameroon:Communications

Telephones: 36,737 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: available only to business and government
domestic: cable, microwave radio relay, and tropospheric scatter
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 11, FM 11, shortwave 0

Radios: 2 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1995)

Televisions: NA

@Cameroon:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,104 km
narrow gauge: 1,104 km 1.000-m gauge (1995 est.)

Highways:
total: 34,300 km
paved : 4,288 km
unpaved: 30,012 km (1995)

Waterways: 2,090 km; of decreasing importance

Ports and harbors: Bonaberi, Douala, Garoua, Kribi, Tiko

Merchant marine:
total: 2 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 24,122 GRT/33,509
DWT (1996 est.)

Airports: 44 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 22
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m : 3
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 12 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 22
1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
914 to 1,523 m : 15 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Naval Infantry), Air Force,
National Gendarmerie, Presidential Guard

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 3,211,508 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 1,623,228 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 156,208 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $102 million (FY93/94)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: demarcation of international boundaries in
vicinity of Lake Chad, the lack of which led to border incidents in
the past, is completed and awaits ratification by Cameroon, Chad,
Niger, and Nigeria; dispute with Nigeria over land and maritime
boundaries in the vicinity of the Bakasi Peninsula has been referred
to the International Court of Justice
______________________________________________________________________

CANADA

@Canada:Geography

Location: Northern North America, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean
and North Pacific Ocean, north of the conterminous US

Geographic coordinates: 60 00 N, 95 00 W

Map references: North America

Area:
total: 9,976,140 sq km
land: 9,220,970 sq km
water: 755,170 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than US

Land boundaries:
total: 8,893 km
border countries: US 8,893 km (includes 2,477 km with Alaska)

Coastline: 243,791 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: varies from temperate in south to subarctic and arctic in
north

Terrain: mostly plains with mountains in west and lowlands in
southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Logan 5,950 m

Natural resources: nickel, zinc, copper, gold, lead, molybdenum,
potash, silver, fish, timber, wildlife, coal, petroleum, natural gas

Land use:
arable land: 5%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 3%
forests and woodland: 54%
other: 38% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 7,100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: continuous permafrost in north is a serious obstacle
to development; cyclonic storms form east of the Rocky Mountains, a
result of the mixing of air masses from the Arctic, Pacific, and North
American interior, and produce most of the country's rain and snow

Environment - current issues: air pollution and resulting acid rain
severely affecting lakes and damaging forests; metal smelting,
coal-burning utilities, and vehicle emissions impacting on
agricultural and forest productivity; ocean waters becoming
contaminated due to agricultural, industrial, mining, and forestry
activities

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: second-largest country in world (after Russia);
strategic location between Russia and US via north polar route; nearly
90% of the population is concentrated within 161 km of the US/Canada
border

@Canada:People

Population: 30,337,334 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 20% (male 3,101,968; female 2,957,927)
15-64 years: 68% (male 10,333,085; female 10,201,996)
65 years and over: 12% (male 1,583,643; female 2,158,715) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.13% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 12.4 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.23 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 6.1 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.73 male(s)/female
total population : 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.96 years
male: 75.61 years
female: 82.48 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.66 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Canadian(s)
adjective: Canadian

Ethnic groups: British Isles origin 40%, French origin 27%, other
European 20%, Amerindian 1.5%, other, mostly Asian 11.5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 45%, United Church 12%, Anglican 8%, other
35% (1991)

Languages: English (official), French (official)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 97% (1986 est.)
male : NA%
female: NA%

@Canada:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Canada

Data code: CA

Government type: confederation with parliamentary democracy

National capital: Ottawa

Administrative divisions: 10 provinces and 2 territories*; Alberta,
British Columbia, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Newfoundland, Northwest
Territories*, Nova Scotia, Ontario, Prince Edward Island, Quebec,
Saskatchewan, Yukon Territory*
note: the Northwest Territories will be split in two as of April 1999;
the eastern section will be renamed Nunavut, the west is as yet
unnamed

Independence: 1 July 1867 (from UK)

National holiday: Canada Day, 1 July (1867)

Constitution: 17 April 1982 (Constitution Act); originally, the
machinery of the government was set up in the British North America
Act of 1867; charter of rights and unwritten customs

Legal system: based on English common law, except in Quebec, where
civil law system based on French law prevails; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General Romeo LeBLANC (since 8 February 1995)
head of government: Prime Minister Jean CHRETIEN (since 4 November
1993)
cabinet : Federal Ministry chosen by the prime minister from among the
members of his own party sitting in Parliament
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor general
appointed by the queen on the advice of the prime minister; following
legislative elections, the leader of the majority party in the House
of Commons is automatically designated by the governor general to
become prime minister

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Parlement consists of the
Senate or Senat (a body whose members are appointed to serve until
reaching 75 years of age by the governor general and selected on the
advice of the prime minister; its normal limit is 104 senators) and
the House of Commons or Chambre des Communes (295 seats; note - number
of seats will rise to 301 at the time of the next election; members
elected by direct popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: House of Commons - last held 25 October 1993 (next to be
held by 3 November 1998)
election results: percent of votes by party - Liberal Party 41%,
Reform Party 19%, Tories 16%, Bloc Quebecois 14%, New Democratic Party
7%, other 3%; seats by party - Liberal Party 177, Bloc Quebecois 53,
Reform Party 52, New Democratic Party 9, Progressive Conservative
Party 2, independents 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the prime
minister through the governor general

Political parties and leaders: Liberal Party [Jean CHRETIEN]; Bloc
Quebecois [Michel GAUTHIER (until March 1997)]; Reform Party [Preston
MANNING]; New Democratic Party [Alexa MCDONOUGH]; Progressive
Conservative Party [Jean CHAREST]

International organization participation: ACCT, AfDB, AG (observer),
APEC, AsDB, Australia Group, BIS, C, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE
(observer), EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, ESA (cooperating state), FAO, G- 7, G-
8, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NACC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS, OECD,
OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNDOF, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM,
UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNPREDEP, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Raymond A. J. CHRETIEN
chancery: 501 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20001
telephone: [1] (202) 682-1740
FAX: [1] (202) 682-7726
consulate(s) general : Atlanta, Boston, Buffalo, Chicago, Dallas,
Detroit, Los Angeles, Minneapolis, New York, and Seattle
consulate(s): Cincinnati, Cleveland, Miami, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh,
Princeton, San Diego, San Francisco, and San Jose

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant)
embassy : 100 Wellington Street, K1P 5T1, Ottawa
mailing address: P. O. Box 866, Ogdensburg, NY 13669-0430
telephone : [1] (613) 238-5335, 4470
FAX: [1] (613) 238-5720
consulate(s) general: Calgary, Halifax, Montreal, Quebec, Toronto, and
Vancouver

Flag description: three vertical bands of red (hoist side), white
(double width, square), and red with a red maple leaf centered in the
white band

Economy

Economy - overview: As an affluent, high-tech industrial society,
Canada today closely resembles the US in per capita output,
market-oriented economic system, and pattern of production. Since
World War II, the impressive growth of the manufacturing, mining, and
service sectors has transformed the nation from a largely rural
economy into one primarily industrial and urban. Canada started the
1990s in recession, and real rates of growth have averaged only 1.1%
so far this decade. Because of slower growth, Canada still faces high
unemployment - especially in Quebec and the Maritime Provinces - and a
large public sector debt. With its great natural resources, skilled
labor force, and modern capital plant, however, Canada will enjoy
better economic prospects in the future. The continuing constitutional
impasse between English- and French-speaking areas is raising the
possibility of a split in the confederation, making foreign investors
somewhat edgy.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $721 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $25,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 3%
industry: 31%
services : 66% (1996)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.4% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 15.1 million (1996)
by occupation : services 74%, manufacturing 15%, agriculture 3%,
construction 5%, other 3% (1994)

Unemployment rate: 9.7% (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $94.3 billion
expenditures: $115.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.7
billion (FY95/96 est.)

Industries: processed and unprocessed minerals, food products, wood
and paper products, transportation equipment, chemicals, fish
products, petroleum and natural gas

Industrial production growth rate: 1.3% (1996)

Electricity - capacity: 113.65 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 547.9 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 16,137 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, barley, oilseed, tobacco, fruits,
vegetables; dairy products; forest products; commercial fisheries
provide annual catch of 1.5 million metric tons, of which 75% is
exported

Exports:
total value: $195.4 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : newsprint, wood pulp, timber, crude petroleum,
machinery, natural gas, aluminum, motor vehicles and parts;
telecommunications equipment
partners: US, Japan, UK, Germany, South Korea, Netherlands, China

Imports:
total value: $169.5 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities : crude oil, chemicals, motor vehicles and parts, durable
consumer goods, electronic computers; telecommunications equipment and
parts
partners: US, Japan, UK, Germany, France, Mexico, Taiwan, South Korea

Debt - external: $253 billion (1996)

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $1.6 billion (1995)
note : ODA and OOF commitments, $10.1 billion (1986-91)

Currency: 1 Canadian dollar (Can$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Canadian dollars (Can$) per US$1 - 1.3486 (January
1997), 1.3635 (1996), 1.37241 (1995), 1.3656 (1994), 1.2901 (1993),
1.2087 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Canada:Communications

Telephones: 15.3 million (1990)

Telephone system: excellent service provided by modern technology
domestic : domestic satellite system with about 300 earth stations
international: 5 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth stations -
5 Intelsat (4 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Pacific Ocean) and 2 Intersputnik
(Atlantic Ocean Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 900, FM 29, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 70 (repeaters 1,400) (1991)

Televisions: 11.53 million (1983 est.)

@Canada:Transportation

Railways:
total: 70,176 km; note - there are two major transcontinental freight
railway systems: Canadian National (privatized November 1995) and
Canadian Pacific Railway; passenger service provided by
government-operated firm VIA, which has no trackage of its own
standard gauge: 70,000 km 1.435-m gauge (63 km electrified)
narrow gauge: 176 km 0.914-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 1.021 million km
paved: 358,371 km (including 19,000 km of expressways)
unpaved: 662,629 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 3,000 km, including Saint Lawrence Seaway

Pipelines: crude and refined oil 23,564 km; natural gas 74,980 km

Ports and harbors: Becancour (Quebec), Churchill, Halifax, Montreal,
New Westminister, Prince Rupert, Quebec, Saint John (New Brunswick),
Saint John's (Newfoundland), Seven Islands, Sydney, Three Rivers,
Thunder Bay, Toronto, Vancouver, Windsor

Merchant marine:
total: 60 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 557,941 GRT/775,391 DWT
ships by type: bulk 14, cargo 9, chemical tanker 4, oil tanker 15,
passenger 2, passenger-cargo 1, railcar carrier 2, roll-on/roll-off
cargo 8, short-sea passenger 3, specialized tanker 2
note: does not include ships used exclusively in the Great Lakes (1996
est.)

Airports: 1,139 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 816
over 3,047 m: 17
2,438 to 3,047 m: 15
1,524 to 2,437 m : 138
914 to 1,523 m: 229
under 914 m: 417 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 323
1,524 to 2,437 m: 55
914 to 1,523 m: 268 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 17 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Canadian Armed Forces (includes Land Forces Command
or LC, Maritime Command or MC, Air Command or AC, Communications
Command or CC, Training Command or TC), Royal Canadian Mounted Police
(RCMP)

Military manpower - military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 8,160,914 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 7,007,901 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 208,138 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $9 billion (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.6% (FY95/96)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: maritime boundary disputes with the US
(Dixon Entrance, Beaufort Sea, Strait of Juan de Fuca, Machias Seal
Island); Saint Pierre and Miquelon is focus of maritime boundary
dispute between Canada and France; in 1992 an arbitration panel
awarded the islands an exclusive economic zone area of 12,348 sq km to
settle the dispute

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis for the domestic drug
market; use of hydroponics technology permits growers to plant large
quantities of high-quality marijuana indoors; growing role as a
transit point for heroin and cocaine entering the US market
______________________________________________________________________

CAPE VERDE

@Cape Verde:Geography

Location: Western Africa, group of Islands in the North Atlantic
Ocean, west of Senegal

Geographic coordinates: 16 00 N, 24 00 W

Map references: World

Area:
total: 4,030 sq km
land: 4,030 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Rhode Island

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 965 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; warm, dry summer; precipitation meager and very
erratic

Terrain: steep, rugged, rocky, volcanic

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point : Pico 2,829 m

Natural resources: salt, basalt rock, pozzuolana (a siliceous volcanic
ash used to produce hydraulic cement), limestone, kaolin, fish

Land use:
arable land: 11%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 6%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 83% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 30 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: prolonged droughts; harmattan wind can obscure
visibility; volcanically and seismically active

Environment - current issues: overgrazing of livestock and improper
land use such as the cultivation of crops on steep slopes has led to
soil erosion; demand for wood used as fuel has resulted in
deforestation; desertification; environmental damage has threatened
several species of birds and reptiles; overfishing

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Environmental
Modification, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: strategic location 500 km from west coast of Africa
near major north-south sea routes; important communications station;
important sea and air refueling site

@Cape Verde:People

Population: 393,943 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 46% (male 91,409; female 89,810)
15-64 years: 48% (male 87,868; female 100,948)
65 years and over: 6% (male 9,594; female 14,214) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.54% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 35.45 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.3 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -12.73 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.87 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.68 male(s)/female
total population: 0.92 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 49.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 70.04 years
male: 66.76 years
female: 73.42 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.2 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Cape Verdean(s)
adjective: Cape Verdean

Ethnic groups: Creole (mulatto) 71%, African 28%, European 1%

Religions: Roman Catholicism fused with indigenous beliefs

Languages: Portuguese, Crioulo, a blend of Portuguese and West African
words

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 71.6%
male: 81.4%
female: 63.8% (1995 est.)

@Cape Verde:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Cape Verde
conventional short form: Cape Verde
local long form: Republica de Cabo Verde
local short form: Cabo Verde

Data code: CV

Government type: republic

National capital: Praia

Administrative divisions: 14 districts (concelhos, singular -
concelho); Boa Vista, Brava, Fogo, Maio, Paul, Praia, Porto Novo,
Ribeira Grande, Sal, Santa Catarina, Santa Cruz, Sao Nicolau, Sao
Vicente, Tarrafal

Independence: 5 July 1975 (from Portugal)

National holiday: Independence Day, 5 July (1975)

Constitution: new constitution came into force 25 September 1992

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Antonio MASCARENHAS Monteiro (since 22 March
1991)
head of government : Prime Minister Carlos Alberto Wahnon de Carvalho
VEIGA (since 13 January 1991)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister from
among the members of the People's National Assembly
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 18 February 1996 (next to be held NA February
2001); prime minister nominated by the People's National Assembly and
appointed by the president
election results: Antonio MASCARENHAS Monteiro elected president;
percent of vote - Antonio MASCARENHAS Monteiro (independent) 80.1%

Legislative branch: unicameral People's National Assembly or
Assembleia Nacional Popular (72 seats; members are elected by popular
vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 17 December 1995 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results : percent of vote by party - MPD 59%, PAICV 28%, PCD
6%; seats by party - MPD 50, PAICV 21, PCD 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Tribunal of Justice or Supremo Tribunal de
Justia

Political parties and leaders: Movement for Democracy or MPD [Prime
Minister Carlos VEIGA, founder and chairman]; African Party for
Independence of Cape Verde or PAICV [Pedro Verona Rodrigues PIRES,
chairman]; Party for Democratic Convergence or PCD; Social Democratic
Party or PSD [leader NA]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA, ECOWAS,
FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NAM, OAU, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Alberto Santos SILVA CARLOS
chancery: 3415 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone: [1] (202) 965-6820
FAX: [1] (202) 965-1207
consulate(s) general: Boston

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Lawrence Neal BENEDICT (17 June 1996)
embassy: Rua Abilio Macedo 81, Praia
mailing address: C. P. 201, Praia
telephone: [238] 61 56 16
FAX : [238] 61 13 55

Flag description: three horizontal bands of light blue (top, double
width), white (with a horizontal red stripe in the middle third), and
light blue; a circle of 10 yellow five-pointed stars is centered on
the hoist end of the red stripe and extends into the upper and lower
blue bands

Economy

Economy - overview: Cape Verde's low per capita GDP reflects a poor
natural resource base, serious water shortages exacerbated by cycles
of long-term drought, and a high birthrate. The economy is service
oriented, with commerce, transport, and public services accounting for
almost 70% of GDP. Although nearly 70% of the population lives in
rural areas, the share of agriculture in GNP is only 14%, of which
fishing accounts for 4%. About 90% of food must be imported. The
fishing potential, mostly lobster and tuna, is not fully exploited.
Cape Verde annually runs a high trade deficit, financed by remittances
from emigrants and foreign aid, which form important supplements to
GDP. Economic reforms, launched by the new democratic government in
1991, are aimed at developing the private sector and attracting
foreign investment to diversify the economy. Prospects for 1997 depend
heavily on the maintenance of aid flows, remittances, and the momentum
of the government's development program.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $472 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.7% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,000 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 14%
industry: 17%
services: 69% (1992 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7.8% (1995)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA %

Budget:
revenues: $253.7 million
expenditures: $276 million (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: fish processing, salt mining, garments, ship repair, food
and beverages

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 17,000 kW

Electricity - production: 15 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 39 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: bananas, corn, beans, sweet potatoes,
sugarcane, coffee, peanuts; fish

Exports:
total value: $10 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: fish, bananas, fuels, basic manufactures
partners: Netherlands, Portugal 50%, Angola, Spain, Singapore, UK

Imports:
total value : $211.8 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, consumer goods, industrial products,
transport equipment, fuels
partners : Portugal 45%, Netherlands, Germany, Spain, Brazil, France,
Cote d'Ivoire

Debt - external: $170 million (1994)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Cape Verdean escudo (CVEsc) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Cape Verdean escudos (CVEsc) per US$1 - 84.770
(December 1996), 82.591 (1996), 76.853 (1995), 81.891 (1994), 80.427
(1993), 68.018 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Cape Verde:Communications

Telephones: 1,740 (1987 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: interisland microwave radio relay system
international : 2 coaxial submarine cables; HF radiotelephone to
Senegal and Guinea-Bissau; satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat
(Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 7,000 (1991 est.)

@Cape Verde:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 1,100 km
paved: 858 km
unpaved: 242 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Mindelo, Praia, Tarrafal

Merchant marine:
total: 3 (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,032 GRT/5,966 DWT
ships by type: cargo 2, chemical tanker 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 6 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 6
over 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 5 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: People's Revolutionary Armed Forces (FARP; includes
Army and Navy), Security Service

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 78,622 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 44,870 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $3.4 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: increasingly used as a transshipment point for illicit
drugs moving from Latin America and Africa destined for Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

CAYMAN ISLANDS

(dependent territory of the UK)

@Cayman Islands:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island group in Caribbean Sea, nearly one-half of
the way from Cuba to Honduras

Geographic coordinates: 19 30 N, 80 30 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total : 260 sq km
land: 260 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 160 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; warm, rainy summers (May to October) and
cool, relatively dry winters (November to April)

Terrain: low-lying limestone base surrounded by coral reefs

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: The Bluff 43 m

Natural resources: fish, climate and beaches that foster tourism

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 8%
forests and woodland: 23%
other: 69% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hurricanes (July to November)

Environment - current issues: no natural fresh water resources,
drinking water supplies must be met by rainwater catchment

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: important location between Cuba and Central America

@Cayman Islands:People

Population: 36,153 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 4.25% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 14.24 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.98 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 33.2 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)
note: major destination for Cubans trying to migrate to the US

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population : NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 8.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 77.1 years
male: 75.37 years
female: 78.81 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.37 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Caymanian(s)
adjective : Caymanian

Ethnic groups: mixed 40%, white 20%, black 20%, expatriates of various
ethnic groups 20%

Religions: United Church (Presbyterian and Congregational), Anglican,
Baptist, Roman Catholic, Church of God, other Protestant denominations

Languages: English

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
total population: 98%
male: 98%
female: 98% (1970 est.)

@Cayman Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Cayman Islands

Data code: CJ

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK

Government type: NA

National capital: George Town

Administrative divisions: 8 districts; Creek, Eastern, Midland, South
Town, Spot Bay, Stake Bay, West End, Western

Independence: none (dependent territory of the UK)

National holiday: Constitution Day (first Monday in July)

Constitution: 1959, revised 1972 and 1992

Legal system: British common law and local statutes

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952)
head of government: Governor and President of the Executive Council
John OWEN (since 15 September 1995)
cabinet: Executive Council (three members appointed by the governor,
four members elected by the Legislative Assembly)
elections : none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; the governor is
appointed by the queen

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly (18 seats, 3
official members and 15 elected by popular vote; members serve
four-year terms)
elections: last held 20 November 1996 (next to be held NA November
2000)
election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - National Team
coalition 9, independents 6

Judicial branch: Grand Court; Cayman Islands Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: no formal political parties

International organization participation: Caricom (observer), CDB,
Interpol (subbureau), IOC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (dependent territory of
the UK)

Flag description: blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper
hoist-side quadrant and the Caymanian coat of arms on a white disk
centered on the outer half of the flag; the coat of arms includes a
pineapple and turtle above a shield with three stars (representing the
three islands) and a scroll at the bottom bearing the motto HE HATH
FOUNDED IT UPON THE SEAS

Economy

Economy - overview: With no direct taxation, the Islands are a
thriving offshore financial center; 28,000 foreign companies do
business with the 600 registered banks and trust companies; banking
assets exceed $500 billion. Tourism is also a mainstay, accounting for
about 70% of GDP and 75% of foreign currency earnings. The tourist
industry is aimed at the luxury market and caters mainly to visitors
from North America. Total tourist arrivals exceeded one million
visitors in 1995 and again in 1996. About 90% of the islands' food and
consumer goods must be imported. The Caymanians enjoy one of the
highest outputs per capita and one of the highest standards of living
in the world.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $860 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $23,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 1.4%
industry: 3.2%
services: 95.4% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.5% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 8,061
by occupation: service workers 18.7%, clerical 18.6%, construction
12.5%, finance and investment 6.7%, directors and business managers
5.9% (1979)

Unemployment rate: 7% (1992)

Budget:
revenues: $141.5 million
expenditures: $160.7 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1991)

Industries: tourism, banking, insurance and finance, construction,
construction materials, furniture

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 71,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: 7,487 kWh (1994 est.)

Agriculture - products: vegetables, fruit; livestock; turtle farming

Exports:
total value : $10 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: turtle products, manufactured consumer goods
partners : mostly US

Imports:
total value: $329 million (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, manufactured goods
partners: US, Trinidad and Tobago, UK, Netherlands Antilles, Japan

Debt - external: $15 million (1986)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Caymanian dollar (CI$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Caymanian dollars (CI$) per US$1 - 0.83 (3 November
1995), 0.85 (22 November 1993)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Cayman Islands:Communications

Telephones: 21,584 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: 1 submarine coaxial cable; satellite earth station - 1
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 28,200 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1995)

Televisions: 6,000 (1992 est.)

@Cayman Islands:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 406 km
paved: 304 km
unpaved : 102 km

Ports and harbors: Cayman Brac, George Town

Merchant marine:
total: 42 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 736,004 GRT/1,153,058 DWT
ships by type : bulk 5, cargo 10, chemical tanker 2, container 4, oil
tanker 4, refrigerated cargo 11, roll-on/roll-off cargo 5, vehicle
carrier 1
note : a flag of convenience registry; Greece owns 7 ships, US 7, UK
5, India 1, Japan 1, Norway 1, Sweden 1, Switzerland 1, and United
Arab Emirates 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Cayman Islands Police Force (RCIPF)

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: vulnerable to drug money-laundering and drug
transshipment
______________________________________________________________________

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Introduction

Current issues: in 1996 the Central African Republic experienced three
mutinies by dissident elements of the armed forces which demanded back
pay as well as political and military reforms; continuing violence in
1997 between the government and rebel military and civilian groups
over pay issues, living conditions, and lack of opposition party
representation in the government has destroyed many businesses in the
capital, reducing tax revenues and exacerbating the government's
problems in meeting expenses

@Central African Republic:Geography

Location: Central Africa, north of Democratic Republic of the Congo

Geographic coordinates: 7 00 N, 21 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 622,980 sq km
land: 622,980 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries:
total : 5,203 km
border countries: Cameroon 797 km, Chad 1,197 km, Democratic Republic
of the Congo 1,577 km, Republic of the Congo 467 km, Sudan 1,165 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; hot, dry winters; mild to hot, wet summers

Terrain: vast, flat to rolling, monotonous plateau; scattered hills in
northeast and southwest

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Oubangui River 335 m
highest point: Mount Gaou 1,420 m

Natural resources: diamonds, uranium, timber, gold, oil

Land use:
arable land: 3%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 5%
forests and woodland: 75%
other: 17% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dusty harmattan winds affect northern
areas; floods are common

Environment - current issues: tap water is not potable; poaching has
diminished its reputation as one of the last great wildlife refuges;
desertification; deforestation

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography - note: landlocked; almost the precise center of Africa

@Central African Republic:People

Population: 3,342,051 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 44% (male 738,623; female 731,163)
15-64 years : 52% (male 858,386; female 894,695)
65 years and over: 4% (male 54,848; female 64,336) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.01% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 39.52 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 17.94 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.5 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.85 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 110.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 45.24 years
male: 44.4 years
female : 46.12 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.35 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Central African(s)
adjective: Central African

Ethnic groups: Baya 34%, Banda 27%, Sara 10%, Mandjia 21%, Mboum 4%,
M'Baka 4%, Europeans 6,500 (including 3,600 French)

Religions: indigenous beliefs 24%, Protestant 25%, Roman Catholic 25%,
Muslim 15%, other 11%
note: animistic beliefs and practices strongly influence the Christian
majority

Languages: French (official), Sangho (lingua franca and national
language), Arabic, Hunsa, Swahili

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 60%
male: 68.5%
female: 52.4% (1995 est.)

@Central African Republic:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Central African Republic
conventional short form: none
local long form : Republique Centrafricaine
local short form: none
former: Central African Empire
abbreviation: CAR

Data code: CT

Government type: republic;

National capital: Bangui

Administrative divisions: 14 prefectures (prefectures, singular -
prefecture), 2 economic prefectures* (prefectures economiques,
singular - prefecture economique), and 1 commune**; Bamingui-Bangoran,
Bangui**, Basse-Kotto, Gribingui*, Haute-Kotto, Haute-Sangha,
Haut-Mbomou, Kemo-Gribingui, Lobaye, Mbomou, Nana-Mambere,
Ombella-Mpoko, Ouaka, Ouham, Ouham-Pende, Sangha*, Vakaga

Independence: 13 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: National Day, 1 December (1958) (proclamation of the
republic)

Constitution: passed by referendum 29 December 1994; adopted 7 January
1995

Legal system: based on French law

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Ange PATASSE (since 22 October 1993)
head of government: Prime Minister Michel GBEZERA-BRIA (since January
1997)
cabinet: Council of Ministers
elections : president elected by popular vote for a 6-year term;
election last held 19 September 1993 (next to be held October 1999);
prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Ange PATASSE elected president; percent of vote -
PATASSE 52.45%, Abel GOUMBA 45.62%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
Nationale (85 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms)
elections: last held 19 September 1993 (next to be held October 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - MLPC
34, RDC 13, PLD 7, FPP 7, ADP 6, PSD 3, CN 3, MDREC 1, PRC 1, FC 1,
MESAN 1, independents supporting David DACKO 6, independents 2
note: the National Assembly is advised by the Economic and Regional
Council or Conseil Economique et Regional; when they sit together they
are called the Congress or Congres

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Cour Supreme, judges appointed by
the president; Constitutional Court, judges appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: Alliance for Democracy and Progress or
ADP [Tchapka BREDE]; Central African Democratic Assembly or RDC [Andre
KOLINGBA]; Central African Republican Party or PRC; Civic Forum or FC
[Gen. Timothee MALENDOMA]; Democratic Movement for the Renaissance and
Evolution of Central Africa or MDREC [Joseph BENDOUNGA]; Liberal
Democratic Party or PLD [Nestor KOMBO-NAGUEMON]; Movement for the
Liberation of the Central African People or MLPC [the party of the
president, Ange Felix PATASSE]; Movement for Democracy and Development
or MDD [David DACKO]; National Convention or CN [David GALIAMBO];
Patriotic Front for Progress or FPP [Abel GOUMBA]; Social Democratic
Party or PSD [Enoch Derant LAKOUE]; Social Evolution Movement of Black
Africa or MESAN [Prosper LAVODRAMA and Joseph NGBANGADIBO]

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC, CCC,
CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC
(observer), UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO,
WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Henri KOBA
chancery: 1618 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone : [1] (202) 483-7800, 7801
FAX: [1] (202) 332-9893

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Mosina H. JORDAN
embassy: Avenue David Dacko, Bangui
mailing address : B. P. 924, Bangui
telephone: [236] 61 02 00, 61 25 78, 61 02 10
FAX: [236] 61 44 94

Flag description: four equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white,
green, and yellow with a vertical red band in center; there is a
yellow five-pointed star on the hoist side of the blue band

Economy

Economy - overview: Subsistence agriculture, together with forestry,
remains the backbone of the economy of the Central African Republic
(CAR), with more than 70% of the population living in outlying areas.
The agricultural sector generates half of GDP. Timber has accounted
for about 16% of export earnings and the diamond industry for nearly
54%. Important constraints to economic development include the CAR's
landlocked position, a poor transportation system, a largely unskilled
work force, and a legacy of misdirected macroeconomic policies. The
50% devaluation of the currencies of 14 Francophone African nations on
12 January 1994 had mixed effects on the CAR's economy. Diamond,
timber, coffee, and cotton exports increased, leading an estimated
rise of GDP of 7% in 1994 and nearly 5% in 1995. Inflation, however,
remains a problem. Moreover, ongoing violence between the government
and rebel military and civilian groups over pay issues, living
conditions, and opposition party political representation has
destroyed many businesses in the capital, reducing tax revenues for
the government, and delaying negotiations for an IMF financial aid
agreement.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $2.5 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.8% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $800 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 50%
industry: 14%
services: 36% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 19.4% (1995)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $638 million
expenditures: $1.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $888
million (1994 est.)

Industries: diamond mining, sawmills, breweries, textiles, footwear,
assembly of bicycles and motorcycles

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 40,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 95 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 32 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: cotton, coffee, tobacco, manioc (tapioca),
yams, millet, corn, bananas; timber

Exports:
total value: $181 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities : diamonds, timber, cotton, coffee, tobacco
partners: France 16%, Belgium-Luxembourg 40.1%, Italy, Japan, US,
Spain, Iran, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of the Congo

Imports:
total value: $176 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: food, textiles, petroleum products, machinery, electrical
equipment, motor vehicles, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, consumer goods,
industrial products
partners: France 37%, other EU countries, Japan 24%, Algeria,
Cameroon, Namibia

Debt - external: $890 million (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note: beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF
100 per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since
1948

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Central African Republic:Communications

Telephones: 16,867 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: fair system
domestic: network consists principally of microwave radio relay and
low-capacity, low-powered radiotelephone communication
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 7,500 (1993 est.)

@Central African Republic:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 23,810 km
paved: 429 km
unpaved: 23,381 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 800 km; traditional trade carried on by means of
shallow-draft dugouts; Oubangui is the most important river

Ports and harbors: Bangui, Nola

Airports: 43 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 11
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 2
under 914 m: 8 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 32
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 10
914 to 1,523 m: 21 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Central African Army (includes Republican Guard),
Air Force, National Gendarmerie, Police Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 755,441 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 393,765 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $30 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.3% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

CHAD

Introduction

Historical perspective: After enduring decades of civil warfare among
ethnic groups as well as invasions by Libya, Chad got started toward a
more stable state with the seizure of the government in early December
1990 by former northern guerrilla leader Idress DEBY. His transitional
government eventually suppressed armed rebellion in all quarters of
the country, settled the territorial dispute with Libya on terms
favorable to Chad, produced a democratic constitution which was
ratified by popular referendum in March 1996, held multiparty national
presidential elections in June and July 1996 (DEBY won with 67% of the
vote), and held multiparty elections to the National Assembly in
January and February 1997, in which Idress DEBY's party, Patriotic
Salvation Movement or MPS, won a majority of the seats.

@Chad:Geography

Location: Central Africa, south of Libya

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 19 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 1.284 million sq km
land: 1,259,200 sq km
water: 24,800 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than three times the size of
California

Land boundaries:
total: 5,968 km
border countries: Cameroon 1,094 km, Central African Republic 1,197
km, Libya 1,055 km, Niger 1,175 km, Nigeria 87 km, Sudan 1,360 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical in south, desert in north

Terrain: broad, arid plains in center, desert in north, mountains in
northwest, lowlands in south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Djourab Depression 175 m
highest point: Emi Koussi 3,415 m

Natural resources: petroleum (unexploited but exploration under way),
uranium, natron, kaolin, fish (Lake Chad)

Land use:
arable land: 3%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 36%
forests and woodland: 26%
other: 35% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 140 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dusty harmattan winds occur in north;
periodic droughts; locust plagues

Environment - current issues: inadequate supplies of potable water;
improper waste disposal in rural areas contributes to soil and water
pollution; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping

Geography - note: landlocked; Lake Chad is the most significant water
body in the Sahel

@Chad:People

Population: 7,166,023 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 44% (male 1,586,873; female 1,579,086)
15-64 years: 53% (male 1,854,645; female 1,931,519)
65 years and over: 3% (male 94,516; female 119,384) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.67% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 43.85 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 17.15 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.04 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.79 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 118.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 47.88 years
male: 45.49 years
female: 50.37 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.79 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Chadian(s)
adjective: Chadian

Ethnic groups: Muslims (Arabs, Toubou, Hadjerai, Fulbe, Kotoko,
Kanembou, Baguirmi, Boulala, Zaghawa, and Maba), non-Muslims (Sara,
Ngambaye, Mbaye, Goulaye, Moundang, Moussei, Massa), nonindigenous
150,000 (of whom 1,000 are French)

Religions: Muslim 50%, Christian 25%, indigenous beliefs (mostly
animism) 25%

Languages: French (official), Arabic (official), Sara and Sango (in
south), more than 100 different languages and dialects

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write in French or Arabic
total population: 48.1%
male : 62.1%
female: 34.7% (1995 est.)

@Chad:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Chad
conventional short form: Chad
local long form : Republique du Tchad
local short form: Tchad

Data code: CD

Government type: republic

National capital: N'Djamena

Administrative divisions: 14 prefectures (prefectures, singular -
prefecture); Batha, Biltine, Borkou-Ennedi-Tibesti, Chari-Baguirmi,
Guera, Kanem, Lac, Logone Occidental, Logone Oriental, Mayo-Kebbi,
Moyen-Chari, Ouaddai, Salamat, Tandjile

Independence: 11 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 11 August (1960)

Constitution: 31 March 1995, passed by referendum

Legal system: based on French civil law system and Chadian customary
law; does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Lt. Gen. Idriss DEBY (since 4 December 1990)
head of government : Prime Minister Djimasta KOIBLA (since 9 April
1995); appointed by the president
cabinet: Council of State appointed by the president on the
recommendation of the prime minister
elections: the constitution provides for the election of a president
by direct popular vote to serve a term of five years; if no candidate
receives at least 50% of the total vote, the two candidates receiving
the most votes must stand for a second round of voting; last held 2
June and 11 July 1996 (next to be held NA 2001); the prime minister is
appointed by the president
election results: in the first round of voting none of the 15
candidates received the required 50% of the total vote; percent of
vote, first round - Lt. Gen. Idress DEBY 47.8 %; percent of vote,
second round - Lt. Gen. DEBY 69.1%, Wadal Abdelkader KAMOUGUE 30.9%;
President DEBY reappointed Prime Minister Djimasta KOIBLA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (125 seats; members
serve four-year terms); replaces the Higher Transitional Council or
the Conseil Superieur de Transition
elections: National Assembly - last held in two rounds on 5 January
and 23 February 1997, (next to be held NA 2001); in the first round of
voting on 5 January 1997 some candidates won clear victories by
receiving 50% or more of the vote; where that did not happen, the two
highest scoring candidates stood for a second round of voting
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - MPS
65, URD 29, UNDR 15, RDP 3, others 13

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Court of Appeal; Criminal Courts;
Magistrate Courts

Political parties and leaders: Patriotic Salvation Movement or MPS
[Maldom Bada ABBAS, chairman], originally in opposition but now the
party in power and the party of the president; National Union for
Development and Renewal or UNDR [Saleh KEBZABO, leader]; Rally for
Democracy and Progress or RDP [Lal Mahamat CHOUA, leader]; Union for
Renewal and Democracy or URD [Gen. Wadal Abdelkader KAMOUGUE, leader];
note - in mid-1996 Chad had about 60 political parties, of which these
are the most prominent in the new National Assembly

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC,
CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, UDEAC,
UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Mahamat Saleh AHMAT
chancery: 2002 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 462-4009
FAX: [1] (202) 265-1937

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador David C. HALSTED
embassy: Avenue Felix Eboue, N'Djamena
mailing address : B. P. 413, N'Djamena
telephone: [235] (51) 70-09, (51) 90-52, (51) 92-33
FAX: [235] (51) 56-54

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side),
yellow, and red; similar to the flag of Romania; also similar to the
flag of Andorra, which has a national coat of arms featuring a
quartered shield centered in the yellow band; design was based on the
flag of France

Economy

Economy - overview: Unfavorable climate, geographic remoteness, poor
resource endowment, and lack of infrastructure make Chad one of the
most underdeveloped countries in the world. Its economy is hobbled by
political turmoil, drought, and food shortages. Consequently the
economy has shown little progress in recent years in overcoming a
severe setback brought on by civil war in the late 1980s. About 85% of
the work force is involved in subsistence farming and fishing. Cotton
is the major cash crop, accounting for at least half of exports. Chad
is highly dependent on foreign aid, especially food credits, given
chronic food shortages in several regions. Of all the Francophone
countries in Africa, Chad has benefited the least from the 50%
devaluation of their currencies on 12 January 1994. Despite an
increase in external financial aid and price increases for cotton -
the primary source of foreign exchange - the corrupt and enfeebled
government bureaucracy continues to postpone payment of public sector
salaries and to dampen economic enterprise by neglecting payments to
domestic suppliers. The devaluation resulted in stepped-up inflation
of 41% in 1994; inflation fell to 9% in 1995 but it remains high
compared with other Francophone countries. In one favorable
development, Chad in December 1996 concluded an agreement with
ESSO/Chad (EXXON) for drilling and extracting petroleum at Doba. Oil
will be piped through Cameroon for export.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $3.3 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.6% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $600 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 48%
industry: 18%
services : 34% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 9% (1995 est.)

Labor force: NA
by occupation : agriculture 85% (subsistence farming, herding, and
fishing)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $136 million
expenditures: $222 million, including capital expenditures of $107
million (1994 est.)

Industries: cotton textiles, meat packing, beer brewing, natron
(sodium carbonate), soap, cigarettes, construction materials

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 40,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 70 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 14 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: cotton, sorghum, millet, peanuts, rice,
potatoes, manioc (tapioca); cattle, sheep, goats, camels

Exports:
total value: $226 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: cotton, cattle, textiles, fish
partners : Portugal 30%, Germany 18%, South Africa 16%, France 7%

Imports:
total value: $225 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: machinery and transportation equipment 39%, industrial
goods 20%, petroleum products 13%, foodstuffs 9%; textiles; note -
excludes military equipment
partners: France 34%, Cameroon 24%, Nigeria 7%, US 6%

Debt - external: $875 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA Francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note: beginning 12 January 1994 the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100
per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Chad:Communications

Telephones: 5,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: primitive system
domestic: fair system of radiotelephone communication stations
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1987 est.)
note: limited TV service; many facilities are inoperative

Televisions: 7,000 (1991 est.)

@Chad:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 32,700 km
paved: 262 km
unpaved : 32,438 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 2,000 km navigable

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 46 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 15
over 3,047 m : 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
under 914 m: 10 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 31
1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
914 to 1,523 m: 17 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Armed Forces (includes Ground Force, Air Force, and
Gendarmerie), Republican Guard, Police

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,603,194 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 830,777 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 65,906 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $74 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 11.1% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: demarcation of international boundaries in
the vicinity of Lake Chad, the lack of which has led to border
incidents in the past, is completed and awaiting ratification by
Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria
______________________________________________________________________

CHILE

@Chile:Geography

Location: Southern South America, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean
and South Pacific Ocean, between Argentina and Peru

Geographic coordinates: 30 00 S, 71 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total : 756,950 sq km
land: 748,800 sq km
water: 8,150 sq km
note: includes Isla de Pascua (Easter Island) and Isla Sala y Gomez

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than twice the size of Montana

Land boundaries:
total : 6,171 km
border countries: Argentina 5,150 km, Bolivia 861 km, Peru 160 km

Coastline: 6,435 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; desert in north; cool and damp in south

Terrain: low coastal mountains; fertile central valley; rugged Andes
in east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Cerro Aconcagua 6,962 m

Natural resources: copper, timber, iron ore, nitrates, precious
metals, molybdenum

Land use:
arable land: 5%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 18%
forests and woodland: 22%
other : 55% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 12,650 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: severe earthquakes; active volcanism; tsunamis

Environment - current issues: air pollution from industrial and
vehicle emissions; water pollution from raw sewage; deforestation
contributing to loss of biodiversity; soil erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: strategic location relative to sea lanes between
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans (Strait of Magellan, Beagle Channel, Drake
Passage); Atacama Desert is one of world's driest regions

@Chile:People

Population: 14,508,158 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 28% (male 2,057,633; female 2,031,588)
15-64 years: 65% (male 4,684,158; female 4,734,170)
65 years and over: 7% (male 416,047; female 584,562) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.18% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 17.53 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.68 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 13.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 74.73 years
male: 71.5 years
female: 77.95 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.17 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Chilean(s)
adjective: Chilean

Ethnic groups: white and white-Amerindian 95%, Amerindian 3%, other 2%

Religions: Roman Catholic 89%, Protestant 11%, Jewish

Languages: Spanish

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 95.2%
male : 95.4%
female: 95% (1995 est.)

@Chile:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Chile
conventional short form: Chile
local long form: Republica de Chile
local short form: Chile

Data code: CI

Government type: republic

National capital: Santiago

Administrative divisions: 13 regions (regiones, singular - region);
Aisen del General Carlos Ibanez del Campo, Antofagasta, Araucania,
Atacama, Bio-Bio, Coquimbo, Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins, Los
Lagos, Magallanes y de la Antartica Chilena, Maule, Region
Metropolitana, Tarapaca, Valparaiso
note: the US does not recognize claims to Antarctica

Independence: 18 September 1810 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 18 September (1810)

Constitution: 11 September 1980, effective 11 March 1981; amended 30
July 1989

Legal system: based on Code of 1857 derived from Spanish law and
subsequent codes influenced by French and Austrian law; judicial
review of legislative acts in the Supreme Court; does not accept
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Eduardo FREI Ruiz-Tagle (since 11 March
1994); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
head of government : President Eduardo FREI Ruiz-Tagle (since 11 March
1994); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
election last held 11 December 1993 (next to be held NA December 1999)
election results: Eduardo FREI Ruiz-Tagle elected president; percent
of vote - Eduardo FREI Ruiz-Tagle (PDC) 58%, Arturo ALESSANDRI 24.4%,
other 17.6%

Legislative branch: bicameral National Congress or Congreso Nacional
consists of the Senate or Senado (46 seats, 38 elected by popular
vote; members serve eight-year terms - one half elected every four
years) and the Chamber of Deputies or Camara de Diputados (120 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : Senate - last held 11 December 1993 (next to be held NA
December 1997); Chamber of Deputies - last held 11 December 1993 (next
to be held NA December 1997)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - Coalition of Parties for Democracy 21 (PDC 13, PS 4, PPD 3, PR
1), Union for the Progress of Chile 15 (RN 11, UDI 3, UCC 1),
right-wing independents 2; Chamber of Deputies - percent of vote by
party - Coalition of Parties for Democracy 53.95% (PDC 27.16%, PS
12.01%, PPD 11.82%, PR 2.96%), Union for the Progress of Chile 30.57%
(RN 15.25%, UDI 12.13%, UCC 3.19%); seats by party - Coalition of
Parties for Democracy 70 (PDC 37, PPD 15, PR 2, PS 15, left-wing
independent 1), Union for the Progress of Chile 47 (RN 30, UDI 15, UCC
2), right-wing independents 3; note - subsequent to the election, the
Radical Party (PR) became the Radical Social Democratic Party (PRSD)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), judges are appointed
by the president, the president of the Supreme Court is elected by the
17-member court

Political parties and leaders: Coalition of Parties for Democracy or
CPD consists mainly of: Christian Democratic Party or PDC [Enrique
KRAUSS]; Socialist Party or PS [Camilo ESCALONA]; Party for Democracy
or PPD [Sergio BITAR]; Radical Social Democratic Party or PRSD
[Anselmo SULE]; Union for the Progress of Chile or UPP consists mainly
of three parties: National Renewal or RN [Alberto ESPINA]; Independent
Democratic Union or UDI [Jovino NOVOA]; Center Center Union or UCC
[Francisco Javier ERRAZURIZ]

Political pressure groups and leaders: revitalized university student
federations at all major universities; labor - United Labor Central or
CUT includes trade unionists from the country's five largest labor
confederations; Roman Catholic Church

International organization participation: APEC, CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-11,
G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
LAES, LAIA, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN, UN Security Council
(temporary), UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNMOGIP, UNTSO, UNU, UPU,
WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador John BIEHL Del Rios
chancery: 1732 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 785-1746
FAX: [1] (202) 887-5579
consulate(s) general : Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Gabriel GUERRA-MONDRAGON
embassy: Avenida Andres Bello 2800, Santiago
mailing address : APO AA 34033
telephone: [56] (2) 232-2600
FAX: [56] (2) 330-3710

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red;
there is a blue square the same height as the white band at the
hoist-side end of the white band; the square bears a white
five-pointed star in the center; design was based on the US flag

Economy

Economy - overview: Chile has a prosperous, essentially free market
economy. Civilian governments - which took over from the military in
March 1990 - have continued to reduce the government's role in the
economy while shifting the emphasis of public spending toward social
programs. Growth in real GDP averaged more than 6.5% in 1991-1996, and
inflation is nearing a 40-year low. Chile's currency and foreign
reserves also are strong, as sustained foreign capital inflows -
driven in part by state privatizations - have more than offset
occasional current account deficits and public debt buybacks.
President FREI, who took office in March 1994, has placed improving
Chile's education system and developing foreign export markets at the
top of his economic agenda. Despite this progress, the Chilean economy
remains largely dependent on a few sectors - particularly copper
mining, fishing, and forestry. Success in meeting the government's
goal of sustained annual economic growth of 5% depends largely on
world prices for these commodities, continued foreign investor
confidence, and the government's ability to maintain a conservative
fiscal stance. In 1996, Chile became an associate member of Mercosur
and concluded a Free Trade Agreement with Canada.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $120.6 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $8,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 8%
industry: 33%
services: 59% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 6.7% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 5.5 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: services 38.3% (includes government 12%), industry and
commerce 33.8%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing 19.2%, mining 2.3%,
construction 6.4% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 6.5% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $17 billion
expenditures: $17 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1996
est.)

Industries: copper, other minerals, foodstuffs, fish processing, iron
and steel, wood and wood products, transport equipment, cement,
textiles

Industrial production growth rate: 4.8% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 5.964 million kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 27.908 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,662 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, corn, grapes, beans, sugar beets,
potatoes, fruit; beef, poultry, wool; timber; 1991 fish catch of 6.6
million metric tons

Exports:
total value: $15.2 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: copper 37%, other metals and minerals 8.2%, wood products
7.1%, fish and fishmeal 9.8%, fruits 8.4% (1994)
partners: EU 25%, US 15%, Asia 34%, Latin America 20% (1995 est.)

Imports:
total value : $16.5 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: capital goods 25.2%, spare parts 24.8%, raw materials
15.4%, petroleum 10%, foodstuffs 5.7% (1994)
partners: EU 18%, US 25%, Asia 16%, Latin America 26% (1995 est.)

Debt - external: $22.3 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $50.3 million (1996 est.)

Currency: 1 Chilean peso (Ch$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Chilean pesos (Ch$) per US$1 - 423.79 (January 1997),
412.27(1996), 396.78 (1995), 420.08 (1994), 404.35 (1993), 362.59
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Chile:Communications

Telephones: 1.5 million (1994 est.)

Telephone system: modern system based on extensive microwave radio
relay facilities
domestic: extensive microwave radio relay links; domestic satellite
system with 3 earth stations
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 179, FM 614, shortwave 11

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 11

Televisions: 2.85 million (1992 est.)

@Chile:Transportation

Railways:
total: 6,782 km
broad gauge: 3,743 km 1.676-m gauge (1,653 km electrified)
narrow gauge: 116 km 1.067-m gauge; 2,923 km 1.000-m gauge (40 km
electrified) (1995)

Highways:
total : 79,750 km
paved: 11,006 km
unpaved: 68,744 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 725 km

Pipelines: crude oil 755 km; petroleum products 785 km; natural gas
320 km

Ports and harbors: Antofagasta, Arica, Chanaral, Coquimbo, Iquique,
Puerto Montt, Punta Arenas, San Antonio, San Vicente, Talcahuano,
Valparaiso

Merchant marine:
total: 38 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 520,710 GRT/865,867 DWT
ships by type: bulk 11, cargo 8, chemical tanker 4, combination
ore/oil 1, container 2, liquefied gas tanker 2, oil tanker 4,
passenger 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 3, vehicle carrier 2 (1996 est.)

Airports: 343 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 259
over 3,047 m: 5
2,438 to 3,047 m : 5
1,524 to 2,437 m: 18
914 to 1,523 m: 17
under 914 m: 214 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 84
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
914 to 1,523 m: 71 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army of the Nation, National Navy (includes Naval
Air, Coast Guard, and Marines), Air Force of the Nation, Carabineros
of Chile (National Police), Investigations Police

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 3,867,676 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 2,874,235 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 125,586 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $2.8 billion (1997); note -
includes earnings from CODELCO Company; may exclude costs of pensions
and internal security

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.5% (1997)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: short section of the southern boundary with
Argentina is indefinite; Bolivia has wanted a sovereign corridor to
the South Pacific Ocean since the Atacama area was lost to Chile in
1884; dispute with Bolivia over Rio Lauca water rights; territorial
claim in Antarctica (Chilean Antarctic Territory) partially overlaps
Argentine and British claims

Illicit drugs: a minor transshipment country for cocaine destined for
the US and Europe; booming economy has made it more attractive to
traffickers seeking to launder drug profits
______________________________________________________________________

CHINA

(also see separate Taiwan entry)

@China:Geography

Location: Eastern Asia, bordering the East China Sea, Korea Bay,
Yellow Sea, and South China Sea, between North Korea and Vietnam

Geographic coordinates: 35 00 N, 105 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total: 9,596,960 sq km
land : 9,326,410 sq km
water: 270,550 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than the US

Land boundaries:
total: 22,143.34 km
border countries: Afghanistan 76 km, Bhutan 470 km, Burma 2,185 km,
Hong Kong 30 km, India 3,380 km, Kazakstan 1,533 km, North Korea 1,416
km, Kyrgyzstan 858 km, Laos 423 km, Macau 0.34 km, Mongolia 4,673 km,
Nepal 1,236 km, Pakistan 523 km, Russia (northeast) 3,605 km, Russia
(northwest) 40 km, Tajikistan 414 km, Vietnam 1,281 km

Coastline: 14,500 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 24 nm
continental shelf: claim to shallow areas of East China Sea and Yellow
Sea
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: extremely diverse; tropical in south to subarctic in north

Terrain: mostly mountains, high plateaus, deserts in west; plains,
deltas, and hills in east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Turpan Pendi -154 m
highest point: Mount Everest 8,848 m

Natural resources: coal, iron ore, petroleum, mercury, tin, tungsten,
antimony, manganese, molybdenum, vanadium, magnetite, aluminum, lead,
zinc, uranium, hydropower potential (world's largest)

Land use:
arable land: 10%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 43%
forests and woodland: 14%
other : 33% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 498,720 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent typhoons (about five per year along southern
and eastern coasts); damaging floods; tsunamis; earthquakes; droughts

Environment - current issues: air pollution from the overwhelming use
of high-sulfur coal as a fuel, produces acid rain which is damaging
forests; water shortages experienced throughout the country,
particularly in urban areas; future growth in water usage threatens to
outpace supplies; water pollution from industrial effluents; much of
the population does not have access to potable water; less than 10% of
sewage receives treatment; deforestation; estimated loss of one-fifth
of agricultural land since 1949 to soil erosion and economic
development; desertification; trade in endangered species

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes,
Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Desertification

Geography - note: world's fourth-largest country (after Russia,
Canada, and US)

@China:People

Population: 1,221,591,778 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 26% (male 166,319,939; female 150,125,798)
15-64 years: 68% (male 427,340,489; female 393,914,502)
65 years and over: 6% (male 36,201,623; female 41,689,427) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.93% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 16.52 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.87 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.34 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.11 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.11 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.87 male(s)/female
total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 37.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 69.98 years
male: 68.61 years
female: 71.5 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.81 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Chinese (singular and plural)
adjective: Chinese

Ethnic groups: Han Chinese 91.9%, Zhuang, Uygur, Hui, Yi, Tibetan,
Miao, Manchu, Mongol, Buyi, Korean, and other nationalities 8.1%

Religions: Daoism (Taoism), Buddhism, Muslim 2%-3%, Christian 1%
(est.)
note: officially atheist, but traditionally pragmatic and eclectic

Languages: Standard Chinese or Mandarin (Putonghua, based on the
Beijing dialect), Yue (Cantonese), Wu (Shanghaiese), Minbei (Fuzhou),
Minnan (Hokkien-Taiwanese), Xiang, Gan, Hakka dialects, minority
languages (see Ethnic divisions entry)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 81.5%
male: 89.9%
female: 72.7% (1995 est.)

@China:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : People's Republic of China
conventional short form: China
local long form: Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo
local short form: Zhong Guo
abbreviation: PRC

Data code: CH

Government type: Communist state

National capital: Beijing

Administrative divisions: 23 provinces (sheng, singular and plural), 5
autonomous regions* (zizhiqu, singular and plural), and 3
municipalities** (shi, singular and plural); Anhui, Beijing**, Fujian,
Gansu, Guangdong, Guangxi*, Guizhou, Hainan, Hebei, Heilongjiang,
Henan, Hubei, Hunan, Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Jilin, Liaoning, Nei Mongol*,
Ningxia*, Qinghai, Shaanxi, Shandong, Shanghai**, Shanxi, Sichuan,
Tianjin**, Xinjiang*, Xizang* (Tibet), Yunnan, Zhejiang
note: China considers Taiwan its 23rd province

Independence: 221 BC (unification under the Qin or Ch'in Dynasty 221
BC; Qing or Ch'ing Dynasty replaced by the Republic on 12 February
1912; People's Republic established 1 October 1949)

National holiday: National Day, 1 October (1949)

Constitution: most recent promulgated 4 December 1982

Legal system: a complex amalgam of custom and statute, largely
criminal law; rudimentary civil code in effect since 1 January 1987;
new legal codes in effect since 1 January 1980; continuing efforts are
being made to improve civil, administrative, criminal, and commercial
law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President JIANG Zemin (since 27 March 1993) and Vice
President RONG Yiren (since 27 March 1993)
head of government: Premier LI Peng (acting premier since 24 November
1987, premier since 9 April 1988); Vice Premiers ZHU Rongji (since 8
April 1991), ZOU Jiahua (since 8 April 1991), QIAN Qichen (since 29
March 1993), LI Lanqing (29 March 1993), WU Bangguo (since 17 March
1995), and JIANG Chunyun (since 17 March 1995)
cabinet: State Council appointed by the National People's Congress
(NPC)
elections: president and vice president elected by the National
People's Congress for five-year terms; election last held 27 March
1993 (next to be held NA March 1998); premier and vice premiers
nominated by the president, confirmed by the National People's
Congress
election results: JIANG Zemin elected by the Eighth National People's
Congress; percent of National People's Congress vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National People's Congress or Quanguo
Renmin Daibiao Dahui (2,977 seats; members indirectly elected at
county or xian level to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held NA March 1993 (next to be held NA March 1998)
election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - NA

Judicial branch: Supreme People's Court, judges appointed by the
National People's Congress

Political parties and leaders: Chinese Communist Party (CCP), JIANG
Zemin, general secretary of the Central Committee; eight registered
small parties controlled by CCP

Political pressure groups and leaders: no meaningful political
opposition groups exist

International organization participation: AfDB, APEC, AsDB, BIS
(pending member), CCC, ESCAP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM,
IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer), Mekong Group, MINURSO, NAM
(observer), PCA, UN, UN Security Council, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
(applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador LI Daoyu
chancery : 2300 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 328-2500 through 2502
consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, and San
Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador James R. SASSER
embassy: Xiu Shui Bei Jie 3, 100600 Beijing
mailing address: PSC 461, Box 50, FPO AP 96521-0002
telephone: [86] (10) 6532-3831
FAX : [86] (10) 6532-6422
consulate(s) general: Chengdu, Guangzhou, Shanghai, Shenyang

Flag description: red with a large yellow five-pointed star and four
smaller yellow five-pointed stars (arranged in a vertical arc toward
the middle of the flag) in the upper hoist-side corner

Economy

Economy - overview: Beginning in late 1978 the Chinese leadership has
been trying to move the economy from a sluggish Soviet-style centrally
planned economy to one that is more market-oriented but still within a
rigid political framework of Communist Party control. To this end the
authorities switched to a system of household responsibility in
agriculture in place of the old collectivization, increased the
authority of local officials and plant managers in industry, permitted
a wide variety of small-scale enterprise in services and light
manufacturing, and opened the economy to increased foreign trade and
investment. The result has been a quadrupling of GDP since 1978.
Agricultural output doubled in the 1980s, and industry also posted
major gains, especially in coastal areas near Hong Kong and opposite
Taiwan, where foreign investment helped spur output of both domestic
and export goods. On the darker side, the leadership has often
experienced in its hybrid system the worst results of socialism
(bureaucracy, lassitude, corruption) and of capitalism (windfall gains
and stepped-up inflation). Beijing thus has periodically backtracked,
retightening central controls at intervals. In 1992-96 annual growth
of GDP accelerated, particularly in the coastal areas - averaging more
than 10% annually according to official figures. In late 1993 China's
leadership approved additional long-term reforms aimed at giving still
more play to market-oriented institutions and at strengthening the
center's control over the financial system; state enterprises would
continue to dominate many key industries in what was now termed "a
socialist market economy." In 1995-96 inflation dropped sharply,
reflecting tighter monetary policies and stronger measures to control
food prices. At the same time, the government struggled to (a) collect
revenues due from provinces, businesses, and individuals; (b) reduce
corruption and other economic crimes; and (c) keep afloat the large
state-owned enterprises, most of which had not participated in the
vigorous expansion of the economy and many of which have been losing
the ability to pay full wages and pensions. From 60 to 100 million
surplus rural workers are adrift between the villages and the cities,
many subsisting through part-time low-paying jobs. Popular resistance,
changes in central policy, and loss of authority by rural cadres have
weakened China's population control program, which is essential to
maintaining growth in living standards. Another long-term threat to
continued rapid economic growth is the deterioration in the
environment, notably air pollution, soil erosion, and the steady fall
of the water table especially in the north. China continues to lose
arable land because of erosion and economic development; furthermore,
the regime gives insufficient priority to agricultural research. The
next few years will witness increasing tensions between a highly
centralized political system and an increasingly decentralized
economic system. Rapid economic growth likely will continue but at a
declining rate.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $3.39 trillion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1995 with use of official
Chinese growth figure for 1996; the result may overstate China's GDP
by as much as 25%)

GDP - real growth rate: 9.7% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 20%
industry: 49%
services : 31% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 10% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 614.7 million (1994)
by occupation: agriculture and forestry 54%, industry and commerce
26%, construction and mining 7%, social services 6%, other 7% (1994)

Unemployment rate: officially 3% in urban areas; probably 8%-10%;
substantial unemployment and underemployment in rural areas (1996
est.)

Budget:
revenues : $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: iron and steel, coal, machine building, armaments,
textiles and apparel, petroleum, cement, chemical fertilizers,
consumer durables, food processing, autos, consumer electronics,
telecommunications

Industrial production growth rate: 13% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 210 million kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 859 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 684 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, wheat, potatoes, sorghum, peanuts, tea,
millet, barley, cotton, other fibers, oilseed; pork and other
livestock products; fish

Exports:
total value : $151.07 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: clothing, miscellaneous consumer goods, fabrics,
footwear, toys, electrical machinery and switchgear (1995)
partners: Hong Kong, Japan, US, South Korea, Germany, Singapore (1995)

Imports:
total value : $138.83 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: plastics, fabrics, telecommunications equipment,
electrical machinery and switchgear, transistors, other industrial
machinery (1995)
partners: Japan, US, Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong, Germany, Russia
(1995)

Debt - external: $92 billion (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $1.977 billion (1993)

Currency: 1 yuan (¥) = 10 jiao

Exchange rates: yuan (¥) per US$1 - 8.2963 (January 1997), 8.3142
(1996), 8.3514 (1995), 8.6187 (1994), 5.7620 (1993), 5.5146 (1992)
note: beginning 1 January 1994, the People's Bank of China quotes the
midpoint rate against the US dollar based on the previous day's
prevailing rate in the interbank foreign exchange market

Fiscal year: calendar year

@China:Communications

Telephones: 20 million (1994 est.)

Telephone system: domestic and international services are increasingly
available for private use; unevenly distributed domestic system serves
principal cities, industrial centers, and most townships
domestic: telephone lines are being expanded to 100 million by 1996;
interprovincial fiber-optic trunk lines and cellular telephone systems
have been installed; a domestic satellite system with 55 earth
stations is in place
international: satellite earth stations - 5 Intelsat (4 Pacific Ocean
and 1 Indian Ocean), 1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean Region) and 1
Inmarsat (Pacific and Indian Ocean Regions); several international
fiber-optic links to Japan, South Korea, and Hong Kong

Radio broadcast stations: AM 274, FM NA, shortwave 0

Radios: 216.5 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 202 (repeaters 2,050)

Televisions: 75 million

@China:Transportation

Railways:
total : 62,500 km (including 5,400 km of provincial "local" rails)
standard gauge: 58,900 km 1.435-m gauge (9,700 km electrified; 18,100
km double track)
narrow gauge: 3,600 km 0.750-m gauge local industrial lines (1996
est.)

Highways:
total: 1.117 million km
paved: 239,500 km
unpaved: 877,500 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 138,600 km; about 110,600 km navigable

Pipelines: crude oil 9,700 km; petroleum products 1,100 km; natural
gas 6,200 km (1990)

Ports and harbors: Dalian, Fuzhou, Guangzhou, Haikou, Lianyungang,
Nanjing, Nantong, Ningbo, Qingdao, Qinhuangdao, Shanghai, Shantou,
Tianjin, Xiamen, Yantain, Zhanjiang

Merchant marine:
total: 1,736 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 16,749,069
GRT/25,196,607 DWT
ships by type: barge carrier 2, bulk 325, cargo 883, chemical tanker
16, combination bulk 11, container 109, liquefied gas tanker 9,
multifunction large-load carrier 6, oil tanker 232, passenger 6,
passenger-cargo 47, refrigerated cargo 24, roll-on/roll-off cargo 22,
short-sea passenger 43, specialized tanker 1
note: China owns an additional 270 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
8,754,413 DWT operating under the registries of Panama, Hong Kong,
Malta, Liberia, Vanuatu, Cyprus, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Marshall Islands, and Singapore (1996 est.)

Airports: 206 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 192
over 3,047 m: 18
2,438 to 3,047 m: 65
1,524 to 2,437 m: 90
914 to 1,523 m : 13
under 914 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 14
1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
914 to 1,523 m: 5
under 914 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: People's Liberation Army (PLA), which includes the
Ground Forces, Navy (includes Marines and Naval Aviation), Air Force,
Second Artillery Corps (the strategic missile force), People's Armed
Police (internal security troops, nominally subordinate to Ministry of
Public Security, but included by the Chinese as part of the "armed
forces" and considered to be an adjunct to the PLA in wartime)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 356,848,321 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 196,780,527 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 9,872,055 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: the officially announced but
suspect figure is 70.2 billion yuan (1995 est.); note - conversion of
the defense budget into US dollars using the current exchange rate
could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: boundary with India in dispute; disputed
sections of the boundary with Russia remain to be settled; boundary
with Tajikistan in dispute; short section of the boundary with North
Korea is indefinite; involved in a complex dispute over the Spratly
Islands with Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam, and possibly
Brunei; maritime boundary dispute with Vietnam in the Gulf of Tonkin;
Paracel Islands occupied by China, but claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan;
claims Japanese-administered Senkaku-shoto (Senkaku Islands/Diaoyu
Tai), as does Taiwan

Illicit drugs: major transshipment point for heroin produced in the
Golden Triangle; growing domestic drug abuse problem
______________________________________________________________________

CHRISTMAS ISLAND

(territory of Australia)

@Christmas Island:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, island in the Indian Ocean, south of
Indonesia

Geographic coordinates: 10 30 S, 105 40 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 135 sq km
land: 135 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.7 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 138.9 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 12 nm
exclusive fishing zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical; heat and humidity moderated by trade winds

Terrain: steep cliffs along coast rise abruptly to central plateau

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Murray Hill 361 m

Natural resources: phosphate

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland : NA%
other: 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: the narrow fringing reef surrounding the island can
be a maritime hazard

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: located along major sea lanes of Indian Ocean

@Christmas Island:People

Population: 743 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: -8.98% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population : NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: NA years
male: NA years
female: NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
noun: Christmas Islander(s)
adjective: Christmas Island

Ethnic groups: Chinese 61%, Malay 25%, European 11%, other 3%, no
indigenous population

Religions: Buddhist 55%, Christian 15%, Muslim 10%, other 20% (1991)

Languages: English

@Christmas Island:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Territory of Christmas Island
conventional short form : Christmas Island

Data code: KT

Dependency status: territory of Australia

Government type: NA

National capital: The Settlement

Administrative divisions: none (territory of Australia)

Independence: none (territory of Australia)

National holiday: NA

Constitution: Christmas Island Act of 1958

Legal system: under the authority of the governor general of Australia
and Australian law

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by the Australian governor general
head of government : Administrator (vacant); Official Secretary
Merrilyn CHILVERS (since NA) is serving as acting administrator
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; administrator
appointed by the governor general of Australia and represents the
queen and Australia

Legislative branch: unicameral Christmas Island Shire Council (9
seats; members elected by popular vote to serve one-year terms)
elections: last held NA December 1996 (next to be held NA December
1997)
election results : percent of vote - NA; seats - independents 9

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Australia)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of Australia)

Flag description: the flag of Australia is used

Economy

Economy - overview: Phosphate mining had been the only significant
economic activity, but in December 1987 the Australian Government
closed the mine. In 1990, the mine was reopened by private operators.
Australian-based Casinos Austria International Ltd. built a $45
million casino on Christmas Island.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: NA
by occupation: tourism 400 people, mining 100 people

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: phosphate extraction (near depletion)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: NA

Exports: $NA
commodities: phosphate
partners: Australia, NZ

Imports: $NA
commodities : consumer goods
partners: principally Australia

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid: none

Currency: 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.2735 (January
1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995), 1.3667 (1994), 1.4704, (1993),
1.3600 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Christmas Island:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international : NA
note: external telephone and telex services are provided by INTELSAT
satellite

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 500 (1992)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 350 (1992)

@Christmas Island:Transportation

Railways: 24 km to serve phosphate mines

Highways:
total: NA km
paved : NA km
unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Flying Fish Cove

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Australia

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

CLIPPERTON ISLAND

(possession of France)

@Clipperton Island:Geography

Location: Middle America, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, 1,120 km
southwest of Mexico

Geographic coordinates: 10 17 N, 109 13 W

Map references: World

Area:
total: 7 sq km
land : 7 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 12 times the size of The Mall in Washington,
DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 11.1 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, humid, average temperature 20-32 degrees C, rains
May-October

Terrain: coral atoll

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point : Rocher Clipperton 29 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100% (all coral)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: subject to tornadoes

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified : NA

Geography - note: reef about 8 km in circumference

@Clipperton Island:People

Population: uninhabited

@Clipperton Island:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Clipperton Island
local long form: none
local short form : Ile Clipperton
former: sometimes called Ile de la Passion

Data code: IP

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by France from
French Polynesia by a high commissioner of the Republic

Flag description: the flag of France is used

Economy

Economy - overview: The only economic activity is a tuna fishing
station.

@Clipperton Island:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

COCOS (KEELING) ISLANDS

(territory of Australia)

@Cocos (Keeling) Islands:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, group of islands in the Indian Ocean,
south of Indonesia, about one-half of the way from Australia to Sri
Lanka

Geographic coordinates: 12 30 S, 96 50 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 14 sq km
land: 14 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note : includes the two main islands of West Island and Home Island

Area - comparative: about 24 times the size of The Mall in Washington,
DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 2.6 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: pleasant, modified by the southeast trade wind for about nine
months of the year; moderate rainfall

Terrain: flat, low-lying coral atolls

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 5 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
arable land : NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other : 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: cyclones may occur in the early months of the year

Environment - current issues: fresh water resources are limited to
rainwater accumulations in natural underground reservoirs

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified : NA

Geography - note: two coral atolls thickly covered with coconut palms
and other vegetation

@Cocos (Keeling) Islands:People

Population: 617 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 0.98% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years : NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: NA years
male: NA years
female: NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
noun: Cocos Islander(s)
adjective : Cocos Islander

Ethnic groups: Europeans, Cocos Malays

Religions: Sunni Muslim 57%, Christian 22%, other 21% (1981 est.)

Languages: English, Malay

@Cocos (Keeling) Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Territory of Cocos (Keeling) Islands
conventional short form: Cocos (Keeling) Islands

Data code: CK

Dependency status: territory of Australia

Government type: NA

National capital: West Island

Administrative divisions: none (territory of Australia)

Independence: none (territory of Australia)

National holiday: NA

Constitution: Cocos (Keeling) Islands Act of 1955

Legal system: based upon the laws of Australia and local laws

Suffrage: NA

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by the Australian governor general
head of government : Administrator (acting) Jarl ANDERSSON (since NA)
cabinet: NA
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; administrator
appointed by the governor general of Australia and represents the
queen and Australia

Legislative branch: unicameral Cocos (Keeling) Islands Shire Council
(NA seats)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Australia)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of Australia)

Flag description: the flag of Australia is used

Economy

Economy - overview: Grown throughout the islands, coconuts are the
sole cash crop. Copra and fresh coconuts are the major export earners.
Small local gardens and fishing contribute to the food supply, but
additional food and most other necessities must be imported from
Australia.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry : NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force: NA
note: the Cocos Islands Cooperative Society Ltd. employs construction
workers, stevedores, and lighterage worker operations; tourism employs
others

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures : $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: copra products and tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: vegetables, bananas, pawpaws, coconuts

Exports: $NA
commodities: copra
partners: Australia

Imports: $NA
commodities: foodstuffs
partners: Australia

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid: none

Currency: 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.2835 (January
1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995), 1.3667 (1994), 1.4704 (1993),
1.3600 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Cocos (Keeling) Islands:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: telephone, telex, and facsimile communications with
Australia and elsewhere via satellite; 1 satellite earth station of NA
type

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 300 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0
note: intermittent television service via satellite

Televisions: NA

@Cocos (Keeling) Islands:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : NA km
paved: NA km
unpaved : NA km

Ports and harbors: none; lagoon anchorage only

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Australia

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

COLOMBIA

@Colombia:Geography

Location: Northern South America, bordering the Caribbean Sea, between
Panama and Venezuela, and bordering the North Pacific Ocean, between
Ecuador and Panama

Geographic coordinates: 4 00 N, 72 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total : 1,138,910 sq km
land: 1,038,700 sq km
water: 100,210 sq km
note: includes Isla de Malpelo, Roncador Cay, Serrana Bank, and
Serranilla Bank

Area - comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Montana

Land boundaries:
total : 7,408 km
border countries: Brazil 1,643 km, Ecuador 590 km, Panama 225 km, Peru
2,900 km, Venezuela 2,050 km

Coastline: 3,208 km (Caribbean Sea 1,760 km, North Pacific Ocean 1,448
km)

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical along coast and eastern plains; cooler in highlands

Terrain: flat coastal lowlands, central highlands, high Andes
Mountains, eastern lowland plains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Nevado del Huila 5,750 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, coal, iron ore, nickel,
gold, copper, emeralds

Land use:
arable land: 4%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures : 39%
forests and woodland: 48%
other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 5,300 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: highlands subject to volcanic eruptions; occasional
earthquakes; periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil damage from overuse
of pesticides; air pollution, especially in Bogota, from vehicle
emissions

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
Species, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94
signed, but not ratified: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping

Geography - note: only South American country with coastlines on both
North Pacific Ocean and Caribbean Sea

@Colombia:People

Population: 37,418,290 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 31% (male 5,959,141; female 5,816,751)
15-64 years: 64% (male 11,756,893; female 12,146,103)
65 years and over: 5% (male 769,724; female 969,678) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.61% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 20.78 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.62 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.1 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.79 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 24.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 73.14 years
male: 70.28 years
female : 76.09 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.31 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Colombian(s)
adjective: Colombian

Ethnic groups: mestizo 58%, white 20%, mulatto 14%, black 4%, mixed
black-Amerindian 3%, Amerindian 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%

Languages: Spanish

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 91.3%
male: 91.2%
female: 91.4% (1995 est.)

@Colombia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Colombia
conventional short form: Colombia
local long form: Republica de Colombia
local short form : Colombia

Data code: CO

Government type: republic; executive branch dominates government
structure

National capital: Bogota

Administrative divisions: 32 departments (departamentos, singular -
departamento) and 1 capital district* (distrito capital); Amazonas,
Antioquia, Arauca, Atlantico, Bolivar, Boyaca, Caldas, Caqueta,
Casanare, Cauca, Cesar, Choco, Cordoba, Cundinamarca, Guainia,
Guaviare, Huila, La Guajira, Magdalena, Meta, Narino, Norte de
Santander, Putumayo, Quindio, Risaralda, San Andres y Providencia,
Santa Fe de Bogota*, Santander, Sucre, Tolima, Valle del Cauca,
Vaupes, Vichada

Independence: 20 July 1810 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 20 July (1810)

Constitution: 5 July 1991

Legal system: based on Spanish law; a new criminal code modeled after
US procedures was enacted in 1992-93; judicial review of executive and
legislative acts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Ernesto SAMPER Pizano (since 7 August
1994); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
head of government: President Ernesto SAMPER Pizano (since 7 August
1994); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
cabinet: Cabinet
elections : president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
election last held 29 May 1994 (next to be held May 1998); vice
president elected by popular vote for a four-year term in a new
procedure that replaces the traditional designation of vice presidents
by newly elected presidents
election results : Ernesto SAMPER Pizano elected president; percent of
vote - no candidate received more than 50% of the total vote,
therefore, a run-off election to select a president from the two
leading candidates was held 19 June 1994; percent of vote - Ernesto
SAMPER Pizano (Liberal Party) 50.4%, Andres PASTRANA Arango
(Conservative Party) 48.6%, blank votes 1%; Humberto de la CALLE
Lombana elected vice president; percent of vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Congress or Congreso consists of the
Senate or Senado (102 seats; members are elected by popular vote to
serve four-year terms) and the House of Representatives or Camara de
Representantes (161 seats; members are elected by popular vote to
serve four-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 13 March 1994 (next to be held March
1998); House of Representatives - last held 13 March 1994 (next to be
held March 1998)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - Liberal Party 59, conservatives (includes PC, MSN, and NDF)
31, other 12; House of Representatives - percent of vote by party -
NA; seats by party - Liberal Party 89, conservatives (includes PC,
MSN, and NDF) 53, AD/M-19 2, other 17

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justical),
highest court of criminal law, judges are selected from the nominees
of the Higher Council of Justice for eight-year terms; Council of
State, highest court of administrative law, judges are selected from
the nominees of the Higher Council of Justice for eight-year terms;
Constitutional Court, guards integrity and supremacy of the
constitution, rules on constitutionality of laws, amendments to the
constitution, and international treaties

Political parties and leaders: Liberal Party or PL [Emilio LEBOLO
Castellanos]; Conservative Party or PC [Fabio VALENCIA Cossio]; New
Democratic Force or NDF [Andres PASTRANA Arango]; Democratic Alliance
M-19 or AD/M-19 is a coalition of small leftist parties and dissident
liberals and conservatives; Patriotic Union (UP) is a legal political
party formed by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and
Colombian Communist Party (PCC); National Salvation Movement or MSN
[Dr. Alvaro GOMEZ Hurtado]

Political pressure groups and leaders: two largest insurgent groups
active in Colombia - Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia or FARC;
and National Liberation Army or ELN

International organization participation: AG, CCC, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-
3, G-11, G-24, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA, NAM, OAS, OPANAL,
PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Juan Carlos ESGUERRA Portocarrero
chancery: 2118 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 387-8338
FAX: [1] (202) 232-8643
consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
New Orleans, New York, San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico), and
Washington, DC
consulate(s): Atlanta and Tampa

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Myles R. R. FRECHETTE
embassy: Calle 22D-BIS, No. 47-51, Apartado Aereo 3831
mailing address : APO AA 34038
telephone: [57] (1) 315-0811
FAX: [57] (1) 315-2197

Flag description: three horizontal bands of yellow (top,
double-width), blue, and red; similar to the flag of Ecuador, which is
longer and bears the Ecuadorian coat of arms superimposed in the
center

Economy

Economy - overview: Boasting a diversified and stable economy,
Colombia has enjoyed Latin America's most consistent record of growth
over the last several decades. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has
expanded every year for more than 25 years, and unlike many other
Latin American countries, Colombia did not default on any of its
official debts during the "lost decade" of the 1980s. Since 1990, when
Bogota introduced a comprehensive reform program that opened the
economy to foreign trade and investment, GDP growth has averaged more
than 4% annually. Growth has been fueled in recent years by the rapid
expansion of the oil sector, progress in the construction and
financial service industries, and an influx of foreign capital. Direct
foreign investment, especially in the oil industry, is rising at a
rapid rate. In 1996, oil overtook coffee as Colombia's main export.
Non-petroleum economic growth slowed, however, due mostly to high
interest rates - the result of high government spending and a tight
monetary policy - and a real appreciation of the exchange rate.
Business confidence was also damaged by a political crisis stemming
from allegations President SAMPER solicited contributions from drug
traffickers during the 1994 campaign. The slowdown in the growth of
labor-intensive industries such as manufacturing has caused
unemployment to rise to 11.5% by the end of 1996 and interfered with
President SAMPER'S plans to lower the country's poverty rate, which
has remained at about 40% despite the expanding economy.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $201.4 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.1% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 20%
industry: 27%
services: 53% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 21.6% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 12 million (1990)
by occupation: services 46%, agriculture 30%, industry 24% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 11.5% (yearend 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $27 billion
expenditures: $30 billion including capital expenditures of $NA (1997
est.)

Industries: textiles, food processing, oil, clothing and footwear,
beverages, chemicals, cement; gold, coal, emeralds

Industrial production growth rate: 4.5% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 10,583,700 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 45.361 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 963 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, cut flowers, bananas, rice, tobacco,
corn, sugarcane, cocoa beans, oilseed, vegetables; forest products;
shrimp farming

Exports:
total value: $10.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: petroleum, coffee, coal, bananas, fresh cut flowers
partners : US 39%, EC 25.7%, Japan 2.9%, Venezuela 8.5% (1992)

Imports:
total value: $12.4 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: industrial equipment, transportation equipment, consumer
goods, chemicals, paper products
partners : US 36%, EC 18%, Brazil 4%, Venezuela 6.5%, Japan 8.7%
(1992)

Debt - external: $16.5 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $30 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Colombian peso (Col$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Colombian pesos (Col$) per US$1 - 1,027.87 (January
1997), 1,036.69 (1996), 912.83 (1995), 844.84 (1994), 863.06 (1993),
759.28 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Colombia:Communications

Telephones: 1.89 million (1986 est.)

Telephone system: modern system in many respects
domestic: nationwide microwave radio relay system; domestic satellite
system with 11 earth stations
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 413 (licensed), FM 217 (licensed),
shortwave 28

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 33

Televisions: 5.5 million (1993 est.)

@Colombia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 3,386 km
standard gauge: 150 km 1.435-m gauge (connects Cerrejon coal mines to
maritime port at Bahia Portete)
narrow gauge: 3,236 km 0.914-m gauge (1830 km in use) (1995)

Highways:
total: 106,600 km
paved: 12,685 km
unpaved : 93,915 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 14,300 km, navigable by river boats

Pipelines: crude oil 3,585 km; petroleum products 1,350 km; natural
gas 830 km; natural gas liquids 125 km

Ports and harbors: Barranquilla, Buenaventura, Cartagena, Leticia,
Puerto Bolivar, San Andres, Santa Marta, Tumaco, Turbo

Merchant marine:
total: 17 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 72,388 GRT/97,576 DWT
ships by type: bulk 5, cargo 6, container 1, multi-function large load
carrier 2, oil tanker 3 (1996 est.)

Airports: 913 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 606
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 9
1,524 to 2,437 m : 32
914 to 1,523 m: 36
under 914 m: 527 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 307
2,438 to 3,047 m : 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 34
914 to 1,523 m: 272 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army (Ejercito Nacional), Navy (Armada Nacional,
includes Marines and Coast Guard), Air Force (Fuerza Aerea
Colombiana), National Police (Policia Nacional)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 10,285,806 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 6,909,846 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 348,802 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $2 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.8% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: maritime boundary dispute with Venezuela in
the Gulf of Venezuela; territorial dispute with Nicaragua over
Archipelago de San Andres y Providencia and Quita Sueno Bank

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of coca, opium poppies, and cannabis;
about 50,900 hectares of coca under cultivation in 1995; the world's
largest processor of coca derivatives into cocaine; supplier of
cocaine to the US and other international drug markets; active aerial
eradication program seeks to virtually eliminate coca and opium crops
______________________________________________________________________

COMOROS

Introduction

Historical perspective: Comoros has had difficulty in achieving
political stability, having endured 18 coups or attempted coups since
receiving independence from France in 1975.

@Comoros:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, group of islands in the Mozambique Channel,
about two-thirds of the way between northern Madagascar and northern
Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 12 10 S, 44 15 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total : 2,170 sq km
land: 2,170 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than 12 times the size of
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 340 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; rainy season (November to May)

Terrain: volcanic islands, interiors vary from steep mountains to low
hills

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Kartala 2,360 m

Natural resources: negligible

Land use:
arable land: 35%
permanent crops: 10%
permanent pastures: 7%
forests and woodland : 18%
other: 30% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: cyclones and tsunamis possible during rainy season
(December to April); Mount Kartala on Grand Comore is an active
volcano

Environment - current issues: soil degradation and erosion results
from crop cultivation on slopes without proper terracing;
deforestation

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

Geography - note: important location at northern end of Mozambique
Channel

@Comoros:People

Population: 528,893 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 42% (male 112,404; female 111,936)
15-64 years: 55% (male 142,604; female 146,382)
65 years and over : 3% (male 7,432; female 8,135) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.09% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 40.75 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.82 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.91 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 87.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 59.88 years
male : 57.52 years
female: 62.32 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.54 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Comoran(s)
adjective: Comoran

Ethnic groups: Antalote, Cafre, Makoa, Oimatsaha, Sakalava

Religions: Sunni Muslim 86%, Roman Catholic 14%

Languages: Arabic (official), French (official), Comoran (a blend of
Swahili and Arabic)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 57.3%
male: 64.2%
female: 50.4% (1995 est.)

@Comoros:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Federal Islamic Republic of the Comoros
conventional short form: Comoros
local long form: Republique Federale Islamique des Comores
local short form: Comores

Data code: CN

Government type: independent republic

National capital: Moroni

Administrative divisions: three islands; Grand Comore (Njazidja),
Anjouan (Nzwani), and Moheli (Mwali)
note: there are also four municipalities named Domoni, Fomboni,
Moroni, and Mutsamudu

Independence: 6 July 1975 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 6 July (1975)

Constitution: 7 June 1992

Legal system: French and Muslim law in a new consolidated code

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Mohamed TAKI Abdulkarim (since 16 March
1996)
head of government: Prime Minister Ahmed ABDOU (since 27 December
1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote to a five-year term;
election last held 16 March 1996 (next to be held NA March 2001);
prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Mohamed TAKI Abdulkarim elected president; share of
vote - 64%

Legislative branch: bicameral legislature consists of the Senate (15
seats; members selected by regional councils for six-year terms) and a
Federal Assembly or Assemblee Federale (43 seats; members elected by
popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : last held 1 and 8 December 1996 (next to be held NA
December 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - RND
39, RND candidate running as independent 1, FNJ 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Cour Supreme), two members are
appointed by the president, two members are elected by the Federal
Assembly, one by the Council of each island, and former presidents of
the republic

Political parties and leaders: Rassemblement National pour le
Development or RND [Mohamed TAKI Abdulkarim], party of the government;
Front National pour la Justice or FNJ, Islamic party in opposition
note: under a new constitution ratified in October 1996, a two party
system was established; President Mohamed TAKI Abdulkarim called for
all parties to dissolve and join him in creating the RND; the
Constitution stipulates that only parties that win six seats in the
Federal Assembly (two from each island) are permitted to be in
opposition, but if no party accomplishes that the second most
successful party will be in opposition; in the elections of December
1996 the FNJ appeared to qualify as opposition

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, AL, CCC,
ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant) Charge d'Affaires ad interim
Mahmoud M. ABOUD (ambassador to the US and Canada)
chancery: (temporary) care of the Permanent Mission of the Federal and
Islamic Republic of the Comoros to the United Nations, 336 East 45th
Street, 2nd Floor, New York, NY 10017
telephone: [1] (212) 972-8010
FAX : [1] (212) 983-4712

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Comoros; the ambassador to Mauritius is accredited to Comoros

Flag description: green with a white crescent in the center of the
field, its points facing downward; there are four white five-pointed
stars placed in a line between the points of the crescent; the
crescent, stars, and color green are traditional symbols of Islam; the
four stars represent the four main islands of the archipelago - Mwali,
Njazidja, Nzwani, and Mayotte (a territorial collectivity of France,
but claimed by Comoros); the design, the most recent of several, is
described in the constitution approved by referendum on 7 June 1992

Economy

Economy - overview: One of the world's poorest countries, Comoros is
made up of three islands that have inadequate transportation links, a
young and rapidly increasing population, and few natural resources.
The low educational level of the labor force contributes to a
subsistence level of economic activity, high unemployment, and a heavy
dependence on foreign grants and technical assistance. Agriculture,
including fishing, hunting, and forestry, is the leading sector of the
economy. It contributes nearly 40% to GDP, employs 80% of the labor
force, and provides most of the exports. The country is not
self-sufficient in food production; rice, the main staple, accounts
for the bulk of imports. The government is struggling to upgrade
education and technical training, to privatize commercial and
industrial enterprises, to improve health services, to diversify
exports, to promote tourism, and to reduce the high population growth
rate. Continued foreign support is essential if the goal of 4% annual
GDP growth is to be reached in the late 1990s.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $370 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -2.3% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $650 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 39%
industry: 13%
services : 48% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7.1% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total : 140,000 (1982)
by occupation: agriculture 80%, government 3%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $83 million
expenditures: $92 million, including capital expenditures of $32
million (1992)

Industries: tourism, perfume distillation, textiles, furniture,
jewelry, construction materials, soft drinks

Industrial production growth rate: -6.5% (1989 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 16,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 25 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 52 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: vanilla, cloves, perfume essences, copra,
coconuts, bananas, cassava (tapioca)

Exports:
total value: $11.2 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: vanilla, ylang-ylang, cloves, perfume oil, copra
partners: France 54%, Germany 18%, US 18%

Imports:
total value: $40.9 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: rice and other foodstuffs, consumer goods; petroleum
products, cement, transport equipment
partners: France 60%, South Africa 10%, Kenya 5%, Singapore 4%

Debt - external: $189 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Comoran franc (CF) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Comoran francs (CF) per US$1 - 406.27 (January 1997),
383.66 (1996), 374.36 (1995), 416.40 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note: beginning 12 January 1994, the Comoran franc was devalued to 75
per French franc from 50 per French franc at which it had been fixed
since 1948

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Comoros:Communications

Telephones: 3,770 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: sparse system of microwave radio relay and HF
radiotelephone communication stations
domestic: HF radiotelephone communications and microwave radio relay
international: HF radiotelephone communications to Madagascar and
Reunion

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: 200 (1991 est.)

@Comoros:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 875 km
paved: 669 km
unpaved : 206 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Fomboni, Moroni, Mutsamudu

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 4 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 4
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Comoran Security Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 125,378 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 74,836 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims French-administered Mayotte
______________________________________________________________________

CONGO, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE
Republic of the]

@Congo, Democratic Republic of the:Geography

Location: Central Africa, northeast of Angola

Geographic coordinates: 0 00 N, 25 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 2,345,410 sq km
land: 2,267,600 sq km
water : 77,810 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than one-fourth the size of US

Land boundaries:
total : 10,271 km
border countries: Angola 2,511 km, Burundi 233 km, Central African
Republic 1,577 km, Republic of the Congo 2,410 km, Rwanda 217 km,
Sudan 628 km, Uganda 765 km, Zambia 1,930 km

Coastline: 37 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone : boundaries with neighbors
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot and humid in equatorial river basin; cooler and
drier in southern highlands; cooler and wetter in eastern highlands;
north of Equator - wet season April to October, dry season December to
February; south of Equator - wet season November to March, dry season
April to October

Terrain: vast central basin is a low-lying plateau; mountains in east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Margherita Peak (Mount Stanley) 5,110 m

Natural resources: cobalt, copper, cadmium, petroleum, industrial and
gem diamonds, gold, silver, zinc, manganese, tin, germanium, uranium,
radium, bauxite, iron ore, coal, hydropower potential

Land use:
arable land : 3%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 7%
forests and woodland: 77%
other: 13% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts in south; volcanic activity

Environment - current issues: poaching threatens wildlife populations;
water pollution; deforestation; refugees who arrived in mid-1994 were
responsible for significant deforestation, soil erosion, and wildlife
poaching in the eastern part of the country (most of those refugees
were repatriated in November and December 1996)

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Environmental Modification,
Tropical Timber 94

Geography - note: straddles Equator; very narrow strip of land that
controls the lower Congo river and is only outlet to South Atlantic
Ocean; dense tropical rain forest in central river basin and eastern
highlands

@Congo, Democratic Republic of the:People

Population: 47,440,362 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 48% (male 11,418,713; female 11,378,403)
15-64 years: 49% (male 11,412,269; female 11,980,993)
65 years and over: 3% (male 541,435; female 708,549) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.34% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 47.66 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 16.61 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -7.66 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)
note: in 1994, about a million refugees fled into Democratic Republic
of the Congo, formerly Zaire, to escape the fighting between the Hutus
and the Tutsis in Rwanda and Burundi; the outbreak of widespread
fighting between rebels and government forces in October 1996 spurred
about 720,000 refugees to return to Rwanda in late 1996 and early
1997; additionally, Democratic Republic of the Congo is host to about
100,000 Angolan, and about 100,000 Sudanese refugees

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 105.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 47.03 years
male: 45.16 years
female: 48.95 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.58 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Congolese (singular and plural)
adjective: Congolese or Congo

Ethnic groups: over 200 African ethnic groups of which the majority
are Bantu; the four largest tribes - Mongo, Luba, Kongo (all Bantu),
and the Mangbetu-Azande (Hamitic) make up about 45% of the population

Religions: Roman Catholic 50%, Protestant 20%, Kimbanguist 10%, Muslim
10%, other syncretic sects and traditional beliefs 10%

Languages: French (official), Lingala (a lingua franca trade
language), Kingwana (a dialect of Kiswahili or Swahili), Kikongo,
Tshiluba

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write in French, Lingala,
Kingwana, or Tshiluba
total population: 77.3%
male: 86.6%
female: 67.7% (1995 est.)

@Congo, Democratic Republic of the:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Democratic Republic of the Congo
conventional short form: none
local long form: Republique Democratique du Congo
local short form: none
former : Belgian Congo, Congo/Leopoldville, Congo/Kinshasa, Zaire

Data code: CG

Government type: republic with a strong presidential system

National capital: Kinshasa

Administrative divisions: 10 regions (regions, singular - region) and
1 town* (ville); Bandundu, Bas-Zaire, Equateur, Haut-Zaire,
Kasai-Occidental, Kasai-Oriental, Kinshasa*, Maniema, Nord-Kivu,
Shaba, Sud-Kivu

Independence: 30 June 1960 (from Belgium)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Regime (Second Republic), 24
November (1965)

Constitution: 24 June 1967, amended August 1974, revised 15 February
1978, amended April 1990; transitional constitution promulgated in
April 1994; new draft constitution approved by Transitional Parliament
in October 1996, subject to ratification by popular referendum
scheduled for February 1997; draft constitution provides for
multiparty elections by July 1997

Legal system: based on Belgian civil law system and tribal law; has
not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state: Gen. Laurent-DESIRE KABILA (since 17 May 1997); note -
the president is both chief of state and head of government
head of government: Gen. Laurent-DESIRE KABILA (since 17 May 1997);
note - the president is both chief of state and head of government
cabinet : National Executive Council normally appointed by mutual
agreement of the president and the prime minister; note - Gen.
KABILA's cabinet was appointed by him and has no prime minister
elections: president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
election last held 29 July 1984 (next was to be held in May 1997);
prime minister elected by the High Council of the Republic; note - the
term of the former government expired in 1991, elections were not
held, and MOBUTU continued in office until his government was
militarily defeated by Gen. Laurent-DESIRE KABILA on 17 May 1997
election results: MOBUTU Sese Seko Kuku Ngbendu wa Za Banga reelected
president in 1984 without opposition
note: Marshal MOBUTU Sese Seko Kuku Ngbendu wa Za Banga was president
from 24 November 1965 until forced into exile on 17 May 1997 when his
government was overturned in a coup by Gen. Laurent-DESIRE KABILA, who
immediately assumed sole governing authority

Legislative branch: unicameral parliament consisting of the combined
High Council of the Republic and the Parliament of the Transition (739
seats)
elections: the country's first multi-party presidential and
legislative elections had been scheduled for May 1997 but were not
held; instead the MOBUTO government was overthrown and control of the
governing apparatus was seized by Gen. Laurent-DESIRE KABILA

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders: sole legal party until January 1991 -
Popular Movement of the Revolution or MPR; other parties include Union
for Democracy and Social Progress or UDPS [Etienne TSHISEKEDI wa
Mulumba]; Democratic Social Christian Party or PDSC; Union of
Federalists and Independent Republicans or UFER; Unified Lumumbast
Party or PALU [Antoine GIZENGA]; Union of Independent Democrats or UDI
[Leon KENGO wa Dondo]

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEEAC,
CEPGL, ECA, FAO, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU,
NAM, OAU, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Charge d'Affaires ad interim Etienne B. J. K.
MUKENDI
chancery: 1800 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 234-7690, 7691
FAX: [1] (202) 686-3631

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Daniel H. SIMPSON
embassy: 310 Avenue des Aviateurs, Kinshasa
mailing address: Unit 31550, APO AE 09828
telephone: [243] (12) 21533 through 21535
FAX: [243] (88) 43805, ext. 2308 or 43467

Flag description: light blue with a large yellow five-pointed star in
the center and a columnar arrangement of six small yellow five-pointed
stars along the hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy of Democratic Republic of the Congo
has continued to disintegrate, although former Prime Minister KENGO
had had some success in slowing the rate of economic decline. While
meaningful economic figures are difficult to come by, the high rate of
inflation, chronic large government deficits, and plunging mineral
production have made it one of the world's poorest countries. Most
formal transactions are conducted in hard currency as indigenous bank
notes have lost almost all value, and a barter economy now flourishes
in all but the largest cities. During the bitter civil strive of
1996-97 most individuals and families have hung on grimly through
subsistence farming and petty trade. The new KABILA government will be
hard pressed to meet its financial obligations to the IMF or to put in
place the financial measures advocated by it. Improved political
stability would boost the country's long-term potential to effectively
exploit its vast mineral and agricultural resources.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $16.5 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -0.7% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $400 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 59%
industry: 15%
services: 26% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 542% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 14.51 million (1993 est.)
by occupation : agriculture 65%, industry 16%, services 19% (1991
est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $479 million
expenditures : $479 million, including capital expenditures of $99
million (1996 est.)

Industries: mining, mineral processing, consumer products (including
textiles, footwear, cigarettes, processed foods and beverages),
cement, diamonds

Industrial production growth rate: NA

Electricity - capacity: 2.83 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 5.48 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 87 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, sugar, palm oil, rubber, tea, quinine,
cassava (tapioca), palm oil, bananas, root crops, corn, fruits; wood
products

Exports:
total value : $1.47 billion (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: diamonds, copper, coffee, cobalt, crude oil
partners: Belgium, US, France, Germany, Italy, UK, Japan, South Africa

Imports:
total value: $1.25 billion (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities : consumer goods, foodstuffs, mining and other machinery,
transport equipment, fuels
partners: Belgium, South Africa, US, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK

Debt - external: $13.8 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 zaire (Z) = 100 makuta

Exchange rates: new zaires (Z) per US$1 - 83,764 (October 1996), 7,024
(1995), 1,194 (1994), 3 (1993); zaire (Z) per US$1 - 645,549 (1992)
note: on 22 October 1993 the new zaire, equal to 3,000,000 old zaires,
was introduced

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Congo, Democratic Republic of the:Communications

Telephones: 34,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : barely adequate wire and microwave radio relay service in
and between urban areas; domestic satellite system with 14 earth
stations
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 10, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 3.87 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 18

Televisions: 55,000 (1992 est.)

@Congo, Democratic Republic of the:Transportation

Railways:
total: 5,138 km (1995); note - severely reduced trackage in use
because of civil strife
narrow gauge: 3,987 km 1.067-m gauge (858 km electrified); 125 km
1.000-m gauge; 1,026 km 0.600-m gauge

Highways:
total : 145,000 km
paved: 2,500 km
unpaved: 142,500 km (1993 est.)

Waterways: 15,000 km including the Congo, its tributaries, and
unconnected lakes

Pipelines: petroleum products 390 km

Ports and harbors: Banana, Boma, Bukavu, Bumba, Goma, Kalemie, Kindu,
Kinshasa, Kisangani, Matadi, Mbandaka

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 216 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 104
over 3,047 m: 4
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 15
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m : 80 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 112
1,524 to 2,437 m: 18
914 to 1,523 m: 94 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Gendarmerie,
paramilitary Civil Guard, Special Presidential Division

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 10,232,612 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 5,213,941 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $46 million (1990)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.5% (1990)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Democratic Republic of the
Congo-Tanzania-Zambia tripoint in Lake Tanganyika may no longer be
indefinite since it has been informally reported that the indefinite
section of the Democratic Republic of the Congo-Zambia boundary has
been settled; long section with Republic of the Congo along the Congo
river is indefinite (no division of the river or its islands has been
made)

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis, mostly for domestic
consumption
______________________________________________________________________

CONGO, REPUBLIC OF THE

@Congo, Republic of the:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean, between
Angola and Gabon

Geographic coordinates: 1 00 S, 15 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 342,000 sq km
land: 341,500 sq km
water: 500 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Montana

Land boundaries:
total: 5,504 km
border countries: Angola 201 km, Cameroon 523 km, Central African
Republic 467 km, Democratic Republic of the Congo 2,410 km, Gabon
1,903 km

Coastline: 169 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy season (March to June); dry season (June to
October); constantly high temperatures and humidity; particularly
enervating climate astride the Equator

Terrain: coastal plain, southern basin, central plateau, northern
basin

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Berongou 903 m

Natural resources: petroleum, timber, potash, lead, zinc, uranium,
copper, phosphates, natural gas

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 29%
forests and woodland: 62%
other: 9% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: seasonal flooding

Environment - current issues: air pollution from vehicle emissions;
water pollution from the dumping of raw sewage; tap water is not
potable; deforestation

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Ozone
Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: about 70% of the population lives in Brazzaville,
Pointe Noire, or along the railroad between them

@Congo, Republic of the:People

Population: 2,583,198 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 557,996; female 552,022)
15-64 years: 54% (male 677,313; female 707,569)
65 years and over: 3% (male 35,573; female 52,725) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.15% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 38.79 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 17.3 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.68 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 106.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 45.73 years
male: 44.24 years
female: 47.27 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.06 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Congolese (singular and plural)
adjective: Congolese or Congo

Ethnic groups: Kongo 48%, Sangha 20%, M'Bochi 12%, Teke 17%, Europeans
8,500 (mostly French)

Religions: Christian 50%, animist 48%, Muslim 2%

Languages: French (official), African languages (Lingala and Kikongo
are the most widely used)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 74.9%
male: 83.1%
female : 67.2% (1995 est.)

@Congo, Republic of the:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of the Congo
conventional short form: none
local long form : Republique du Congo
local short form: none
former: Congo/Brazzaville, Congo

Data code: CF

Government type: republic

National capital: Brazzaville

Administrative divisions: 9 regions (regions, singular - region) and 1
commune*; Bouenza, Brazzaville*, Cuvette, Kouilou, Lekoumou, Likouala,
Niari, Plateaux, Pool, Sangha

Independence: 15 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Congolese National Day, 15 August (1960)

Constitution: new constitution approved by referendum March 1992

Legal system: based on French civil law system and customary law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Pascal LISSOUBA (since August 1992)
head of government: Prime Minister David Charles GANAO (since 2
September 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections : president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 16 August 1992 (next was to be held 27 July 1997
but armed clashes between political parties in early July seemed
likely to delay it); prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Pascal LISSOUBA elected president; percent of vote -
Pascal LISSOUBA 61%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the National
Assembly or Assemblee Nationale (125 seats; members are elected by
direct popular vote to serve five-year terms) and the Senate (60
seats; members are elected by local and regional councils to serve
six-year terms)
elections: National Assembly - last held 3 October 1993 (next to be
held NA 1998); Senate - last held November 1996 (next to be held NA
2002)
election results: National Assembly - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - UPADS 64, URD/PCT 58, others 3; Senate - percent of
vote by party - NA; seats by party - UPADS 23, MCDDI 14, RDD 8, RDPS
5, PCT 2, others 8

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders: the most important of the many
political parties are Congolese Labor Party or PCT [Denis
SASSOU-NGUESSO, president]; Association for Democracy and Development
or RDD [Joachim Yhombi OPANGO, president]; Association for Democracy
and Social Progress or RDPS [Jean-Pierre Thystere TCHICAYA,
president]; Congolese Movement for Democracy and Integral Development
or MCDDI [Bernard KOLELAS, leader]; Pan-African Union for Social
Development or UPADS [Pascal LISSOUBA, leader]; Union of Democratic
Forces or UFD [David Charles GANAO, leader]; Union for Democratic
Renewal or URD; Union for Development and Social Progress or UDPS
[Jean-Michael BOKAMBA-YANGOUMA, leader]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Union of Congolese Socialist
Youth or UJSC; Congolese Trade Union Congress or CSC; Revolutionary
Union of Congolese Women or URFC; General Union of Congolese Pupils
and Students or UGEEC

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC, CCC,
CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, UDEAC,
UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Dieudonne Antoine GANGA
chancery: 4891 Colorado Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20011
telephone: [1] (202) 726-5500
FAX : [1] (202) 726-1860

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador J. Aubrey HOOKS (10 June 1996)
embassy: Avenue Amilcar Cabral, Brazzaville
mailing address: B. P. 1015, Brazzaville
telephone: [242] 83 20 70
FAX: [242] 83 63 38

Flag description: divided diagonally from the lower hoist side by a
yellow band; the upper triangle (hoist side) is green and the lower
triangle is red; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is a mixture of village agriculture
and handicrafts, an industrial sector based largely on oil, support
services, and a government characterized by budget problems and
overstaffing. Oil has supplanted forestry as the mainstay of the
economy, providing about 90% of government revenues and exports. In
the early 1980s, rapidly rising oil revenues enabled the government to
finance large-scale development projects with GDP growth averaging 5%
annually, one of the highest rates in Africa. Subsequently, falling
oil prices cut GDP growth by half. Moreover, the government has
mortgaged a substantial portion of its oil earnings, contributing to
the government's shortage of revenues. The 12 January 1994 devaluation
of Franc Zone currencies by 50% resulted in inflation of 61% in 1994
but inflation has subsided since. Recent efforts to implement economic
reforms have begun to show progress; the government and the IMF signed
an aid agreement in mid-1996.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $4.9 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 0.9% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,960 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 11.4%
industry: 35.2%
services: 53.4% (1993)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3% (1996 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $870 million
expenditures: $970 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: petroleum extraction, cement kilning, lumbering, brewing,
sugar milling, palm oil, soap, cigarette making

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 165,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 440 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 223 kWh (1994 est.)

Agriculture - products: cassava (tapioca) accounts for 90% of food
output, sugar, rice, corn, peanuts, vegetables, coffee, cocoa; forest
products

Exports:
total value: $952 million (f.o.b., 1994)
commodities: crude oil 90%, lumber, plywood, sugar, cocoa, coffee,
diamonds
partners: Belgium-Luxembourg 24.3%, Taiwan 20.2%, US 14.9%, Italy
14.8% (1995 est.)

Imports:
total value: $559 million (f.o.b. 1994)
commodities : intermediate manufactures, capital equipment,
construction materials, foodstuffs, petroleum products
partners: France 31.2%, Netherlands 24.6%, Italy 11.4%, US 6.9% (1995
est.)

Debt - external: $5.3 billion (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note: beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF
100 per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since
1948

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Congo, Republic of the:Communications

Telephones: 18,000 (1983 est.)

Telephone system: services barely adequate for government use; key
exchanges are in Brazzaville, Pointe-Noire, and Loubomo; inter-city
lines frequently out of order
domestic: primary network consists of microwave radio relay and
coaxial cable
international : satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 8,500 (1993 est.)

@Congo, Republic of the:Transportation

Railways:
total: 795 km (includes 285 km private track)
narrow gauge: 795 km 1.067-m gauge (1995 est.)

Highways:
total: 12,760 km
paved: 1,238 km
unpaved : 11,522 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: the Congo and Ubangi (Oubangui) Rivers provide 1,120 km of
commercially navigable water transport; other rivers are used for
local traffic only

Pipelines: crude oil 25 km

Ports and harbors: Brazzaville, Impfondo, Ouesso, Oyo, Pointe-Noire

Merchant marine:
total : 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,218 GRT/4,100 DWT
(1996 est.)

Airports: 34 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 13
over 3,047 m : 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
under 914 m: 9 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 21
1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
914 to 1,523 m : 14 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Marines), Air Force, National
Police

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 601,771 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 306,757 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 26,081 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $110 million (1993)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.8% (1993)

Military - note: under the terms of a 1994 peace agreement, which
ended two years of civil strife, members of militias who supported the
three main political parties are being integrated into the military
forces

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: long segment of boundary with Democratic
Republic of the Congo along the Congo River is indefinite (no division
of the river or its islands has been made)
______________________________________________________________________

COOK ISLANDS

(free association with New Zealand)

@Cook Islands:Geography

Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean, about
one-half of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 21 14 S, 159 46 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 240 sq km
land: 240 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: 1.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 120 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by trade winds

Terrain: low coral atolls in north; volcanic, hilly islands in south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Te Manga 652 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land : 9%
permanent crops: 13%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other : 78% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons (November to March)

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea
signed, but not ratified: NA

@Cook Islands:People

Population: 19,776 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 1.08% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 22.7 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.2 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -6.65 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 24.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 71.14 years
male: 69.2 years
female: 73.1 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.22 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Cook Islander(s)
adjective: Cook Islander

Ethnic groups: Polynesian (full blood) 81.3%, Polynesian and European
7.7%, Polynesian and non-European 7.7%, European 2.4%, other 0.9%

Religions: Christian (majority of populace are members of the Cook
Islands Christian Church)

Languages: English (official), Maori

Literacy: NA

@Cook Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form : Cook Islands

Data code: CW

Dependency status: free association with New Zealand; Cook Islands is
fully responsible for internal affairs; New Zealand retains
responsibility for external affairs, in consultation with the Cook
Islands

Government type: self-governing parliamentary democracy

National capital: Avarua

Administrative divisions: none

Independence: none (became self-governing in free association with New
Zealand on 4 August 1965 and has the right at any time to move to full
independence by unilateral action)

National holiday: Constitution Day, 4 August

Constitution: 4 August 1965

Legal system: based on New Zealand law and English common law

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
chief of state : Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Apenera SHORT (since NA); New Zealand High Commissioner
Darryl DUNN (since NA 1994), representative of New Zealand
head of government: Prime Minister Sir Geoffrey A. HENRY (since 1
February 1989); Deputy Prime Minister Inatio AKARURU (since 1 February
1989)
cabinet: Cabinet chosen by the prime minister; collectively
responsible to Parliament
elections : none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; the queen's
representative is appointed by the queen; the New Zealand high
commissioner is appointed by the New Zealand Government; following
legislative elections, the leader of the party that wins the most
seats usually becomes prime minister

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (25 seats; members elected
by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 6 March 1994 (next to be held by NA 1999)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
Cook Islands Party 20, Democratic Party 3, Democratic Alliance Party 2
note: the House of Arikis (chiefs) advises on traditional matters, but
has no legislative powers

Judicial branch: High Court

Political parties and leaders: Cook Islands Party, Geoffrey HENRY;
Democratic Party, Sir Thomas DAVIS; Democratic Alliance Party, Norman
GEORGE

International organization participation: AsDB, ESCAP (associate),
FAO, ICAO, ICFTU, IFAD, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, Sparteca,
SPC, SPF, UNESCO, WHO, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (self-governing in free
association with New Zealand)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (self-governing in free
association with New Zealand)

Flag description: blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper
hoist-side quadrant and a large circle of 15 white five-pointed stars
(one for every island) centered in the outer half of the flag

Economy

Economy - overview: Like other South Pacific island nations, the Cook
Islands' economic development is hindered by the isolation of the
country from foreign markets, lack of natural resources, periodic
devastation from natural disasters, and inadequate infrastructure.
Agriculture provides the economic base with major exports made up of
copra and citrus fruit. Manufacturing activities are limited to a
fruit-processing plant and several clothing factories. Trade deficits
are made up for by remittances from emigrants and by foreign aid,
largely from New Zealand. In 1996, the government declared bankruptcy,
citing a $120 million public debt. Efforts to exploit tourism
potential and expanding the mining and fishing industries have not
been enough to adequately deal with the financial crisis. In an effort
to stem further erosion of the tenuous economic situation, the
government slashed public service salaries by 50%, condensed the
number of government ministries from 52 to 22, reduced the number of
civil servants by more than half, began selling government assets, and
closed all overseas diplomatic posts except for the one in New
Zealand.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $57 million (1993 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,000 (1993 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 17%
industry: 6%
services: 77% (FY90/91)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5.8% (1994)

Labor force:
total: 6,601 (1993)
by occupation: agriculture 29%, government 27%, services 25%, industry
15%, other 4% (1981)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: fruit processing, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 7,500 kW (1990)

Electricity - production: 20 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: copra, citrus, pineapples, tomatoes, bananas,
yams, taro, coffee

Exports:
total value: $3.9 million (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: copra, fresh and canned citrus fruit, clothing, coffee,
fish
partners: NZ 80%, Japan, Hong Kong

Imports:
total value : $67 million (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: foodstuffs, textiles, fuels, timber
partners: NZ 49%, Italy, Australia

Debt - external: $160 million (1994)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $1.275 million from Australia (FY96/97 est.); $5.4
million in budget support and $3.2 million in project and training aid
from New Zealand, the country's largest source of aid (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1 - 1.4247 (January
1997), 1.4543 (1996), 1.5235 (1995), 1.6844 (1994), 1.8495 (1993),
1.8584 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Cook Islands:Communications

Telephones: 4,180 (1994)

Telephone system:
domestic: the individual islands are connected by a combination of
satellite earth stations, microwave systems, and VHF and HF
radiotelephone; within the islands, service is provided by small
exchanges connected to subscribers by open wire, cable, and
fiber-optic cable
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 1

Radios: 13,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 studio and 8 low-powered repeaters
achieve good coverage on the island of Rarotonga

Televisions: 3,500 (1995 est.)

@Cook Islands:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 187 km
paved: 35 km
unpaved: 152 km (1980 est.)

Ports and harbors: Avarua, Avatiu

Merchant marine:
total : 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,464 GRT/2,181 DWT
(1996 est.)

Airports: 7 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 6
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of New Zealand

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

CORAL SEA ISLANDS

(territory of Australia)

@Coral Sea Islands:Geography

Location: Oceania, islands in the Coral Sea, northeast of Australia

Geographic coordinates: 18 00 S, 152 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: less than 3 sq km
land: less than 3 sq km
water : 0 sq km
note: includes numerous small islands and reefs scattered over a sea
area of about 1 million sq km, with the Willis Islets the most
important

Area - comparative: NA

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 3,095 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: sand and coral reefs and islands (or cays)

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location on Cato Island 6 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land : 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100% (mostly grass or scrub cover)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: occasional, tropical cyclones

Environment - current issues: no permanent fresh water resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: important nesting area for birds and turtles

@Coral Sea Islands:People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants
note: there is a staff of four at the meteorological station

@Coral Sea Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Coral Sea Islands Territory
conventional short form: Coral Sea Islands

Data code: CR

Dependency status: territory of Australia; administered by the
Ministry for Sport, Territories, and Local Government

National capital: none; administered from Canberra, Australia

Independence: none (territory of Australia)

Legal system: the laws of Australia, where applicable, apply

Executive branch: administered by the Minister for the Arts, Sport,
the Environments and Territories of Australia

Flag description: the flag of Australia is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Coral Sea Islands:Communications

Communications - note: there are automatic weather relay stations on
many of the isles and reefs relaying data to the mainland

@Coral Sea Islands:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Australia; visited
regularly by the Royal Australian Navy; Australia has control over the
activities of visitors

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

COSTA RICA

@Costa Rica:Geography

Location: Middle America, bordering both the Caribbean Sea and the
North Pacific Ocean, between Nicaragua and Panama

Geographic coordinates: 10 00 N, 84 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 51,100 sq km
land: 50,660 sq km
water : 440 sq km
note: includes Isla del Coco

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
total: 639 km
border countries: Nicaragua 309 km, Panama 330 km

Coastline: 1,290 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; dry season (December to April); rainy season (May
to November)

Terrain: coastal plains separated by rugged mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point : Cerro Chirripo 3,810 m

Natural resources: hydropower potential

Land use:
arable land: 6%
permanent crops : 5%
permanent pastures: 46%
forests and woodland: 31%
other: 12% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,200 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional earthquakes, hurricanes along Atlantic
coast; frequent flooding of lowlands at onset of rainy season; active
volcanoes

Environment - current issues: deforestation, largely a result of the
clearing of land for cattle ranching; soil erosion

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Marine Life Conservation

@Costa Rica:People

Population: 3,534,174 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 34% (male 617,256; female 587,566)
15-64 years: 61% (male 1,090,414; female 1,065,273)
65 years and over : 5% (male 80,304; female 93,361) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.35 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.15 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.82 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.86 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 13.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 75.82 years
male : 73.41 years
female: 78.36 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.85 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Costa Rican(s)
adjective: Costa Rican

Ethnic groups: white (including mestizo) 96%, black 2%, Amerindian 1%,
Chinese 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%

Languages: Spanish (official), English spoken around Puerto Limon

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 94.8%
male: 94.7%
female: 95% (1995 est.)

@Costa Rica:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Costa Rica
conventional short form: Costa Rica
local long form: Republica de Costa Rica
local short form: Costa Rica

Data code: CS

Government type: democratic republic

National capital: San Jose

Administrative divisions: 7 provinces (provincias, singular -
provincia); Alajuela, Cartago, Guanacaste, Heredia, Limon, Puntarenas,
San Jose

Independence: 15 September 1821 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 15 September (1821)

Constitution: 9 November 1949

Legal system: based on Spanish civil law system; judicial review of
legislative acts in the Supreme Court; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Jose Maria FIGUERES Olsen (since 8 May
1994); First Vice President Rodrigo OREAMUNO Blanco (since 8 May
1994), Second Vice President Rebeca GRYNSPAN Mayufis (since 8 May
1994); note - president is both the chief of state and head of
government
head of government: President Jose Maria FIGUERES Olsen (since 8 May
1994); First Vice President Rodrigo OREAMUNO Blanco (since 8 May
1994), Second Vice President Rebeca GRYNSPAN Mayufis (since 8 May
1994); note - president is both the chief of state and head of
government
cabinet: Cabinet selected by the president
elections: president and vice presidents elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 6 February 1994
(next to be held NA February 1998)
election results : Jose Maria FIGUERES Olsen elected president;
percent of vote - Jose Maria FIGUERES Olsen (PLN) 49.7%, Miquel Angel
RODRIGUEZ (PUSC) 47.5%

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly or Asamblea
Legislativa (57 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 6 February 1994 (next to be held NA February
1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PLN
28, PUSC 25, minority parties 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), justices are elected
for eight-year terms by the Legislative Assembly

Political parties and leaders: National Liberation Party or PLN
[Rolando ARAYA]; Social Christian Unity Party or PUSC [Rafael Angel
CALDERON Fournier]; National Integration Party or PIN [Walter MUNOZ];
National Agrarian Party or PAN; People's Party of Costa Rica or PPC
[Lenin CHACON Vargas]; Agricultural Union Party or PUAC [Juan
Guillermo BRENES Castillo]; Democratic Force Party or FD [Isaac Felipe
AZOFEIFA Bolanos]; People United [Humberto VARGAS Carbonell];
Patriotic Front Party; New Democratic Party or PDN [Rodrigo
GUTIERREZ)]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Costa Rican Confederation of
Democratic Workers or CCTD (Liberation Party affiliate); Confederated
Union of Workers or CUT (Communist Party affiliate); Authentic
Confederation of Democratic Workers or CATD (Communist Party
affiliate); Chamber of Coffee Growers; National Association for
Economic Development or ANFE; Free Costa Rica Movement or MCRL
(rightwing militants); National Association of Educators or ANDE;
Federation of Public Service Workers or FTSP

International organization participation: AG (observer), BCIE, CACM,
ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO,
ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer), NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL, UN, UN
Security Council (temporary), UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WCL,
WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Sonia PICADO
chancery: 2114 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 234-2945
FAX: [1] (202) 265-4795
consulate(s) general : Albuquerque, Atlanta, Chicago, Durham, Houston,
Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, Philadelphia, San Antonio,
San Diego, San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico), and Tampa
consulate(s): Austin

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Peter Jon DE VOS
embassy: Pavas Road, San Jose
mailing address: APO AA 34020
telephone: [506] 220-3939
FAX: [506] 220-2305

Flag description: five horizontal bands of blue (top), white, red
(double width), white, and blue, with the coat of arms in a white disk
on the hoist side of the red band

Economy

Economy - overview: Costa Rica's basically stable and progressive
economy depends especially on tourism and the export of bananas,
coffee, and other agricultural products. Poverty has been
substantially reduced over the past 15 years, and a strong social
safety net has been put in place. Recent trends, however, have been
disappointing. Economic growth slipped from 4.3% in 1994 to 2.5% in
1995, and to 0.9% in 1996. Inflation rose to 22.5% in 1995 from 13.5%
in 1994, then dropped back to 13.9% in 1996. Unemployment appears
moderate at little more than 5% but substantial underemployment
continues. Furthermore, substantial government deficits have
undermined efforts to maintain the quality of social services. The
government thus faces a formidable set of problems: to curb inflation,
reduce the deficit, encourage domestic savings, and improve public
sector efficiency while increasing the role of the private sector, all
this in harmony with IMF agreements.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $19 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -0.9% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,500 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 18%
industry: 24%
services: 58% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 13.9% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 868,300
by occupation: industry and commerce 35.1%, government and services
33%, agriculture 27%, other 4.9% (1985 est.)

Unemployment rate: 5.5% (1996 est.); much underemployment

Budget:
revenues : $1.1 billion
expenditures: $1.34 billion, including capital expenditures of $110
million (1991 est.)

Industries: food processing, textiles and clothing, construction
materials, fertilizer, plastic products

Industrial production growth rate: 10.5% (1992)

Electricity - capacity: 1,113,900 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 5.138 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,330 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, bananas, sugar, corn, rice, beans,
potatoes; beef; timber (depletion of forest resources has resulted in
declining timber output)

Exports:
total value: $3.82 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: coffee, bananas, textiles, sugar
partners: US, Germany, Italy, Guatemala, El Salvador, Netherlands, UK,
France

Imports:
total value: $3.857 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities : raw materials, consumer goods, capital equipment,
petroleum
partners: US, Japan, Mexico, Guatemala, Venezuela, Germany

Debt - external: $3.2 billion (October 1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Costa Rican colon (C) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates: Costa Rican colones (C) per US$1 - 219.29 (December
1996), 207.69 (1996), 179.73 (1995), 157.07 (1994), 142.17 (1993),
134.51 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Costa Rica:Communications

Telephones: 281,042 (1983 est.)

Telephone system: very good domestic telephone service
domestic: NA
international: connected to Central American Microwave System;
satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 71, FM 0, shortwave 13

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 18

Televisions: 340,000 (1993 est.)

@Costa Rica:Transportation

Railways:
total : 950 km
narrow gauge: 950 km 1.067-m gauge (260 km electrified)
note: the entire system was scheduled to be shut down on 31 June 1995
because of insolvency

Highways:
total : 35,600 km
paved: 5,945 km
unpaved: 29,655 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: about 730 km, seasonally navigable

Pipelines: petroleum products 176 km

Ports and harbors: Caldera, Golfito, Moin, Puerto Limon, Puerto
Quepos, Puntarenas

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 143 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 115
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m : 1
914 to 1,523 m: 16
under 914 m: 96 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 28
914 to 1,523 m: 28 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Coast Guard, Air Section, Ministry of Public
Security Force (Fuerza Publica) note - during 1996, the Ministry of
Public Security reorganized and eliminated the Civil Guard, Rural
Assistance Guard, and Frontier Guards as separate entities; they are
now under the Ministry and operate on a geographic command basis
performing ground security, law enforcement, counternarcotics, and
national security (border patrol) functions; the Constitution
prohibits armed forces

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 940,666 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 631,426 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 34,422 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $55 million (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment country for cocaine and heroin from South
America; illicit production of cannabis on small, scattered plots
______________________________________________________________________

COTE D'IVOIRE

@Cote d'Ivoire:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean, between
Ghana and Liberia

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 N, 5 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 322,460 sq km
land: 318,000 sq km
water: 4,460 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than New Mexico

Land boundaries:
total: 3,110 km
border countries : Burkina Faso 584 km, Ghana 668 km, Guinea 610 km,
Liberia 716 km, Mali 532 km

Coastline: 515 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200 nm
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical along coast, semiarid in far north; three seasons -
warm and dry (November to March), hot and dry (March to May), hot and
wet (June to October)

Terrain: mostly flat to undulating plains; mountains in northwest

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Gulf of Guinea 0 m
highest point: Mont Nimba 1,752 m

Natural resources: petroleum, diamonds, manganese, iron ore, cobalt,
bauxite, copper

Land use:
arable land: 8%
permanent crops : 4%
permanent pastures: 41%
forests and woodland: 22%
other: 25% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 680 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: coast has heavy surf and no natural harbors; during
the rainy season torrential flooding is possible

Environment - current issues: deforestation (most of the country's
forests - once the largest in West Africa - have been cleared by the
timber industry); water pollution from sewage and industrial and
agricultural effluents

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

@Cote d'Ivoire:People

Population: 14,986,218 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 47% (male 3,537,190; female 3,496,749)
15-64 years: 51% (male 3,927,687; female 3,700,468)
65 years and over: 2% (male 165,544; female 158,580) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.35% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 42.43 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 17.11 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.85 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)
note : since 1989, over 350,000 refugees have fled to Cote d'Ivoire to
escape the civil war in Liberia

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.06 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.04 male(s)/female
total population: 1.04 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 99.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 44.81 years
male : 43.63 years
female: 46.03 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.06 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Ivorian(s)
adjective: Ivorian

Ethnic groups: Baoule 23%, Bete 18%, Senoufou 15%, Malinke 11%, Agni,
foreign Africans (mostly Burkinabe and Malians, about 3 million),
non-Africans 130,000 to 330,000 (French 30,000 and Lebanese 100,000 to
300,000)

Religions: indigenous 25%, Muslim 60%, Christian 12%

Languages: French (official), 60 native dialects with Dioula the most
widely spoken

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 40.1%
male: 49.9%
female: 30% (1995 est.)

@Cote d'Ivoire:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Cote d'Ivoire
conventional short form : Cote d'Ivoire
local long form: Republique de Cote d'Ivoire
local short form: Cote d'Ivoire
former: Ivory Coast

Data code: IV

Government type: republic; multiparty presidential regime established
1960

National capital: Yamoussoukro
note: although Yamoussoukro has been the capital since 1983, Abidjan
remains the administrative center; foreign governments, including the
US, maintain official presences in Abidjan

Administrative divisions: 50 departments (departements, singular -
departement); Abengourou, Abidjan, Aboisso, Adzope, Agboville,
Agnibilekrou, Bangolo, Beoumi, Biankouma, Bondoukou, Bongouanou,
Bouafle, Bouake, Bouna, Boundiali, Dabakala, Daloa, Danane, Daoukro,
Dimbokro, Divo, Duekoue, Ferkessedougou, Gagnoa, Grand-Lahou, Guiglo,
Issia, Katiola, Korhogo, Lakota, Man, Mankono, Mbahiakro, Odienne,
Oume, Sakassou, San-Pedro, Sassandra, Seguela, Sinfra, Soubre, Tabou,
Tanda, Tingrela, Tiassale, Touba, Toumodi, Vavoua, Yamoussoukro,
Zuenoula

Independence: 7 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: National Day, 7 August

Constitution: 3 November 1960; has been amended numerous times, last
time November 1990

Legal system: based on French civil law system and customary law;
judicial review in the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court;
has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Henri Konan BEDIE (since 7 December 1993);
note - succeeded to the presidency following the death of President
Felix HOUPHOUET-BOIGNY, who had served continuously since November
1960
head of government: Prime Minister Daniel Kablan DUNCAN (since 10
December 1993)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 22 October 1995 (next to be held October 2000);
prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Henri Konan BEDIE elected president; percent of vote
- Henri Konan BEDIE 96%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
Nationale (175 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
serve five-year terms)
elections: elections last held 27 November 1995 (next to be held
November 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PDCI
150, RDR 13, FPI 12

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party of the Cote d'Ivoire
or PDCI [Henri Konan BEDIE]; Rally of the Republicans or RDR [Djeny
KOBINA]; Ivorian Popular Front or FPI [Laurent GBAGBO]; Ivorian
Worker's Party or PIT [Francis WODIE]; Ivorian Socialist Party or PSI
[Morifere BAMBA]; over 20 smaller parties

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA,
ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
ITU, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Koffi Moise KOUMOUE-KOFFI
chancery: 2424 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 797-0300

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Lannon WALKER
embassy : 5 Rue Jesse Owens, Abidjan
mailing address: 01 B. P. 1712, Abidjan
telephone: [225] 21 09 79
FAX: [225] 22 32 59

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of orange (hoist side),
white, and green; similar to the flag of Ireland, which is longer and
has the colors reversed - green (hoist side), white, and orange; also
similar to the flag of Italy, which is green (hoist side), white, and
red; design was based on the flag of France

Economy

Economy - overview: Cote d'Ivoire is among the world's largest
producers and exporters of coffee, cocoa beans, and palm-kernel oil.
Consequently, the economy is highly sensitive to fluctuations in
international prices for coffee and cocoa and to weather conditions.
Despite attempts by the government to diversify the economy, it is
still largely dependent on agriculture and related activities, which
engage roughly 85% of the population. After several years of lagging
performance, the Ivorian economy began a comeback in 1994, due to
improved prices for cocoa and coffee, growth in nontraditional primary
exports such as pineapples and rubber, limited trade and banking
liberalization, offshore oil and gas discoveries, and generous
external financing and debt rescheduling by multilateral lenders and
France. The 50% devaluation of Franc Zone currencies on 12 January
1994 caused a one-time jump in the inflation rate to 32% for 1994, but
this rate fell to 8% by 1996, in part as the economy adjusted to the
devaluation. Moreover, government adherence to donor-mandated reforms
led to a jump in growth rates - 6.5% in GDP in 1996.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $23.9 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,620 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 31%
industry: 20%
services : 49% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 8% (1996 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $1.9 billion
expenditures: $3.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $408
million (1993)

Industries: foodstuffs, beverages; wood products, oil refining,
automobile assembly, textiles, fertilizer, construction materials,
electricity

Industrial production growth rate: 9% (first half of 1996)

Electricity - capacity: 1.17 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 1.86 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 118 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, cocoa beans, bananas, palm kernels,
corn, rice, manioc (tapioca), sweet potatoes, sugar; cotton, rubber;
timber

Exports:
total value: $3.7 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: cocoa 36%, coffee 22%; tropical woods 4%, petroleum,
cotton, bananas, pineapples, palm oil, cotton, fish
partners : France 18%, Germany 11%, Italy 8%, Burkina Faso, Mali, US,
UK, Netherlands

Imports:
total value : $2.4 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: food, consumer goods; capital goods, fuel, transport
equipment
partners: France 32%, Nigeria 20%, US 6.7%, Germany, Italy, Ghana

Debt - external: $16.7 billion (1994)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $552 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note : beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF
100 per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since
1948

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Cote d'Ivoire:Communications

Telephones: 87,700 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: well-developed by African standards but operating
well below capacity
domestic: open-wire lines and microwave radio relay
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
and 1 Indian Ocean); 2 coaxial submarine cables

Radio broadcast stations: AM 71, FM 0, shortwave 13

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 18

Televisions: 810,000 (1993 est.)

@Cote d'Ivoire:Transportation

Railways:
total : 660 km
narrow gauge: 660 km 1.000-meter gauge; 25 km double track (1995 est.)

Highways:
total: 46,331 km
paved: 3,579 km
unpaved : 42,752 km (1984 est.)

Waterways: 980 km navigable rivers, canals, and numerous coastal
lagoons

Ports and harbors: Abidjan, Aboisso, Dabou, San-Pedro

Merchant marine:
total : 1 oil tanker (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,200 GRT/2,181 DWT
(1996 est.)

Airports: 34 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 17
over 3,047 m : 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
under 914 m: 10 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 17
1,524 to 2,437 m: 6
914 to 1,523 m: 11 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary Gendarmerie,
Presidential Guard

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 3,478,429 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,811,508 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 164,364 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $140 million (1993)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.4% (1993)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis, mostly for local
consumption; minor transshipment point for Southwest and Southeast
Asian heroin to Europe and occasionally to the US
______________________________________________________________________

CROATIA

@Croatia:Geography

Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Adriatic Sea, between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Slovenia

Geographic coordinates: 45 10 N, 15 30 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 56,538 sq km
land : 56,410 sq km
water: 128 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
total: 2,197 km
border countries: Bosnia and Herzegovina 932 km, Hungary 329 km,
Serbia and Montenegro 266 km (241 km with Serbia; 25 km with
Montenego), Slovenia 670 km

Coastline: 5,790 km (mainland 1,778 km, islands 4,012 km)

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: Mediterranean and continental; continental climate
predominant with hot summers and cold winters; mild winters, dry
summers along coast

Terrain: geographically diverse; flat plains along Hungarian border,
low mountains and highlands near Adriatic coast, coastline, and
islands

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Adriatic Sea 0 m
highest point: Dinara 1,830 m

Natural resources: oil, some coal, bauxite, low-grade iron ore,
calcium, natural asphalt, silica, mica, clays, salt

Land use:
arable land: 21%
permanent crops: 2%
permanent pastures : 20%
forests and woodland: 38%
other: 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 30 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent and destructive earthquakes

Environment - current issues: air pollution (from metallurgical
plants) and resulting acid rain is damaging the forests; coastal
pollution from industrial and domestic waste; widespread casualties
and destruction of infrastructure in border areas affected by civil
strife

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Desertification

Geography - note: controls most land routes from Western Europe to
Aegean Sea and Turkish Straits

@Croatia:People

Population: 4,664,710 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 18% (male 417,181; female 395,430)
15-64 years: 68% (male 1,590,334; female 1,593,470)
65 years and over: 14% (male 253,201; female 415,094) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.17% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 10.63 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 11.2 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.27 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.07 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.61 male(s)/female
total population : 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 8.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 73.49 years
male: 70.16 years
female: 77.03 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.56 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Croat(s)
adjective: Croatian

Ethnic groups: Croat 78%, Serb 12%, Muslim 0.9%, Hungarian 0.5%,
Slovenian 0.5%, others 8.1% (1991)

Religions: Catholic 76.5%, Orthodox 11.1%, Slavic Muslim 1.2%,
Protestant 0.4%, others and unknown 10.8%

Languages: Serbo-Croatian 96%, other 4% (including Italian, Hungarian,
Czechoslovak, and German)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 97%
male: 99%
female: 95% (1991 est.)

@Croatia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Croatia
conventional short form: Croatia
local long form: Republika Hrvatska
local short form: Hrvatska

Data code: HR

Government type: presidential/parliamentary democracy

National capital: Zagreb

Administrative divisions: 21 counties (zupanijas, zupanija -
singular): Bjelovar-Bilogora, City of Zagreb, Dubrovnik-Neretva,
Istra, Karlovac, Koprivnica-Krizevci, Krapina-Zagorje, Lika-Senj,
Medimurje, Osijek-Baranja, Pozega-Slavonija, Primorje-Gorski Kotar,
Sibenik, Sisak-Moslavina, Slavonski Brod-Posavina, Split-Dalmatia,
Varazdin, Virovitica-Podravina, Vukovar-Srijem, Zadar-Knin, Zagreb

Independence: 25 June 1991 (from Yugoslavia)

National holiday: Statehood Day, 30 May (1990)

Constitution: adopted on 22 December 1990

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal (16 years of age, if employed)

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Franjo TUDJMAN (since 30 May 1990)
head of government: Prime Minister Zlatko MATESA (since NA November
1995); Deputy Prime Ministers Mate GRANIC (since 8 September 1992),
Ivica KOSTOVIC (since 14 October 1993), Jure RADIC (since NA October
1994), Borislav SKEGRO (since 3 April 1993), and Ljerka MINTAS-HODAK
(since November 1995)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 4 August 1992 (next to be held 15 June 1997); prime
minister and deputy prime ministers appointed by the president
election results: President Franjo TUDJMAN reelected; percent of vote
- Franjo TUDJMAN 56%, Dobroslav PARAGA 5%

Legislative branch: bicameral Assembly or Sabor consists of the House
of Districts or Zupanijski Dom (68 seats - 63 directly elected by
popular vote, 5 presidentially appointed; members serve four-year
terms) and House of Representatives or the Zastupnicki Dom (127 seats;
members are directly elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: House of Districts - last held 13 April 1997 (next to be
held NA 2001); House of Representatives - last held 29 October 1995
(next to be held NA 1999)
election results: House of Districts - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - HDZ 42, HDZ/HSS 11, HSS 2, IDS 2, SDP/PGS/HNS 2,
SDP/HNS 2, HSLS/HSS/HNS 1, HSLS 1; note - in some districts certain
parties ran as coalitions, while in others they ran alone; House of
Representatives - percent of vote by party - HDZ 45.23%,
HSS/IDS/HNS/HKDU/SBHS 18.26%, HSLS 11.55%, SDP 8.93%, HSP 5.01%; seats
by party - HDZ 75, HSLS 12, HSS 10, SDP 10, IDS 4, HSP 4, HNS 2, SNS
2, HND 1, ASH 1, HKDU 1, SBHS 1, independents 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed for eight-year terms
by the Judicial Council of the Republic, which is elected by the House
of Representatives; Constitutional Court, judges appointed for
eight-year terms by the Judicial Council of the Republic, which is
elected by the House of Representatives

Political parties and leaders: Croatian Democratic Union or HDZ
[Franjo TUDJMAN, president]; Croatian Democratic Independents or HND
[Stjepan MESIC, president]; Croatian Social Liberal Party or HSLS
[Vlado GOTOVAC, president]; Social Democratic Party of Croatia or SDP
[Ivica RACAN]; Croatian Party of Rights or HSP [Ante DAPIC]; Croatian
Peasants' Party or HSS [Zlatko TOMCIC]; Croatian People's Party or HNS
[Radimir CACIC, president]; Serbian National Party or SNS [Milan
DJUKIC]; Action of the Social Democrats of Croatia or ASH [Silvija
DEGEN]; Croatian Christian Democratic Union or HKDU [Marko VASELICA,
president]; Istrian Democratic Assembly or IDS [Ivan JACKOVIC];
Slanvonsko-Baranja Croatian Party or SBHS; Primorje Gorski Kotar
Alliance

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: CCC, CE, CEI, EBRD, ECE,
FAO, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending
member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO,
ITU, NAM (observer), OSCE, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO,
WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Miomir ZUZUL
chancery: 2343 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 588-5899
FAX : [1] (202) 588-8936
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Peter W. GALBRAITH
embassy: Andrije Hebranga 2, Zagreb
mailing address: US Embassy, Zagreb, Department of State, Washington,
DC 20521-5080
telephone: [385] (1) 455-55-00
FAX : [385] (1) 455-85-85

Flag description: red, white, and blue horizontal bands with Croatian
coat of arms (red and white checkered)

Economy

Economy - overview: Before the dissolution of Yugoslavia, the Republic
of Croatia, after Slovenia, was the most prosperous and industrialized
area, with a per capita output perhaps one-third above the Yugoslav
average. Croatia faces considerable economic problems stemming from:
the legacy of longtime communist mismanagement of the economy; damage
during the internecine fighting to bridges, factories, power lines,
buildings, and houses; the large refugee population, both Croatian and
Bosnian; and the disruption of economic ties. Western aid and
investment, especially in the tourist and oil industries, would help
restore the economy. The government has been successful in some reform
efforts - partially macroeconomic stabilization policies - and it has
normalized relations with its creditors. Yet it still is struggling
with privatization of large state enterprises and with bank reform.
The draft 1997 budget boosts expenditures on the repair and upgrading
of infrastructure. In 1996, the substantial trade deficit was
partially offset by increased earnings from tourism.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $21.4 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $4,300 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 11%
industry: 30%
services : 59% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 1.444 million (1995)
by occupation: industry and mining 31.1%, agriculture 4.3%, government
19.1% (including education and health), other 45.5% (1993)

Unemployment rate: 13% (yearend 1996)

Budget:
revenues : $3.86 billion
expenditures: $3.72 billion, including capital expenditures of $320
million (1994 est.)

Industries: chemicals and plastics, machine tools, fabricated metal,
electronics, pig iron and rolled steel products, aluminum, paper, wood
products, construction materials, textiles, shipbuilding, petroleum
and petroleum refining, food and beverages; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 0% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 3.59 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 8.03 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,208 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, corn, sugar beets, sunflower seed,
alfalfa, clover, olives, citrus, grapes, vegetables; livestock
breeding, dairy farming

Exports:
total value : $4.6 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment 13.6%, miscellaneous
manufactures 27.6%, chemicals 14.2%, food and live animals 12.2%, raw
materials 6.1%, fuels and lubricants 9.4%, beverages and tobacco 2.7%
(1993)
partners: Germany 22%, Italy 21%, Slovenia 18% (1994)

Imports:
total value: $7.6 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment 23.1%, fuels and
lubricants 8.8%, food and live animals 9.0%, chemicals 14.2%,
miscellaneous manufactured articles 16.0%, raw materials 3.5%,
beverages and tobacco 1.4% (1993)
partners : Germany 21%, Italy 19%, Slovenia 10% (1994)

Debt - external: $3.15 billion (September 1995)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA
note: IMF has given Croatia $192 million; World Bank has given Croatia
$100 million

Currency: 1 Croatian kuna (HRK) = 100 lipas

Exchange rates: Croatian kuna per US$1 - 5.681 (January 1997), 5.434
(1996), 5.230 (1995), 5.996 (1994), 3.577 (1993)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Croatia:Communications

Telephones: 1.216 million (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international : no satellite earth stations

Radio broadcast stations: AM 14, FM 8, shortwave 0

Radios: 1.1 million

Television broadcast stations: 12 (repeaters 2)

Televisions: 1.52 million (1992 est.)

@Croatia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,907 km
standard gauge : 1,907 km 1.435-m gauge (769 km electrified)
note: some lines inoperative or not in use; disrupted by territorial
dispute (1997)

Highways:
total: 26,929 km
paved: 21,947 km (including 302 km of expressways)
unpaved: 4,982 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 785 km perennially navigable; Sava blocked by downed
bridges

Pipelines: crude oil 670 km; petroleum products 20 km; natural gas 310
km (1992); note - under repair following territorial dispute

Ports and harbors: Dubrovnik, Omisalj, Ploce, Pula, Rijeka, Sibenik,
Split, Zadar

Merchant marine:
total : 56 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 449,619 GRT/645,328 DWT
ships by type: bulk 7, cargo 29, chemical tanker 1, combination bulk
1, container 4, multi-function large load carrier 3, oil tanker 1,
passenger 2, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 3, short-sea
passenger 4
note: Croatia owns an additional 105 ships (1,000 GRT or over)
totaling 2,875,941 DWT operating under the registries of Malta,
Liberia, Cyprus, Panama, Antigua and Barbuda, and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines (1996 est.)

Airports: 68 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 60
over 3,047 m : 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m : 47 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 8
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 7 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Ground Forces, Naval Forces, Air and Air Defense
Forces, Frontier Guard, Home Guard

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,190,814 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 946,063 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 35,464 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.56 billion (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 10% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Eastern Slavonia, which was held by ethnic
Serbs during the ethnic conflict, is currently being overseen by the
UN Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia; reintegration of
Eastern Slavonia into Croatia will occur in 1997; Croatia and Italy
have not resolved a bilateral issue dating from WWII over property and
ethnic minority rights; maritime border dispute with Slovenia over
direct access to the sea in the Adriatic; the border issue is
currently under negotiation; Serbia and Montenegro is disputing
Croatia's claim to the Prevlaka Peninsula in southern Croatia because
it controls the entrance to Kotor Bay in Montenegro; Prevlaka is
currently under observation by the UN military observer mission in
Prevlaka (UNMOP)

Illicit drugs: transit point along the Balkan route for Southwest
Asian heroin to Western Europe; a minor transit point for maritime
shipments of South American cocaine bound for Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

CUBA

@Cuba:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island between the Caribbean Sea and the North
Atlantic Ocean, south of Florida

Geographic coordinates: 21 30 N, 80 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 110,860 sq km
land: 110,860 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Pennsylvania

Land boundaries:
total: 29 km
border countries: US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay 29 km
note: Guantanamo Naval Base is leased by the US and thus remains part
of Cuba

Coastline: 3,735 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by trade winds; dry season (November to
April); rainy season (May to October)

Terrain: mostly flat to rolling plains with rugged hills and mountains
in the southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point : Pico Turquino 2,005 m

Natural resources: cobalt, nickel, iron ore, copper, manganese, salt,
timber, silica, petroleum

Land use:
arable land: 24%
permanent crops: 7%
permanent pastures : 27%
forests and woodland: 24%
other: 18% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 9,100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: the east coast is subject to hurricanes from August
to October (in general, the country averages about one hurricane every
other year); droughts are common

Environment - current issues: pollution of Havana Bay; overhunting
threatens wildlife populations; deforestation

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution
signed, but not ratified: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
Desertification, Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: largest country in Caribbean

@Cuba:People

Population: 10,999,041 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 22% (male 1,255,844; female 1,190,860)
15-64 years: 69% (male 3,770,154; female 3,753,094)
65 years and over: 9% (male 483,858; female 545,231) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.42% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 13.21 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.42 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.54 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.89 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 8.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 75.2 years
male: 72.83 years
female: 77.71 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.54 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Cuban(s)
adjective: Cuban

Ethnic groups: mulatto 51%, white 37%, black 11%, Chinese 1%

Religions: nominally Roman Catholic 85% prior to CASTRO assuming
power; Protestants, Jehovah's Witnesses, Jews, and Santeria are also
represented

Languages: Spanish

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 95.7%
male: 96.2%
female: 95.3% (1995 est.)

@Cuba:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Cuba
conventional short form: Cuba
local long form: Republica de Cuba
local short form: Cuba

Data code: CU

Government type: Communist state

National capital: Havana

Administrative divisions: 14 provinces (provincias, singular -
provincia) and 1 special municipality* (municipio especial); Camaguey,
Ciego de Avila, Cienfuegos, Ciudad de La Habana, Granma, Guantanamo,
Holguin, Isla de la Juventud*, La Habana, Las Tunas, Matanzas, Pinar
del Rio, Sancti Spiritus, Santiago de Cuba, Villa Clara

Independence: 20 May 1902 (from Spain 10 December 1898; administered
by the US from 1898 to 1902)

National holiday: Rebellion Day, 26 July (1953); Liberation Day, 1
January (1959)

Constitution: 24 February 1976

Legal system: based on Spanish and American law, with large elements
of Communist legal theory; does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 16 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President of the Council of State and President of the
Council of Ministers Fidel CASTRO Ruz (prime minister from February
1959 until 24 February 1976 when office was abolished; president since
2 December 1976); First Vice President of the Council of State and
First Vice President of the Council of Ministers Gen. Raul CASTRO Ruz
(since 2 December 1976); note - the president is both the chief of
state and head of government
head of government : President of the Council of State and President
of the Council of Ministers Fidel CASTRO Ruz (prime minister from
February 1959 until 24 February 1976 when office was abolished;
president since 2 December 1976); First Vice President of the Council
of State and First Vice President of the Council of Ministers Gen.
Raul CASTRO Ruz (since 2 December 1976); note - the president is both
the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Council of Ministers proposed by the president of the Council
of State, appointed by the National Assembly
note: there is also a Council of State whose members are elected by
the National Assembly
elections: president and vice president elected by the National
Assembly; election last held 15 March 1993 (next to be held NA)
election results : Fidel CASTRO Ruz elected president; percent of
legislative vote - NA; Raul CASTRO Ruz elected vice president; percent
of legislative vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly of People's Power or
Asemblea Nacional del Poder Popular (589 seats, elected directly from
slates approved by special candidacy commissions; members serve
five-year terms)
elections: last held 24 February 1993 (next to be held NA 1998)
election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - NA

Judicial branch: People's Supreme Court (Tribunal Supremo Popular),
president, vice president, and other judges are elected by the
National Assembly

Political parties and leaders: only party - Cuban Communist Party or
PCC [Fidel CASTRO Ruz, first secretary]

International organization participation: CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IAEA,
ICAO, ICRM, IFAD, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat
(nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer),
NAM, OAS (excluded from formal participation since 1962), PCA, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOMIG, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; note - Cuba has an
Interests Section in the Swiss Embassy, headed by Principal Officer
Fernando REMIREZ DE ESTENOZ; address: Cuban Interests Section, Swiss
Embassy, 2630 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009; telephone: [1]
(202) 797-8609, 8610, and 8615

Diplomatic representation from the US: none; note - the US does have
an Interests Section in the Swiss Embassy, headed by Principal Officer
Michael G. KOZAK; address: USINT, Swiss Embassy, Calzada between L and
M, Vedado Seccion, Havana; telephone: 33-3551 through 3559 and 33-3543
through 3547 (operator assistance required); FAX: 33-3700; protecting
power in Cuba is Switzerland

Flag description: five equal horizontal bands of blue (top and bottom)
alternating with white; a red equilateral triangle based on the hoist
side bears a white five-pointed star in the center

Economy

Economy - overview: The state plays the primary role in the economy
and controls practically all foreign trade. The government has
undertaken several reforms in recent years to stem excess liquidity,
increase labor incentives, and alleviate serious shortages of food,
consumer goods, and services. The liberalized agricultural markets
introduced in October 1994, at which state and private farmers sell
above-quota production at unrestricted prices, have broadened legal
consumption alternatives and reduced black market prices. Government
efforts to lower subsidies to unprofitable enterprises and to shrink
the money supply caused the peso's black market value to move from a
peak of 120 to the dollar in the summer of 1994 to a low of 18-20 to
the dollar in late September before climbing to 20-21 at the end of
1996. New taxes helped drive down the number of legally registered
self-employed workers from 208,000 in January 1996 to 180,000 by
December. Havana announced in 1995 that GDP declined by 35% during
1989-1993, the result of lost Soviet aid and domestic inefficiencies.
The drop in GDP apparently halted in 1994, when Cuba reported a 0.7%
growth. Government officials claimed that GDP increased by 2.5% in
1995 and 7.8% in 1996. Export earnings rose an estimated 40% in 1996
to $2.1 billion, largely on the strength of increased sugar shipments
to Russia and higher nickel production through a joint venture with a
Canadian firm. With the economic recovery, imports rose for the second
straight year, growing by an estimated 26% to $3.5 billion. Living
standards for the average Cuban, however, have not improved
significantly.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $16.2 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7.8% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,480 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 7%
industry: 31%
services: 62% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total : 4.71 million economically active population (1989); 3,527,000
employed in state civilian sector (1989)
by occupation: services and government 30%, industry 22%, agriculture
20%, commerce 11%, construction 10%, transportation and communications
7% (June 1990)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: sugar, petroleum, food, tobacco, textiles, chemicals,
paper and wood products, metals (particularly nickel), cement,
fertilizers, consumer goods, agricultural machinery

Industrial production growth rate: 6% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 4.082 million kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 11.189 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 822 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: sugarcane, tobacco, citrus, coffee, rice,
potatoes and other tubers, beans; livestock

Exports:
total value: $2.1 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: sugar, nickel, tobacco, shellfish, medical products,
citrus, coffee
partners : Canada 23%, Russia 21% China 7% (1996 est.)

Imports:
total value: $3.5 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities : petroleum, food, machinery, chemicals
partners: Russia 14%, Spain 13%, Mexico 11% (1996 est.)

Debt - external: $10.5 billion (convertible currency, 1996); another
$20 billion owed to Russia (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Cuban peso (Cu$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Cuban pesos (Cu$) per US$1 - 1.0000 (non-convertible,
official rate, linked to the US dollar)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Cuba:Communications

Telephones: 229,000

Telephone system: among the world's least developed telephone systems
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic
Ocean Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 150, FM 5, shortwave 1

Radios: 2.14 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 58

Televisions: 2.5 million (1993 est.)

@Cuba:Transportation

Railways:
total: 4,677 km
standard gauge: 4,677 km 1.435-m gauge (132 km electrified)
note: a large amount of track is in private use by sugar plantations

Highways:
total : 27,100 km
paved: 15,122 km
unpaved: 11,978 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 240 km

Ports and harbors: Cienfuegos, Havana, Manzanillo, Mariel, Matanzas,
Nuevitas, Santiago de Cuba

Merchant marine:
total : 22 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 113,092 GRT/162,029 DWT
ships by type: cargo 11, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker 4,
refrigerated cargo 6
note: Cuba owns an additional 38 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
548,170 DWT operating under the registries of Panama, Cyprus, Malta,
Belize, and Mauritius (1996 est.)

Airports: 162 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 130
over 3,047 m : 7
2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
914 to 1,523 m: 10
under 914 m: 92 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 32
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 31 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Revolutionary Armed Forces (FAR) includes ground
forces, Revolutionary Navy (MGR), Air and Air Defense Force (DAAFAR),
Territorial Troops Militia (MTT), and Youth Labor Army (EJT); Border
Guards (TGF), which are controlled by the Interior Ministry

Military manpower - military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 3,053,716
females age 15-49: 3,007,277 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 1,896,023 (1997 est.)
females: 1,861,886 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 61,934
females: 58,648 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: roughly 4% (1995 est.)

Military - note: Moscow, for decades the key military supporter and
supplier of Cuba, cut off almost all military aid by 1993

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay is leased to
US and only mutual agreement or US abandonment of the area can
terminate the lease

Illicit drugs: lesser transshipment point for cocaine bound for the US
______________________________________________________________________

CYPRUS

@Cyprus:Geography

Location: Middle East, island in the Mediterranean Sea, south of
Turkey

Geographic coordinates: 35 00 N, 33 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 9,250 sq km (note - 3,355 sq km are in the Turkish area)
land: 9,240 sq km
water: 10 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.6 times the size of Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 648 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate, Mediterranean with hot, dry summers and cool, wet
winters

Terrain: central plain with mountains to north and south; scattered
but significant plains along southern coast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Mediterranean Sea 0 m
highest point: Olympus 1,952 m

Natural resources: copper, pyrites, asbestos, gypsum, timber, salt,
marble, clay earth pigment

Land use:
arable land: 12%
permanent crops: 5%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 13%
other : 70% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 390 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: moderate earthquake activity

Environment - current issues: water resource problems (no natural
reservoir catchments, seasonal disparity in rainfall; sea water
intrusion to island's largest aquifier); water pollution from sewage
and industrial wastes; coastal degradation; loss of wildlife habitats
from urbanization

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Climate Change

@Cyprus:People

Population: 752,808 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 25% (male 96,924; female 91,833)
15-64 years: 65% (male 244,821; female 241,580)
65 years and over: 10% (male 33,858; female 43,792) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.08% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 15.04 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.58 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.34 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.77 male(s)/female
total population : 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 8.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 76.54 years
male: 74.38 years
female: 78.81 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.17 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Cypriot(s)
adjective: Cypriot

Ethnic groups: Greek 78% (99.5% of the Greeks live in the Greek area;
0.5% of the Greeks live in the Turkish area), Turkish 18% (1.3% of the
Turks live in the Greek area; 98.7% of the Turks live in the Turkish
area), other 4% (99.2% of the other ethnic groups live in the Greek
area; 0.8% of the other ethnic groups live in the Turkish area)

Religions: Greek Orthodox 78%, Muslim 18%, Maronite, Armenian
Apostolic, and other 4%

Languages: Greek, Turkish, English

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 94%
male: 98%
female: 91% (1987 est.)

@Cyprus:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Cyprus
conventional short form: Cyprus
note: the Turkish area refers to itself as the "Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus" (TRNC)

Data code: CY

Government type: republic
note: a disaggregation of the two ethnic communities inhabiting the
island began after the outbreak of communal strife in 1963; this
separation was further solidified following the Turkish invasion of
the island in July 1974, which gave the Turkish Cypriots de facto
control in the north; Greek Cypriots control the only internationally
recognized government; on 15 November 1983 Turkish Cypriot "President"
Rauf DENKTASH declared independence and the formation of a "Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus" (TRNC), which has been recognized only by
Turkey; both sides publicly call for the resolution of intercommunal
differences and creation of a new federal system of government

National capital: Nicosia
note: the Turkish area's capital is Lefkosa (Nicosia)

Administrative divisions: 6 districts; Famagusta, Kyrenia, Larnaca,
Limassol, Nicosia, Paphos; note - Turkish area administrative
divisions include Kyrenia, all but a small part of Famagusta, and
small parts of Nicosia and Larnaca

Independence: 16 August 1960 (from UK)
note: Turkish area proclaimed self-rule on 13 February 1975 from
Republic of Cyprus

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 October
note: Turkish area celebrates 15 November as Independence Day

Constitution: 16 August 1960; negotiations to create the basis for a
new or revised constitution to govern the island and to better
relations between Greek and Turkish Cypriots have been held
intermittently; in 1975 Turkish Cypriots created their own
constitution and governing bodies within the "Turkish Federated State
of Cyprus," which was renamed the "Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus" in 1983; a new constitution for the Turkish area passed by
referendum on 5 May 1985

Legal system: based on common law, with civil law modifications

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Glafcos CLERIDES (since 28 February 1993);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government; post of vice president is currently vacant; under the 1960
constitution, the post is reserved for a Turkish Cypriot
head of government: President Glafcos CLERIDES (since 28 February
1993); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government; post of vice president is currently vacant; under the 1960
constitution, the post is reserved for a Turkish Cypriot
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed jointly by the president and
vice president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 14 February 1993 (next to be held NA February 1998)
election results : Glafcos CLERIDES elected president; percent of vote
- Glafcos CLERIDES 50.3%, Yeoryios VASSILIOU 49.7%
note: Rauf R. DENKTASH has been "president" of the Turkish area since
13 February 1975 (president elected by popular vote for a five-year
term); elections last held 15 and 22 April 1995 (next to be held NA
April 2000); results - Rauf R. DENKTASH 62.5%, Dervis EROGLU 37.5%;
Dervis EROGLU has been "prime minister" of the Turkish area since 16
August 1996; there is a Council of Ministers (cabinet) in the Turkish
area

Legislative branch: unicameral - Greek area: House of Representatives
or Vouli Antiprosopon (80 seats of which only 56 assigned to the Greek
Cypriots are filled; members are elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms); Turkish area: Assembly of the Republic or Cumhuriyet
Meclisi (50 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms)
elections: Greek area: last held 26 May 1996 (next to be held May
2001); Turkish area: last held 12 December 1993 (next to be held
December 1998)
election results : Greek area: House of Representatives - percent of
vote by party - DISY 34.5%, AKEL (Communist) 33.0%, DIKO 16.4%, EDEK
8.1%, KED 3.7%, others 4.1%; seats by party - DISY 20, AKEL
(Communist) 19, DIKO 10, EDEK 5, KED 2; Turkish area: Assembly of the
Republic - percent of vote by party - UBP 29.9%, DP 29.2%, CTP 24.2%
TKP 13.3%, others 3.4%; seats by party - UBP (conservative) 17, DP 15,
CTP 13, TKP 5

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the Supreme
Council of Judicature
note : there is also a Supreme Court in the Turkish area

Political parties and leaders: Greek area: Progressive Party of the
Working People or AKEL (Communist Party) [Dimitrios CHRISTOFIAS];
Democratic Rally or DISY [Ioannis MATSIS]; Democratic Party or DIKO
[Spyros KYPRIANOU]; United Democratic Union of Cyprus or EDEK [Vassos
LYSSARIDIS]; Liberal Party or KP [Nikolaos ROLANDIS]; Free Democrats
Movement or KED [Yeoryios VASSILIOU]; New Horizons [Nikolaos KOUTSOU,
secretary general]; Ecologists [Yeoryios PERDHIKIS]; Turkish area:
National Unity Party or UBP [Dervis EROGLU]; Communal Liberation Party
or TKP [Mustafa AKINCI]; Republican Turkish Party or CTP [Mehmet ALI
TALAT]; Free Democratic Party or HDP [Ismet KOTAK]; Nationalist
Justice Party or MAP [Zorlu TORE]; Unity and Sovereignty Party or BEP
[Arif Salih KIRDAG]; Democratic Party or DP [Serdar DENKTASH]; the
HDP, MAP, and VP merged under the label National Struggle Unity Party
(MMBP) to compete in the 12 December 1993 legislative election

Political pressure groups and leaders: Pan-Cyprian Labor Federation or
PEO (Communist controlled); Confederation of Cypriot Workers or SEK
(pro-West); Federation of Turkish Cypriot Labor Unions or Turk-Sen;
Confederation of Revolutionary Labor Unions or Dev-Is

International organization participation: C, CCC, CE, EBRD, ECE, EU
(applicant), FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
NAM, OAS (observer), OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL,
WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Andreas NIKOLAIDES
chancery: 2211 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone : [1] (202) 462-5772
FAX: [1] (202) 483-6710
consulate(s) general: New York
note: representative of the Turkish area in the US is Namik KORHAN,
office at 1667 K Street NW, Washington, DC, telephone [1] (202)
887-6198

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Kenneth C. BRILL (26 June 1996)
embassy: corner of Metochiou and Ploutarchou Streets, Engomi, Nicosia
mailing address : P. O. Box 4536, Nicosia, Cyprus
telephone: [357] (2) 476100
FAX: [357] (2) 465944

Flag description: white with a copper-colored silhouette of the island
(the name Cyprus is derived from the Greek word for copper) above two
green crossed olive branches in the center of the flag; the branches
symbolize the hope for peace and reconciliation between the Greek and
Turkish communities
note : the Turkish Cypriot flag has a horizontal red stripe at the top
and bottom between which is a red crescent and red star on a white
field

Economy

Economy - overview: The Greek Cypriot economy is small and prosperous,
but highly susceptible to external shocks. Industry contributes 23% to
GDP and employs 25% of the labor force, while the service sector
contributes 72% to GDP and employs 62% of the labor force. Erratic
growth rates in the 1990s reflect the economy's vulnerability to
swings in tourist arrivals (caused by fluctuations in political and
economic conditions in Western Europe and the Middle East) and the
need for structural changes in the economy. One bright spot has been
the low rate of inflation. In 1996 Cyprus fully satisfied all the
Maastricht convergence criteria. The Turkish Cypriot economy has less
than one-third the per capita GDP of the south. Because it is
recognized only by Turkey, it has had much difficulty arranging
foreign financing, and foreign firms have hesitated to invest there.
The economy remains heavily dependent on agriculture and government
service, which together employ about half of the work force. Moreover,
the small, vulnerable economy has suffered because the Turkish lira is
legal tender. To compensate for the economy's weakness, Turkey
provides direct and indirect aid to nearly every sector. In January
1997, Turkey signed a $250 million economic cooperation accord with
the Turkish Cypriot area to support tourism, education, and industry.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $8.8 billion (Greek area: purchasing
power parity - $8,300,000,000; Turkish area: purchasing power parity -
$536,000,000) (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.4% (Greek area: 4%; Turkish area: 0.5%)
(1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $11,800 (Greek area:
purchasing power parity - $13,700; Turkish area: purchasing power
parity - $3,950) (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: Greek area: agriculture 5.3%; industry
22.7%; services 72% (1996 est.); Turkish area: agriculture 11.4%;
industry 22.9%; services 65.7% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: Greek area: 3.3% (1996 est.);
Turkish area: 86% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : Greek area: 299,700
by occupation: services 62%, industry 25%, agriculture 13% (1995)
total: Turkish area: 76,500
by occupation: services 66%, industry 11%, agriculture 23% (1995)

Unemployment rate: Greek area: 2.3% (1996 est.); Turkish area: 3.6%
(1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues: Greek area - $2.9 billion, Turkish area - $149 million
expenditures: Greek area - $3.3 billion, including capital
expenditures of $453 million, Turkish area - $304 million, including
capital expenditures of $20 million (1996)

Industries: food, beverages, textiles, chemicals, metal products,
tourism, wood products

Industrial production growth rate: Greek area: -4% (1996); Turkish
area: 2.6% (1992)

Electricity - capacity: 690,000 kW 000 kW

Electricity - production: 2.5 billion kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,380 kWh (1995)

Agriculture - products: potatoes, citrus, vegetables, barley, grapes,
olives, vegetables

Exports:
total value: Greek area: $1.4 billion (f.o.b., 1996);
commodities: citrus, potatoes, grapes, wine, cement, clothing and
shoes
partners: Russia 17%, UK 11%, Greece 6%, Germany 5%
total value: Turkish area: $71 million (f.o.b., 1996);
commodities: citrus, potatoes, textiles
partners : UK 35%, Turkey 30%

Imports:
total value: Greek area: $4 billion (f.o.b., 1996);
commodities: consumer goods, petroleum and lubricants, food and feed
grains, machinery
partners: US 16%, UK 11%, Italy 9%, Germany 7%, Greece 7%, Japan 6%
total value : Turkish area: $330 million (f.o.b., 1996);
commodities: food, minerals, chemicals, machinery
partners: Turkey 53%, UK 13%

Debt - external: Greek area: $1.8 billion (1996)

Economic aid: Greek area: recipient - $700 million with amount
declining in recent years (1974-96 est.); Turkish area: recipient -
$400 million from Turkey (1977-96 est.)

Currency: 1 Cypriot pound (£C) = 100 cents; 1 Turkish lira (TL) = 100
kurus

Exchange rates: Cypriot pounds per US1$ - 0.4816 (January 1997),
0.4663 (1996), 0.4522 (1995), 0.4915 (1994), 0.4970 (1993), 0.4502
(1992); Turkish liras (TL) per US$1 - 112,019 (January 1997), 81,405
(1996), 45,845.1 (1995), 29,608.7 (1994), 10,984.6 (1993), 6,872.4
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Cyprus:Communications

Telephones: Greek area: 367,000 (1996 est.); Turkish area: 80,000
(1996 est.)

Telephone system: excellent in both the Greek and Turkish areas
domestic: open wire, fiber-optic cable, and microwave radio relay
international: tropospheric scatter; 3 coaxial and 5 fiber-optic
submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (1 Atlantic
Ocean and 2 Indian Ocean), 2 Eutelsat, 2 Intersputnik, and 1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: Greek area: AM 4, FM 36, shortwave 1,
Turkish area: AM 2, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: Greek area: 500,000 (1996 est.); Turkish area: 130,000 (1996
est.)

Television broadcast stations: Greek area: 8 (repeaters 34); Turkish
area: 2

Televisions: Greek area: 300,000 (1996 est.); Turkish area: 90,000
(1996 est.)

@Cyprus:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: Greek area: 10,150 km; Turkish area: 2,350 km
paved : Greek area: 5,781 km; Turkish area: 1,370 km
unpaved: Greek area: 4,369 km; Turkish area: 980 km

Ports and harbors: Famagusta, Kyrenia, Larnaca, Limassol, Vasilikos
Bay

Merchant marine:
total : 1,520 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 24,234,821
GRT/40,170,562 DWT
ships by type: bulk 486, cargo 562, chemical tanker 26, combination
bulk 50, combination ore/oil 19, container 119, liquefied gas tanker
3, oil tanker 142, passenger 7, passenger-cargo 1, refrigerated cargo
50, roll-on/roll-off cargo 32, short-sea passenger 17, specialized
tanker 4, vehicle carrier 2
note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 49 countries
among which are Greece 723, Germany 172, Russia 45, Netherlands 32,
Japan 30, Belgium 26, Cuba 26, Latvia 17, UK 15, and US 14; Cyprus
owns 71 additional ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,491,740 DWT
that operate under the registries of Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas,
Hong Kong, Liberia, Malta, Panama, Syria, and UK (1996 est.)

Airports: 15 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 14
2,438 to 3,047 m: 8
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Greek area: Greek Cypriot National Guard (GCNG;
includes air and naval elements); Hellenic Forces Regiment on Cyprus
(ELDYK); Greek Cypriot Police;, Turkish area: Turkish Cypriot Security
Force (TCSF), Turkish Forces Regiment on Cyprus (KTKA), Turkish
mainland army units

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 192,593 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 132,412 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 6,038 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $405 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 5.4% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: 1974 hostilities divided the island into two
de facto autonomous areas, a Greek area controlled by the Cypriot
Government (59% of the island's land area) and a Turkish-Cypriot area
(37% of the island), that are separated by a UN buffer zone (4% of the
island); there are two UK sovereign base areas within the Greek
Cypriot portion of the island

Illicit drugs: transit point for heroin and hashish via air routes and
container traffic to Europe, especially from Lebanon and Turkey; some
cocaine transits as well
______________________________________________________________________

CZECH REPUBLIC

@Czech Republic:Geography

Location: Central Europe, southeast of Germany

Geographic coordinates: 49 45 N, 15 30 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 78,703 sq km
land: 78,645 sq km
water: 58 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than South Carolina

Land boundaries:
total: 1,881 km
border countries: Austria 362 km, Germany 646 km, Poland 658 km,
Slovakia 215 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; cool summers; cold, cloudy, humid winters

Terrain: Bohemia in the west consists of rolling plains, hills, and
plateaus surrounded by low mountains; Moravia in the east consists of
very hilly country

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Elbe River 115 m
highest point: Snezka 1,602 m

Natural resources: hard coal, soft coal, kaolin, clay, graphite

Land use:
arable land: 41%
permanent crops: 2%
permanent pastures: 11%
forests and woodland: 34%
other: 12% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 240 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: air and water pollution in areas of
northwest Bohemia and in northern Moravia around Ostrava present
health risks; acid rain damaging forests

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law
of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol

Geography - note: landlocked; strategically located astride some of
oldest and most significant land routes in Europe; Moravian Gate is a
traditional military corridor between the North European Plain and the
Danube in central Europe

@Czech Republic:People

Population: 10,298,324 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 18% (male 930,874; female 886,444)
15-64 years : 69% (male 3,542,900; female 3,539,351)
65 years and over: 13% (male 535,049; female 863,706) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.13% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 8.84 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 11.02 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.93 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.62 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 73.86 years
male: 70.49 years
female: 77.42 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.17 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Czech(s)
adjective: Czech
note: 300,000 Slovaks declared themselves Czech citizens in 1994

Ethnic groups: Czech 94.4%, Slovak 3%, Polish 0.6%, German 0.5%, Gypsy
0.3%, Hungarian 0.2%, other 1%

Religions: atheist 39.8%, Roman Catholic 39.2%, Protestant 4.6%,
Orthodox 3%, other 13.4%

Languages: Czech, Slovak

Literacy:
definition: age NA and over can read and write
total population: 99% (est.)
male: NA%
female : NA%

@Czech Republic:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Czech Republic
conventional short form: Czech Republic
local long form: Ceska Republika
local short form: Ceska Republika

Data code: EZ

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Prague

Administrative divisions: 8 regions (kraje, kraj - singular);
Jihocesky, Jihomoravsky, Praha, Severocesky, Severomoravsky,
Stredocesky, Vychodocesky, Zapadocesky

Independence: 1 January 1993 (from Czechoslovakia)

National holiday: National Liberation Day, 8 May; Founding of the
Republic, 28 October

Constitution: ratified 16 December 1992; effective 1 January 1993

Legal system: civil law system based on Austro-Hungarian codes; has
not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction; legal code modified to bring
it in line with Organization on Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) obligations and to expunge Marxist-Leninist legal theory

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Vaclav HAVEL (since 26 January 1993)
head of government : Prime Minister Vaclav KLAUS (since NA June 1992);
Deputy Prime Ministers Ivan KOCARNIK (since NA June 1992), Josef LUX
(since NA June 1992), Josef ZIELENIEC (since NA June 1992)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president on the recommendation of
the prime minister
elections : president elected by Parliament for a five-year term;
election last held 26 January 1993 (next to be held NA January 1998);
prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Vaclav HAVEL elected president; percent of
parliamentary vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Parlament consists of the
Senate (81 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
staggered two-, four-, and six-year terms) and the Chamber of Deputies
or Snemovna Poslancu (200 seats; members are elected by popular vote
to serve four-year terms)
elections : Senate - last held 15-16 and 22-23 November 1996 (next to
be held NA November 1998 - to replace/re-elect 20 senators serving
two-year terms); Chamber of Deputies - last held 31 May-1 June 1996
(next to be held NA May 2000)
election results : Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - governing coalition (ODS 32, KDU-CSL 13, ODA 7), opposition
(CSSD 25, KCSM 2, DEU 1, independent 1); Chamber of Deputies - percent
of vote by party - NA; seats by party - governing coalition (ODS 68,
KDU-CSL 18, ODA 13), opposition (CSSD 61, KCSM 22, SPR-RSC 18)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chairman and deputy chairmen are
appointed by the president; Constitutional Court, chairman and deputy
chairmen are appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders:
governing coalition : Civic Democratic Party or ODS [Vaclav KLAUS,
chairman]; Civic Democratic Alliance or ODA [Michael ZANTOVSKY,
chairman]; Christian Democratic Union-Czech People's Party or KDU-CSL
[Josef LUX, chairman]
opposition: Czech Social Democrats or CSSD - left opposition [Milos
ZEMAN, chairman]; Communist Party or KSCM - left opposition [Miroslav
GREBENICEK, chairman]; Assembly for the Republic or SPR-RSC - extreme
right radical [Miroslav SLADEK, chairman]; Democratic Union or DEU
[Ratibor MAJZLIK, chairman]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Czech-Moravian Chamber of Trade
Unions; Civic Movement

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS, CCC,
CE (guest), CEI, CERN, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, IAEA, IBRD,
ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Interpol,
IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, NACC, NSG, OECD, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMOP, UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UPU, WEU (associate
partner), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Alexander VONDRA
chancery: 3900 Spring of Freedom Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 274-9101, 9102
FAX: [1] (202) 966-8540
consulate(s) general : Los Angeles

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Jenonne R. WALKER
embassy : Trziste 15, 11801 Prague 1
mailing address: Unit 1330, APO AE 09213
telephone: [420] (2) 5732-0663
FAX: [420] (2) 5732-0920

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red
with a blue isosceles triangle based on the hoist side (almost
identical to the flag of the former Czechoslovakia)

Economy

Economy - overview: Western observers view the Czech Republic as one
of the most politically and economically stable post-Communist states.
Its key macroeconomic indicators are, in the aggregate, the best in
the region, and public opinion polls show strong support for reform.
The country emerged from recession in 1994 with 2.6% growth and
reached about 5% growth in both 1995 and 1996 while keeping a balanced
budget and reorienting exports to the EU. Inflation and unemployment
of 8.7% and 3.3% respectively in 1996 are among the lowest in the
region. Prague's mass privatization program, including its innovative
distribution of ownership shares to Czech citizens via "coupon
vouchers," has made the most rapid progress in Eastern Europe. About
80% of the economy is in private hands or is partially privatized. The
Czech Republic appears to be the East European frontrunner in economic
integration with the West; for example, in 1996 it began to strengthen
its bankruptcy law and to improve the transparency of stock market
operations. It was the first post-Communist member of the OECD and is
expected to be in the next group of new EU members. Its solid economic
performance has led Standard and Poor's to upgrade the country's
sovereign credit rating to "A" and has attracted over $6.7 billion in
direct foreign investment to Czech industry between 1990 and September
1996 - one quarter from the US. Prague's biggest macroeconomic
concerns now are mounting trade and current account deficits. In
addition, the Czech economy still faces transition problems. The
government continues to exert too much direct and indirect influence
on the privatized economy, and the management of privatized firms
sometimes is ineffective. Insufficient regulation and lack of public
information in the capital markets and the banking system, combined
with a shortage of experienced financial analysts, limit the ability
to distribute new credit efficiently. The judicial system also has
trouble speedily processing bankruptcy cases. Prague has promised to
overhaul its bankruptcy law and improve stock market and bank
operations, but it will take years to ensure compliance. Prague
forecasts a balanced budget, 4.5% GDP growth, 3.3% unemployment and
7.5% to 8% inflation for 1997.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $114.3 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $11,100 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 4%
industry: 43%
services : 53% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 8.7% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 5.107 million (1996)
by occupation: industry 33.1%, agriculture 6.9%, construction 9.1%,
transport and communications 7.2%, services 43.7% (1994)

Unemployment rate: 3.3% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $18.4 billion
expenditures: $18.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: fuels, ferrous metallurgy, machinery and equipment, coal,
motor vehicles, glass, armaments

Industrial production growth rate: 6.4% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 13.85 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 55.38 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 4,712 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grains, potatoes, sugar beets, hops, fruit;
pigs, cattle, poultry; forest products

Exports:
total value: $21.9 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: manufactured goods 32.4%, machinery and transport
equipment 26.3%, chemicals 10.4%, raw materials and fuel 11.3% (1995)
partners : EU 55.1%, Eastern Europe, excluding Slovakia, and CIS
countries 16.9%, Slovakia 16.2%, developing countries 6.6%, EFTA 1.8%
(1995)

Imports:
total value: $27.8 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment 35.6%, manufactured
goods 17.9%, chemicals 13.2%, raw materials and fuels 14.4% (1994)
partners : EU 56.4%, Eastern Europe, excluding Slovakia, and CIS
countries 15.7%, Slovakia 13.1%, developing countries 6.0%, EFTA 2.5%
(1995)

Debt - external: $17.1 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $27 million (1993)

Currency: 1 koruna (Kc) = 100 haleru

Exchange rates: koruny (Kcs) per US$1 - 27.516 (January 1997), 27.145
(1996), 26.541 (1995), 28.785 (1994), 29.153 (1993), 28.26 (1992)
note: values before 1993 reflect Czechoslovak exchange rates

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Czech Republic:Communications

Telephones: 3,349,539 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international : satellite earth stations - 2 Intersputnik (Atlantic
and Indian Ocean Regions)

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

@Czech Republic:Transportation

Railways:
total: 9,441 km
standard gauge : 9,345 km 1.435-m standard gauge (2641 km electrified
at three voltages)
narrow gauge: 96 km two narrow gauges (1995)

Highways:
total: 124,770 km
paved: 16,719 km (including 414 km of expressways)
unpaved : 108,051 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: NA km; the Elbe (Labe) is the principal river

Pipelines: natural gas 5,400 km

Ports and harbors: Decin, Prague, Usti nad Labem

Merchant marine:
total: 4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 80,117 GRT/134,890 DWT
ships by type: bulk 3, cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 116 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 29
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 9
1,524 to 2,437 m: 13
under 914 m: 5 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 87
over 3,047 m : 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
914 to 1,523 m: 32
under 914 m : 41 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Air and Air Defense Forces, Civil Defense,
Railroad Units

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,715,759 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 2,068,143 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 84,516 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.22 billion (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.2% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Liechtenstein claims restitution for 1,600
sq km of Czech territory confiscated from its royal family in 1918;
the Czech Republic insists that restitution does not go back before
February 1948, when the communists seized power; individual Sudeten
German claims for restitution of property confiscated in connection
with their expulsion after World War II; unresolved property issues
with Slovakia over redistribution of property of the former
Czechoslovak federal government

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin and
hashish and Latin American cocaine to Western Europe; domestic
consumption - especially of locally produced synthetic drugs - on the
rise
______________________________________________________________________

DENMARK

@Denmark:Geography

Location: Northern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea and the North Sea,
on a peninsula north of Germany

Geographic coordinates: 56 00 N, 10 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 43,094 sq km
land: 42,394 sq km
water: 700 sq km
note: includes the island of Bornholm in the Baltic Sea and the rest
of metropolitan Denmark, but excludes the Faroe Islands and Greenland

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Massachusetts

Land boundaries:
total: 68 km
border countries : Germany 68 km

Coastline: 7,314 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 4 nm
continental shelf : 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 3 nm

Climate: temperate; humid and overcast; mild, windy winters and cool
summers

Terrain: low and flat to gently rolling plains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Lammefjord -7 m
highest point: Ejer Bavnehoj 173 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, fish, salt, limestone,
stone, gravel and sand

Land use:
arable land: 60%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 5%
forests and woodland: 10%
other: 25% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 4,350 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding is a threat in some areas of the country
(e.g., parts of Jutland, along the southern coast of the island of
Lolland) that are protected from the sea by a system of dikes

Environment - current issues: air pollution, principally from vehicle
and power plant emissions; nitrogen and phosphorus pollution of the
North Sea; drinking and surface water becoming polluted from animal
wastes and pesticides

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber
94, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: controls Danish Straits (Skagerrak and Kattegat)
linking Baltic and North Seas; about one-quarter of the population
lives in Copenhagen

@Denmark:People

Population: 5,305,048 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 18% (male 487,731; female 463,444)
15-64 years: 67% (male 1,801,904; female 1,754,435)
65 years and over: 15% (male 330,143; female 467,391) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.59% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 12.78 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 11.22 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 4.32 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 76.1 years
male: 73.44 years
female: 78.9 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.75 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Dane(s)
adjective: Danish

Ethnic groups: Scandinavian, Eskimo, Faroese, German

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran 91%, other Protestant and Roman
Catholic 2%, other 7% (1988)

Languages: Danish, Faroese, Greenlandic (an Eskimo dialect), German
(small minority)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99% (1980 est.)
male : NA%
female: NA%

@Denmark:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Kingdom of Denmark
conventional short form: Denmark
local long form: Kongeriget Danmark
local short form: Danmark

Data code: DA

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: Copenhagen

Administrative divisions: metropolitan Denmark - 14 counties (amter,
singular - amt) and 1 city* (stad); Arhus, Bornholms, Frederiksborg,
Fyns, Kobenhavns, Nordjyllands, Ribe, Ringkobing, Roskilde,
Sonderjyllands, Staden Kobenhavn*, Storstroms, Vejle, Vestsjaellands,
Viborg
note : there is one other city, Fredericksberg, mentioned by some
sources, but the US government has not recognized it as a first-order
administrative division; see separate entries for the Faroe Islands
and Greenland, which are part of the Danish realm and self-governing
administrative divisions

Independence: 10th century first organized as a unified state; in 1849
became a constitutional monarchy

National holiday: Birthday of the Queen, 16 April (1940)

Constitution: 1849 was the original constitution; there was a major
overhaul 5 June 1953, allowing for a unicameral legislature and a
female chief of state

Legal system: civil law system; judicial review of legislative acts;
accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen MARGRETHE II (since 14 January 1972); Heir
Apparent Crown Prince FREDERIK, elder son of the queen (born 26 May
1968)
head of government: Prime Minister Poul Nyrup RASMUSSEN (since 25
January 1993)
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the queen
elections: none; the queen is a constitutional monarch; prime minister
appointed by the queen

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Folketing (179 seats;
members are elected on the basis of proportional representation to
serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 21 September 1994 (next to be held not later than
September 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - Social Democrats 34.6%,
Liberals 23.3%, Conservatives 15.0%, Socialist People's Party 7.3%,
Progress Party 6.4%, Social Liberals 4.6%, Unity List 3.1%, Center
Democrats 2.8%, Christian People's Party 1.8%; seats by party - Social
Democrats 63, Liberals 44, Conservatives 28, Socialist People's Party
13, Progress Party 11, Social Liberals 8, Unity List 6, Center
Democrats 5, independent 1; note - Progress Party split up in spring
of 1995: Progress Party retained 7 seats, Danish People's Party 4
seats

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the monarch
for life

Political parties and leaders: Social Democratic Party [Poul Nyrup
RASMUSSEN]; Conservative Party [Hans ENGELL]; Liberal Party [Uffe
ELLEMANN-JENSEN]; Socialist People's Party [Holger K. NIELSEN];
Progress Party [Kirsten JAKOBSEN]; Center Democratic Party [Mimi
JAKOBSEN]; Social Liberal Party [Marianne JELVED]; Unity Party [none];
Danish People's Party [Pia KJAERSGAARD]

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB,
Australia Group, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN, EBRD, ECE, EIB, ESA, EU,
FAO, G- 9, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NACC, NATO, NC, NEA, NIB, NSG, OECD, OSCE, PCA,
UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMOGIP, UNMOP,
UNMOT, UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UNTSO, UPU, WEU (observer), WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Knud-Erik TYGESEN
chancery: 3200 Whitehaven Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 234-4300
FAX: [1] (202) 328-1470
consulate(s) general: Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Edward E. ELSON
embassy: Dag Hammarskjolds Alle 24, 2100 Copenhagen
mailing address: PSC 73, APO AE 09716
telephone: [45] (31) 42 31 44
FAX : [45] (35) 43 02 23

Flag description: red with a white cross that extends to the edges of
the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side,
and that design element of the Dannebrog (Danish flag) was
subsequently adopted by the other Nordic countries of Finland,
Iceland, Norway, and Sweden

Economy

Economy - overview: This thoroughly modern market economy features
high-tech agriculture, up-to-date small-scale and corporate industry,
extensive government welfare measures, comfortable living standards,
and high dependence on foreign trade. Denmark is a net exporter of
food. The center-left coalition government will concentrate on
reducing the persistently high unemployment rate and the budget
deficit as well as following the previous government's policies of
maintaining low inflation and a current account surplus. The coalition
also vows to maintain a stable currency. The coalition has lowered
marginal income taxes while maintaining overall tax revenues; boosted
industrial competitiveness through labor market and tax reforms and
increased research and development funds; and improved welfare
services for the neediest while cutting paperwork and delays. Prime
Minister RASMUSSEN's reforms focus on adapting Denmark to the criteria
for European integration by 1999; Copenhagen has won from the European
Union (EU) the right to opt out of the European Monetary Union (EMU).
Denmark is, in fact, one of the few EU countries likely to fit into
the EMU on time.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $118.2 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $22,700 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 4%
industry: 27%
services: 69% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.1% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 2,895,950
by occupation: private services 40%, government services 30%,
manufacturing and mining 19%, construction 6%, agriculture, forestry,
and fishing 5% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 8.2% (November 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $62.1 billion
expenditures: $66.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: food processing, machinery and equipment, textiles and
clothing, chemical products, electronics, construction, furniture, and
other wood products, shipbuilding

Industrial production growth rate: 3.4% (1996)

Electricity - capacity: 9.458 million kW 000 kW

Electricity - production: 34.6 billion kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: 6,411 kWh (1995)

Agriculture - products: grain, potatoes, rape, sugar beets; meat,
dairy products; fish

Exports:
total value: $47.6 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: machinery and instruments 25%, meat and meat products,
fuels, dairy products, ships, fish, chemicals
partners : Germany 22.5%, Sweden 9.7%, UK 7.9%, Norway 5.9%, France
5.4%, Netherlands 4.4%, US 4.0% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $42.4 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: machinery and equipment, petroleum 25%, chemicals, grain
and foodstuffs, textiles, paper
partners : Germany 21.7%, Sweden 11.7%, Netherlands 7.0%, UK 6.6%,
France 5.2%, Norway 4.9%, US 4.7%, Japan 3.5%, FSU 1.7% (1995)

Debt - external: $44 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $1.34 billion (1993)

Currency: 1 Danish krone (DKr) = 100 oere

Exchange rates: Danish kroner (DKr) per US$1 - 6.117 (January 1997),
5.799 (1996), 5.602 (1995), 6.361 (1994), 6.484 (1993), 6.036 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Denmark:Communications

Telephones: 4.025 million (1995 est.), of which 822,000 are mobile
telephones

Telephone system: excellent telephone and telegraph services
domestic: buried and submarine cables and microwave radio relay form
trunk network, four cellular radio communications systems
international: 18 submarine optical fiber cables linking Denmark with
Norway, Sweden, Russia, Poland, Germany, the Netherlands, UK, Faroe
Islands, Iceland, and Canada; satellite earth stations - 6 Intelsat;
10 Eutelsat; 1 Orion; 1 Inmarsat (Blaavand-Atlantic-East); note - the
Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden) share
the Danish earth station and the Eik, Norway, station for world-wide
Inmarsat access

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 50 (1996 est.)

Televisions: 3 million (1996 est.)

@Denmark:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,848 km (499 km privately owned and operated)
standard gauge: 2,848 km 1.435-m gauge (326 km electrified; 760 km
double track) (1995)

Highways:
total : 71,420 km
paved: 71,420 km (including 830 km of expressways)
unpaved: 0 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 417 km

Pipelines: crude oil 110 km; petroleum products 578 km; natural gas
700 km

Ports and harbors: Alborg, Arhus, Copenhagen, Esbjerg, Fredericia,
Grenaa, Koge, Odense, Struer

Merchant marine:
total: 328 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,180,729 GRT/7,400,870
DWT
ships by type: bulk 15, cargo 114, chemical tanker 20, container 68,
liquefied gas tanker 25, livestock carrier 6, oil tanker 29, railcar
carrier 1, refrigerated cargo 16, roll-on/roll-off cargo 24, short-sea
passenger 9, specialized tanker 1
note: Denmark has created its own internal register, called the Danish
International Ship register (DIS); DIS ships do not have to meet
Danish manning regulations, and they amount to a flag of convenience
within the Danish register (1996 est.)

Airports: 109 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 102
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m : 7
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 13
under 914 m: 77 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 7
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Danish Army, Royal Danish Navy, Royal Danish
Air Force, Home Guard

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,333,279 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 1,146,099 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 33,532 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $2.9 billion (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.6% (1997 est.)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Rockall continental shelf dispute involving
Iceland, Ireland, and the UK (Ireland and the UK have signed a
boundary agreement in the Rockall area)
______________________________________________________________________

DJIBOUTI

@Djibouti:Geography

Location: Eastern Africa, bordering the Gulf of Aden and the Red Sea,
between Eritrea and Somalia

Geographic coordinates: 11 30 N, 43 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 22,000 sq km
land: 21,980 sq km
water : 20 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Massachusetts

Land boundaries:
total: 508 km
border countries : Eritrea 113 km, Ethiopia 337 km, Somalia 58 km

Coastline: 314 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: desert; torrid, dry

Terrain: coastal plain and plateau separated by central mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Asal -155 m
highest point : Mousa Alli 2,028 m

Natural resources: geothermal areas

Land use:
arable land : NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: 9%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 91% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: earthquakes; droughts; occasional cyclonic
disturbances from the Indian Ocean bring heavy rains and flash floods

Environment - current issues: inadequate supplies of potable water;
desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of
the Sea, Ship Pollution
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

Geography - note: strategic location near world's busiest shipping
lanes and close to Arabian oilfields; terminus of rail traffic into
Ethiopia; mostly wasteland

@Djibouti:People

Population: 434,116 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 92,920; female 92,584)
15-64 years: 55% (male 125,547; female 112,140)
65 years and over: 2% (male 5,624; female 5,301) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.51% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 42.16 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 14.98 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -12.09 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.12 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 1.06 male(s)/female
total population: 1.07 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 104.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 50.61 years
male: 48.65 years
female: 52.63 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.01 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Djiboutian(s)
adjective: Djiboutian

Ethnic groups: Somali 60%, Afar 35%, French, Arab, Ethiopian, and
Italian 5%

Religions: Muslim 94%, Christian 6%

Languages: French (official), Arabic (official), Somali, Afar

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 46.2%
male : 60.3%
female: 32.7% (1995 est.)

@Djibouti:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Djibouti
conventional short form: Djibouti
former: French Territory of the Afars and Issas, French Somaliland

Data code: DJ

Government type: republic

National capital: Djibouti

Administrative divisions: 5 districts (cercles, singular - cercle);
'Ali Sabih, Dikhil, Djibouti, Obock, Tadjoura

Independence: 27 June 1977 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 June (1977)

Constitution: multiparty constitution approved in referendum 4
September 1992

Legal system: based on French civil law system, traditional practices,
and Islamic law

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
chief of state: President HASSAN GOULED Aptidon (since 24 June 1977)
head of government: Prime Minister BARKAT Gourad Hamadou (since 30
September 1978)
cabinet : Council of Ministers responsible to the president
elections: president elected by popular vote to a six-year term;
election last held 7 May 1993 (next to be held NA 1999)
election results: President HASSAN GOULED reelected; percent of vote -
NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Chamber of Deputies or Chambre des
Deputes (65 seats; members are elected to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 18 December 1992 (next to be held NA 1997)
election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - RPP 65; note - RPP
(the ruling party) dominated

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders:
ruling party : People's Progress Assembly or RPP [Hassan GOULED
Aptidon]
other parties: Democratic Renewal Party or PRD [Mohamed Jama ELABE];
Democratic National Party or PND [ADEN Robleh Awaleh]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Front for the Restoration of
Unity and Democracy or FRUD, and affiliates; Movement for Unity and
Democracy or MUD

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL,
ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
IGADD, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC,
ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIH, UPU, WFTU, WHO,
WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador ROBLE Olhaye Oudine
chancery: Suite 515, 1156 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005
telephone: [1] (202) 331-0270
FAX : [1] (202) 331-0302

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Terri ROBL
embassy: Plateau du Serpent, Boulevard Marechal Joffre, Djibouti
mailing address: B. P. 185, Djibouti
telephone : [253] 35 39 95
FAX: [253] 35 39 40

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of light blue (top) and
light green with a white isosceles triangle based on the hoist side
bearing a red five-pointed star in the center

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is based on service activities
connected with the country's strategic location and status as a free
trade zone in northeast Africa. Two-thirds of the inhabitants live in
the capital city, the remainder being mostly nomadic herders. Scanty
rainfall limits crop production to fruits and vegetables, and most
food must be imported. Djibouti provides services as both a transit
port for the region and an international transshipment and refueling
center. It has few natural resources and little industry. The nation
is, therefore, heavily dependent on foreign assistance (an important
supplement to GDP) to help support its balance of payments and to
finance development projects. An unemployment rate of 40% to 50%
continues to be a major problem. Per capita consumption dropped an
estimated 35% over the last six years because of recession, civil war,
and a high population growth rate (including immigrants and refugees).
Faced with a multitude of economic difficulties, the government has
fallen in arrears on long term external debt and has been struggling
to meet the stipulations of foreign aid donors.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $500 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -3.1% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,200 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 3%
industry: 21%
services: 76% (1993 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4.9% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 282,000
by occupation: agriculture 75%, industry 11%, services 14% (1991 est.)

Unemployment rate: 40%-50% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $150 million
expenditures: $181 million, including capital expenditures of $34
million (1995 est.)

Industries: limited to a few small-scale enterprises, such as dairy
products and mineral-water bottling

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 115,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 200 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 577 kWh (1991)

Agriculture - products: fruits, vegetables; goats, sheep, camels

Exports:
total value: $184 million (f.o.b., 1994 est.)
commodities: hides and skins, coffee (in transit) (1995)
partners: Somalia 42%, Ethiopia 35%, Yemen 7% (1995 est.)

Imports:
total value: $384 million (f.o.b., 1994 est.)
commodities: foods, beverages, transport equipment, chemicals,
petroleum products (1995)
partners : Thailand 15%, France 13%, Ethiopia 8%, Saudi Arabia 6%
(1995 est.)

Debt - external: $267 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Djiboutian franc (DF) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Djiboutian francs (DF) per US$1 - 177.721 (fixed rate
since 1973)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Djibouti:Communications

Telephones: 7,200 (1986 est.)

Telephone system: telephone facilities in the city of Djibouti are
adequate as are the microwave radio relay connections to outlying
areas of the country
domestic: microwave radio relay network
international: submarine cable to Jiddah, Suez, Sicily, Marseilles,
Colombo, and Singapore; satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat (Indian
Ocean) and 1 Arabsat; MEDARABTEL regional microwave radio relay
telephone network

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 17,000 (1993 est.)

@Djibouti:Transportation

Railways:
total: 97 km (Djibouti segment of the Addis Ababa-Djibouti railroad)
narrow gauge: 97 km 1.000-m gauge

Highways:
total: 2,890 km
paved: 364 km
unpaved: 2,526 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Djibouti

Merchant marine:
total : 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,369 GRT/3,030 DWT
(1996 est.)

Airports: 11 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 4
over 3,047 m : 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 7
1,524 to 2,437 m : 3
914 to 1,523 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Djibouti National Army (includes Navy and Air
Force), National Security Force (Force Nationale de Securite),
National Police Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 103,569 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 60,751 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $26 million (1989)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

DOMINICA

@Dominica:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island between the Caribbean Sea and the North
Atlantic Ocean, about one-half of the way from Puerto Rico to Trinidad
and Tobago

Geographic coordinates: 13 30 N, 61 20 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 750 sq km
land: 750 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than four times the size of
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 148 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by northeast trade winds; heavy rainfall

Terrain: rugged mountains of volcanic origin

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Morne Diablatins 1,447 m

Natural resources: timber

Land use:
arable land : 9%
permanent crops: 13%
permanent pastures: 3%
forests and woodland: 67%
other : 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: flash floods are a constant threat; destructive
hurricanes can be expected during the late summer months

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental Modification,
Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

@Dominica:People

Population: 66,633 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 28% (male 9,287; female 9,115)
15-64 years: 63% (male 21,364; female 20,617)
65 years and over : 9% (male 2,569; female 3,681) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -1.26% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 17.72 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.24 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -24.04 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 9.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.6 years
male: 74.74 years
female : 80.6 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.92 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Dominican(s)
adjective: Dominican

Ethnic groups: black, Carib Amerindian

Religions: Roman Catholic 77%, Protestant 15% (Methodist 5%,
Pentecostal 3%, Seventh-Day Adventist 3%, Baptist 2%, other 2%), none
2%, unknown 1%, other 5%

Languages: English (official), French patois

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
total population: 94%
male: 94%
female: 94% (1970 est.)

@Dominica:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Commonwealth of Dominica
conventional short form: Dominica

Data code: DO

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Roseau

Administrative divisions: 10 parishes; Saint Andrew, Saint David,
Saint George, Saint John, Saint Joseph, Saint Luke, Saint Mark, Saint
Patrick, Saint Paul, Saint Peter

Independence: 3 November 1978 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 3 November (1978)

Constitution: 3 November 1978

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Crispin Anselm SORHAINDO (since 25 October
1993)
head of government: Prime Minister Edison C. JAMES (since 12 June
1995)
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the president on the advice of the
prime minister
elections: president elected by the House of Assembly for a five-year
term; election last held 4 October 1993 (next to be held NA October
1998); prime minister appointed by the president
election results : Crispin Anselm SORHAINDO elected president; percent
of legislative vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Assembly (30 seats, 9
appointed senators, 21 elected by popular vote representatives;
members serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 12 June 1995; byelections held 13 August 1996
(next to be held by October 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - UWP
12, DLP 5, DFP 4

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (located in Santa
Lucia), one of the six judges must reside in Dominica and preside over
the Court of Summary Jurisdiction

Political parties and leaders: Dominica Freedom Party or DFP [Charles
SAVERIN]; Dominica Labor Party or DLP [Rosie DOUGLAS]; United Workers
Party or UWP [Edison JAMES]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Dominica Liberation Movement or
DLM (a small leftist party)

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, C, Caricom, CDB,
ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM (observer), OAS, OECS, OPANAL, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Edward I. WATTY (non-resident)
chancery: 3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016
telephone: [1] (202) 364-6781
FAX : [1] (202) 364-6791
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Dominica; the Ambassador to Dominica resides in Bridgetown
(Barbados), but travels frequently to Dominica

Flag description: green with a centered cross of three equal bands -
the vertical part is yellow (hoist side), black, and white - the
horizontal part is yellow (top), black, and white; superimposed in the
center of the cross is a red disk bearing a sisserou parrot encircled
by 10 green five-pointed stars edged in yellow; the 10 stars represent
the 10 administrative divisions (parishes)

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is dependent on agriculture and thus
is highly vulnerable to climatic conditions, notably tropical storms.
Agriculture, primarily bananas, accounts for 26% of GDP and employs
40% of the labor force. Development of the tourist industry remains
difficult because of the rugged coastline, lack of beaches, and the
lack of an international airport. Hurricane Luis devastated the
country's banana crop in September 1995; tropical storms had wiped out
one-quarter of the crop in 1994 as well. The government is attempting
to develop an offshore financial industry in order to diversify the
island's production base.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $208 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.7% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,500 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 26%
industry: NA%
services : NA% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.2% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 25,000
by occupation: agriculture 40%, industry and commerce 32%, services
28% (1984)

Unemployment rate: 15% (1992 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $80 million
expenditures: $95.8 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY95/96 est.)

Industries: soap, coconut oil, tourism, copra, furniture, cement
blocks, shoes

Industrial production growth rate: -10% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 15,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 52 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 479 kWh (1994 est.)

Agriculture - products: bananas, citrus, mangoes, root crops,
coconuts; forestry and fisheries potential not exploited

Exports:
total value : $40 million (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: bananas 70%, soap, bay oil, vegetables, grapefruit,
oranges
partners: UK 55%, Caricom countries, Italy, US

Imports:
total value: $122 million (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities : manufactured goods, machinery and equipment, food,
chemicals
partners: US 25%, Caricom, UK, Japan, Canada

Debt - external: $110 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (February
1997; fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Dominica:Communications

Telephones: 14,613 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: fully automatic network
international: microwave radio relay and SHF radiotelephone links to
Martinique and Guadeloupe; VHF and UHF radiotelephone links to Saint
Lucia

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 45,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 cable

Televisions: 5,200 (1993 est.)

@Dominica:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 765 km
paved: 385 km
unpaved: 380 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Portsmouth, Roseau

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Commonwealth of Dominica Police Force (includes
Special Service Unit, Coast Guard)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for narcotics bound for the US and
Europe; minor cannabis producer
______________________________________________________________________

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

@Dominican Republic:Geography

Location: Caribbean, eastern two-thirds of the island of Hispaniola,
between the Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean, east of Haiti

Geographic coordinates: 19 00 N, 70 40 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 48,730 sq km
land: 48,380 sq km
water : 350 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of New Hampshire

Land boundaries:
total : 275 km
border countries: Haiti 275 km

Coastline: 1,288 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 6 nm

Climate: tropical maritime; little seasonal temperature variation;
seasonal variation in rainfall

Terrain: rugged highlands and mountains with fertile valleys
interspersed

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Lago Enriquillo -46 m
highest point: Pico Duarte 3,175 m

Natural resources: nickel, bauxite, gold, silver

Land use:
arable land: 21%
permanent crops: 9%
permanent pastures : 43%
forests and woodland: 12%
other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 2,300 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional hurricanes (July to October)

Environment - current issues: water shortages; soil eroding into the
sea damages coral reefs; deforestation

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Marine Dumping, Marine
Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Climate Change, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: shares island of Hispaniola with Haiti (eastern
two-thirds is the Dominican Republic, western one-third is Haiti)

@Dominican Republic:People

Population: 7,868,731 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 36% (male 1,423,626; female 1,371,309)
15-64 years: 60% (male 2,404,042; female 2,334,119)
65 years and over : 4% (male 160,270; female 175,365) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.65% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 26.87 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.81 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -4.6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.91 male(s)/female
total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 46 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 69.39 years
male : 67.21 years
female: 71.69 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.1 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Dominican(s)
adjective: Dominican

Ethnic groups: white 16%, black 11%, mixed 73%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%

Languages: Spanish

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 82.1%
male: 82%
female : 82.2% (1995 est.)

@Dominican Republic:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Dominican Republic
conventional short form: none
local long form : Republica Dominicana
local short form: none

Data code: DR

Government type: republic

National capital: Santo Domingo

Administrative divisions: 29 provinces (provincias, singular -
provincia) and 1 district* (distrito); Azua, Baoruco, Barahona,
Dajabon, Distrito Nacional*, Duarte, Elias Pina, El Seibo, Espaillat,
Hato Mayor, Independencia, La Altagracia, La Romana, La Vega, Maria
Trinidad Sanchez, Monsenor Nouel, Monte Cristi, Monte Plata,
Pedernales, Peravia, Puerto Plata, Salcedo, Samana, Sanchez Ramirez,
San Cristobal, San Juan, San Pedro de Macoris, Santiago, Santiago
Rodriguez, Valverde

Independence: 27 February 1844 (from Haiti)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 February (1844)

Constitution: 28 November 1966

Legal system: based on French civil codes

Suffrage: 18 years of age, universal and compulsory; married persons
regardless of age
note : members of the armed forces and police cannot vote

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Leonel FERNANDEZ Reyna (since 16 August
1996); Vice President Jaime David FERNANDEZ Mirabal (since 16 August
1996); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
head of government : President Leonel FERNANDEZ Reyna (since 16 August
1996); Vice President Jaime David FERNANDEZ Mirabal (since 16 August
1996); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
cabinet: Cabinet nominated by the president
elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for four-year term; election last held 16 May 1996;
runoff election held 30 June 1996 (next to be held 16 May 2000)
election results: President FERNANDEZ elected to his first term;
percent of vote - Leonel FERNANDEZ (PLD) 51.25%, Jose Francisco PENA
Gomez (PRD) 48.75%

Legislative branch: bicameral National Congress or Congreso Nacional
consists of the Senate or Senado (30 seats; members are elected by
popular vote to serve four-year terms) and the Chamber of Deputies or
Camara de Diputados (120 seats; members are elected by popular vote to
serve four-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 30 May 1994 (next to be held NA May
1998); Chamber of Deputies - last held 16 May 1994 (next to be held NA
May 1998)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - PRSC 15, PLD 1, PRD 14; Chamber of Deputies - percent of vote
by party - NA; seats by party - PLD 13, PRSC 50, PRD 57

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), judges are elected by
a Council made up of legislative and executive members with the
president presiding

Political parties and leaders:
major parties: Social Christian Reformist Party or PRSC [Joaquin
BALAGUER Ricardo]; Dominican Liberation Party or PLD [Lidio CADET];
Dominican Revolutionary Party or PRD [Jose Franciso PENA Gomez];
Independent Revolutionary Party or PRI
minor parties: National Veterans and Civilian Party or PNVC [Juan Rene
BEAUCHAMPS Javier]; Liberal Party of the Dominican Republic or PLRD
[Andres Van Der HORST]; Democratic Quisqueyan Party or PQD [Elias
WESSIN Chavez]; National Progressive Force or FNP [Marino VINICIO
Castillo]; Popular Christian Party or PPC [Rogelio DELGADO Bogaert];
Dominican Communist Party or PCD [Narciso ISA Conde]; Dominican
Workers' Party or PTD [Ivan RODRIGUEZ]; Anti-Imperialist Patriotic
Union or UPA [Ignacio RODRIGUEZ Chiappini]; Alliance for Democracy
Party or APD [Maximilano Rabelais PUIG Miller, Nelsida MARMOLEJOS,
Vicente BENGOA]; Democratic Union or UD [Fernando ALVAREZ Bogaert]
note: in 1983 several leftist parties, including the PCD, joined to
form the Dominican Leftist Front or FID; however, they still retain
individual party structures

Political pressure groups and leaders: Collective of Popular
Organizations or COP

International organization participation: ACP, Caricom (observer),
ECLAC, FAO, G-11, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer), NAM (guest), OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Bernardo VEGA Boyrie
chancery: 1715 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 332-6280, 6281
FAX: [1] (202) 265-8057
consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, Mayaguez (Puerto
Rico), Miami, New Orleans, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and
San Juan (Puerto Rico)
consulate(s): Charlotte Amalie (Virgin Islands), Detroit, Houston,
Jacksonville, Mobile, and Ponce (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Donna Jean HRINAK
embassy: corner of Calle Cesar Nicolas Penson and Calle Leopoldo
Navarro, Santo Domingo
mailing address: Unit 5500, APO AA 34041
telephone: [1] (809) 221-2171, 221-8100
FAX: [1] (809) 686-7437

Flag description: a centered white cross that extends to the edges,
divides the flag into four rectangles - the top ones are blue (hoist
side) and red, the bottom ones are red (hoist side) and blue; a small
coat of arms is at the center of the cross

Economy

Economy - overview: Economic reforms launched in late 1994 contributed
to exchange rate stabilization, reduced inflation, and strong GDP
growth in 1995-96. In 1996, there was increased mineral and petroleum
exploration, and a new investment law that allows for repatriation of
capital dividends has drawn more investment to the island. Upon coming
to power in August 1996, President FERNANDEZ nevertheless inherited a
trouble-ridden economy hampered by a pressured peso, a large external
debt, nearly bankrupt state-owned enterprises, and a manufacturing
sector hindered by daily power outages. In December, FERNANDEZ
presented a bold economic reform package - including such reforms as
the devaluation of the peso, income tax cuts, a 50% increase in sales
taxes, reduced import tariffs, and increased gasoline prices - in an
attempt to create a market-oriented economy that can compete
internationally. The legislature, however, has been slow to act on
several of the economic measures.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $29.8 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7.3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,670 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 13%
industry: 32%
services: 55% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 12.5% (1995)

Labor force: 2.3 million to 2.6 million
by occupation : agriculture 50%, services and government 32%, industry
18% (1991 est.)

Unemployment rate: 30% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $1.8 billion
expenditures: $2.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1994 est.)

Industries: tourism, sugar processing, ferronickel and gold mining,
textiles, cement, tobacco

Industrial production growth rate: 6.3% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 2,450,400 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 6.506 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 613 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: sugarcane, coffee, cotton, cocoa, tobacco,
rice, beans, potatoes, corn, bananas; cattle, pigs, dairy products,
meat, eggs

Exports:
total value: $3.1 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: ferronickel, sugar, gold, coffee, cocoa
partners : US 45%, EU 34%, Canada, Japan, Puerto Rico (1995)

Imports:
total value: $5.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, petroleum, cotton and fabrics, chemicals and
pharmaceuticals
partners: US 44%, EU 16%, Venezuela 11%, Netherlands Antilles, Mexico,
Japan (1995)

Debt - external: $3.6 billion (1997)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $21 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Dominican peso (RD$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Dominican pesos (RD$) per US$1 - 14.206 (January
1997), 13.775 (1996), 13.597 (1995), 13.160 (1994), 12.676 (1993),
12.774 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Dominican Republic:Communications

Telephones: 190,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: relatively efficient system based on islandwide microwave
radio relay network
international : 1 coaxial submarine cable; satellite earth station - 1
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 120, FM 0, shortwave 6

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 18 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 728,000 (1993 est.)

@Dominican Republic:Transportation

Railways:
total: 757 km
standard gauge: 375 km 1.435-m gauge (Central Romana Railroad)
narrow gauge: 142 km 0.762-m gauge (Dominica Government Railway); 240
km operated by sugar companies in various gauges (0.558-m, 0.762-m,
1.067-m gauges) (1995)

Highways:
total : 12,300 km
paved: 6,064 km
unpaved: 6,236 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 96 km; petroleum products 8 km

Ports and harbors: Barahona, La Romana, Puerto Plata, San Pedro de
Macoris, Santo Domingo

Merchant marine:
total : 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,587 GRT/1,165 DWT
(1996 est.)

Airports: 31 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 26
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m: 15 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 5
1,524 to 2,437 m : 1
914 to 1,523 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Police

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,081,709 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 1,310,534 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 79,860 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $116 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.4% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for South American drugs destined
for the US through Puerto Rico
______________________________________________________________________

ECUADOR

@Ecuador:Geography

Location: Western South America, bordering the Pacific Ocean at the
Equator, between Colombia and Peru

Geographic coordinates: 2 00 S, 77 30 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total : 283,560 sq km
land: 276,840 sq km
water: 6,720 sq km
note: includes Galapagos Islands

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Nevada

Land boundaries:
total: 2,010 km
border countries: Colombia 590 km, Peru 1,420 km

Coastline: 2,237 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: claims continental shelf between mainland and
Galapagos Islands
territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical along coast becoming cooler inland

Terrain: coastal plain (costa), inter-Andean central highlands
(sierra), and flat to rolling eastern jungle (oriente)

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Chimborazo 6,267 m

Natural resources: petroleum, fish, timber

Land use:
arable land: 6%
permanent crops: 5%
permanent pastures: 18%
forests and woodland: 56%
other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 5,560 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent earthquakes, landslides, volcanic activity;
periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion;
desertification; water pollution; pollution from oil production wastes

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: Cotopaxi in Andes is highest active volcano in world

@Ecuador:People

Population: 12,105,124 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 37% (male 2,252,260; female 2,174,004)
15-64 years: 59% (male 3,529,606; female 3,619,002)
65 years and over : 4% (male 248,105; female 282,147) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.93% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 24.04 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.28 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.58 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.88 male(s)/female
total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 33.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 71.44 years
male: 68.83 years
female: 74.17 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.87 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Ecuadorian(s)
adjective: Ecuadorian

Ethnic groups: mestizo (mixed Amerindian and Spanish) 55%, Amerindian
25%, Spanish 10%, black 10%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%

Languages: Spanish (official), Amerindian languages (especially
Quechua)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 90.1%
male: 92%
female: 88.2% (1995 est.)

@Ecuador:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Ecuador
conventional short form: Ecuador
local long form: Republica del Ecuador
local short form : Ecuador

Data code: EC

Government type: republic

National capital: Quito

Administrative divisions: 21 provinces (provincias, singular -
provincia); Azuay, Bolivar, Canar, Carchi, Chimborazo, Cotopaxi, El
Oro, Esmeraldas, Galapagos, Guayas, Imbabura, Loja, Los Rios, Manabi,
Morona-Santiago, Napo, Pastaza, Pichincha, Sucumbios, Tungurahua,
Zamora-Chinchipe

Independence: 24 May 1822 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 10 August (1809) (independence of
Quito)

Constitution: 10 August 1979

Legal system: based on civil law system; has not accepted compulsory
ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal, compulsory for literate persons
ages 18-65, optional for other eligible voters

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Fabian ALARCON Rivera (since 11 February
1997); Vice President Rosalia ARTEAGA Serrano de Cordova (since 10
August 1996); note - the president is both the chief of state and head
of government
head of government: President Fabian ALARCON Rivera (since 11 February
1997); Vice President Rosalia ARTEAGA Serrano de Cordova (since 10
August 1996); note - the president is both the chief of state and head
of government
note : in an unusual, out of cycle change in executive power, Congress
on 11 February 1997 elected then Congress President ALARCON to be
Interim President until August 1998 after ousting former President
BUCARAM because of "mental incapacity;" ARTEAGA remained vice
president
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the president
elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 19 May 1996;
runoff election held 7 July 1996; note - because of the February 1997
unusual change in executive power, the next presidential elections
will take place in 1998
election results : runoff election; percent of vote - Abdala BUCARAM
Ortiz 54%, Jaime NEBOT 46%; note - in February 1997, Congress elected
ALARCON to be Interim President until August 1998, with 57 of 82
Congressmen voting in favor of him

Legislative branch: unicameral National Congress or Congreso Nacional
(82 seats; 12 members are popularly elected at large nationally to
serve four-year terms; 70 members are popularly elected by province
for two-year terms)
elections : last held 19 May 1996 (next to be held 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PSC
27, PRE 19, DP 12, P-NP 8, ID 4, FRA 3, MPD 2, PCE 2, CFP 1,
independents and other 4; note - defections by members of congress are
commonplace, resulting in frequent changes in the numbers of seats
held by the various parties

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), judges are elected by
Congress

Political parties and leaders:
Center-Right parties: Social Christian Party or PSC [Jaime NEBOT
Saadi, president]; Ecuadorian Conservative Party or PCE [Freddy BRAVO]
Center-Left parties: Democratic Left or ID [Rodrigo BORJA Cevallos,
leader]; Popular Democracy or DP [Jamil MAHUAD, leader]; Radical
Alfarista Front or FRA [Fabian ALARCON, director]
Populist parties: Roldosist Party or PRE [Abdala BUCARAM Ortiz,
director]; Concentration of Popular Forces or CFP [Averroes BUCARAM,
leader]; Popular Revolutionary Action or APRE [Frank VARGAS Passos,
leader]; Pachakutik-New Country or P-NP [Freddy EHLERS]
Far-Left parties: Popular Democratic Movement or MPD [Juan Jose
CASTELLO, leader]

International organization participation: AG, ECLAC, FAO, G-11, G-77,
IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA,
NAM, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Fernando
FLORES
chancery: 2535 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 234-7200
consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
Orleans, New York, Philadelphia, and San Francisco
consulate(s): Newark

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Leslie ALEXANDER
embassy: Avenida 12 de Octubre and Avenida Patria, Quito
mailing address: APO AA 34039
telephone : [593] (2) 562-890
FAX: [593] (2) 502-052
consulate(s) general: Guayaquil

Flag description: three horizontal bands of yellow (top, double
width), blue, and red with the coat of arms superimposed at the center
of the flag; similar to the flag of Colombia that is shorter and does
not bear a coat of arms

Economy

Economy - overview: Ecuador has substantial oil resources and rich
agricultural areas. As an exporter of primary products such as oil,
bananas, and shrimp, fluctuations in world market prices can have a
substantial domestic impact. Growth has been uneven in recent years as
the government has repeatedly initiated ill-conceived fiscal
stabilization measures. The populist government of Abdala BUCARAM
Ortiz proposed a major currency reform in 1996, but popular discontent
with new austerity measures and rampant official corruption undermined
his government's position. Congress replaced BUCARAM with Fabian
ALARCON in February 1997. ALARCON has adopted a minimalist economic
program that puts off major decisions until the next elected
government takes office in August 1998. Ecuador has joined the Word
Trade Organization in 1996, but has failed to comply with many of its
accession commitments. Growth slowed to 2.0% in 1996, due to a lack of
investment caused by political uncertainty and high domestic interest
rates.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $47 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $4,100 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 13%
industry: 38%
services: 49% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 26% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 3.4 million
by occupation: agriculture 29%, manufacturing 18%, commerce 15%,
services and other activities 38% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 8.5% with widespread underemployment (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $3.6 billion (1997)
expenditures: $3.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: petroleum, food processing, textiles, metal work, paper
products, wood products, chemicals, plastics, fishing, lumber

Industrial production growth rate: 3.3% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 2.754 million kW (1996)

Electricity - production: 9.27 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 600 kWh (1996)

Agriculture - products: bananas, coffee, cocoa, rice, potatoes,
manioc, plantains, sugarcane; cattle, sheep, pigs, beef, pork, dairy
products; balsa wood; fish, shrimp

Exports:
total value: $4.9 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: petroleum 37%, bananas 20%, shrimp 13%, cocoa 2%, coffee
3%
partners : US 39%, Latin America 25%, EU countries 22%, Asia 12%

Imports:
total value: $3.7 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: transport equipment, consumer goods, vehicles, machinery,
chemicals
partners: US 32%, EU 19%, Latin America 35%, Asia 11%

Debt - external: $12.6 billion (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $153 million (1993)
note: received $12.7 million from the US and $160 million from other
countries in 1995

Currency: 1 sucre (S/) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: sucres (S/) per US$1 - 3,674.9 (January 1997), 3,189.5
(1996), 2,564.5 (1995), 2,196.7 (1994), 1,919.1 (1993), 1,534.0 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Ecuador:Communications

Telephones: 586,300 (1994 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: facilities generally inadequate and unreliable
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 272, FM 0, shortwave 39

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 33

Televisions: 940,000 (1992 est.)

@Ecuador:Transportation

Railways:
total: 965 km (single track)
narrow gauge: 965 km 1.067-m gauge

Highways:
total : 43,106 km
paved: 7,932 km
unpaved: 35,174 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,500 km

Pipelines: crude oil 800 km; petroleum products 1,358 km

Ports and harbors: Esmeraldas, Guayaquil, La Libertad, Manta, Puerto
Bolivar, San Lorenzo

Merchant marine:
total: 20 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 117,401 GRT/179,142 DWT
ships by type: container 2, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker 14,
passenger 2, refrigerated cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 179 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 143
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m : 6
1,524 to 2,437 m: 11
914 to 1,523 m: 13
under 914 m: 111 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 36
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 33 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army (Ejercito Ecuatoriano), Navy (Armada
Ecuatoriana, includes Marines), Air Force (Fuerza Aerea Ecuatoriana),
National Police

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 3,077,812 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 2,079,537 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 125,185 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $390.2 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.1% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: three sections of the boundary with Peru are
in dispute

Illicit drugs: significant transit country for derivatives of coca
originating in Colombia, Bolivia, and Peru; minor illicit producer of
coca; importer of precursor chemicals used in production of illicit
narcotics; important money-laundering hub
______________________________________________________________________

EGYPT

@Egypt:Geography

Location: Northern Africa, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between
Libya and the Gaza Strip

Geographic coordinates: 27 00 N, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 1,001,450 sq km
land : 995,450 sq km
water: 6,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than three times the size of New
Mexico

Land boundaries:
total: 2,689 km
border countries: Gaza Strip 11 km, Israel 255 km, Libya 1,150 km,
Sudan 1,273 km

Coastline: 2,450 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: desert; hot, dry summers with moderate winters

Terrain: vast desert plateau interrupted by Nile valley and delta

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Qattara Depression -133 m
highest point: Mount Catherine 2,629 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, phosphates,
manganese, limestone, gypsum, talc, asbestos, lead, zinc

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other : 98% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 32,460 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts; frequent earthquakes, flash
floods, landslides, volcanic activity; hot, driving windstorm called
khamsin occurs in spring; dust storms, sandstorms

Environment - current issues: agricultural land being lost to
urbanization and windblown sands; increasing soil salinization below
Aswan High Dam; desertification; oil pollution threatening coral
reefs, beaches, and marine habitats; other water pollution from
agricultural pesticides, raw sewage, and industrial effluents; very
limited natural fresh water resources away from the Nile which is the
only perennial water source; rapid growth in population overstraining
natural resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: controls Sinai Peninsula, only land bridge between
Africa and remainder of Eastern Hemisphere; controls Suez Canal,
shortest sea link between Indian Ocean and Mediterranean Sea; size,
and juxtaposition to Israel, establish its major role in Middle
Eastern geopolitics

@Egypt:People

Population: 64,824,466 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 36% (male 12,080,281; female 11,556,970)
15-64 years: 60% (male 19,616,790; female 19,228,163)
65 years and over: 4% (male 1,050,540; female 1,291,722) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.89% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 27.82 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.56 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.35 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.81 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 71 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 61.75 years
male: 59.8 years
female: 63.8 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.5 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Egyptian(s)
adjective: Egyptian

Ethnic groups: Eastern Hamitic stock (Egyptians, Bedouins, and
Berbers) 99%, Greek, Nubian, Armenian, other European (primarily
Italian and French) 1%

Religions: Muslim (mostly Sunni) 94% (official estimate), Coptic
Christian and other 6% (official estimate)

Languages: Arabic (official), English and French widely understood by
educated classes

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 51.4%
male: 63.6%
female: 38.8% (1995 est.)

@Egypt:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Arab Republic of Egypt
conventional short form: Egypt
local long form: Jumhuriyat Misr al-Arabiyah
local short form: none
former : United Arab Republic (with Syria)

Data code: EG

Government type: republic

National capital: Cairo

Administrative divisions: 26 governorates (muhafazat, singular -
muhafazah); Ad Daqahliyah, Al Bahr al Ahmar, Al Buhayrah, Al Fayyum,
Al Gharbiyah, Al Iskandariyah, Al Isma'iliyah, Al Jizah, Al Minufiyah,
Al Minya, Al Qahirah, Al Qalyubiyah, Al Wadi al Jadid, Ash Sharqiyah,
As Suways, Aswan, Asyut, Bani Suwayf, Bur Sa'id, Dumyat, Janub Sina',
Kafr ash Shaykh, Matruh, Qina, Shamal Sina', Suhaj

Independence: 28 February 1922 (from UK)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Revolution, 23 July (1952)

Constitution: 11 September 1971

Legal system: based on English common law, Islamic law, and Napoleonic
codes; judicial review by Supreme Court and Council of State (oversees
validity of administrative decisions); accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Mohammed Hosni MUBARAK (since 14 October
1981)
head of government: Prime Minister Kamal Ahmed El-GANZOURI (since 4
January 1996)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
elections : president nominated by the People's Assembly for a
six-year term, the nomination must then be validated by a national,
popular referendum; national referendum last held 4 October 1993 (next
to be held NA October 1999); prime minister appointed by the president
election results: national referendum validated President MUBARAK's
nomination by the People's Assembly to a third term

Legislative branch: bicameral system consists of the People's Assembly
or Majlis al-Sha'b (454 seats; 444 elected by popular vote, 10
appointed by the president; members serve five-year terms) and the
Advisory Council or Majlis al-Shura - which functions only in a
consultative role (264 seats; 176 elected by popular vote, 88
appointed by the president; members serve NA-year terms)
elections: People's Assembly - last held 29 November 1995 (next to be
held NA 2000); Advisory Council - last held 7 June 1995 (next to be
held NA)
election results: People's Assembly - percent of vote by party - NDP
72%, independents 25%, opposition 3%; seats by party - NDP 317,
independents 114, NWP 6, NPUG 5, Nasserist Arab Democratic Party 1,
Liberals 1; Advisory Council - percent of vote by party - NDP 99%,
independents 1%; seats by party - NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Constitutional Court

Political parties and leaders: National Democratic Party (NDP),
President Mohammed Hosni MUBARAK, leader, is the dominant party; legal
opposition parties are as follows: New Wafd Party (NWP), Fu'ad SIRAJ
AL-DIN; Socialist Labor Party (SLP), Ibrahim SHUKRI; National
Progressive Unionist Grouping (NPUG), Khalid Muhi al-DIN; Socialist
Liberal Party, Mustafa Kamal MURAD; Democratic Unionist Party,
Mohammed 'Abd-al-Mun'im TURK; Umma Party, Ahmad al-SABAHI; Misr
al-Fatah Party (Young Egypt Party), leader NA; Nasserist Arab
Democratic Party, Dia' al-din DAWUD; Democratic Peoples' Party, Anwar
AFIFI; The Greens Party, Kamal KIRAH; Social Justice Party, Muhammad
'ABDAL-'AL
note: formation of political parties must be approved by government

Political pressure groups and leaders: despite a constitutional ban
against religious-based parties, the technically illegal Muslim
Brotherhood constitutes MUBARAK's potentially most significant
political opposition; MUBARAK tolerated limited political activity by
the Brotherhood for his first two terms, but has moved more
aggressively in the past two years to block its influence; trade
unions and professional associations are officially sanctioned

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACC, ACCT
(associate), AfDB, AFESD, AG (observer), AL, AMF, BSEC (observer),
CAEU, CCC, EBRD, ECA, ESCWA, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD,
ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, NAM, OAPEC,
OAS (observer), OAU, OIC, OSCE (partner), PCA, UN, UN Security Council
(temporary), UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOP,
UNOMIG, UNOMIL, UNPREDEP, UNRWA, UNTAES, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Ahmed Maher El SAYED
chancery: 3521 International Court NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 895-5400
FAX: [1] (202) 244-4319, 5131
consulate(s) general : Chicago, Houston, New York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Edward S. WALKER, Jr.
embassy: (North Gate) 8, Kamel El-Din Salah Street, Garden City, Cairo
mailing address: Unit 64900, APO AE 09839-4900
telephone : [20] (2) 3557371
FAX: [20] (2) 3572000
branch office: Alexandria

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and black with the national emblem (a shield superimposed on a golden
eagle facing the hoist side above a scroll bearing the name of the
country in Arabic) centered in the white band; similar to the flag of
Yemen, which has a plain white band; also similar to the flag of Syria
that has two green stars and to the flag of Iraq, which has three
green stars (plus an Arabic inscription) in a horizontal line centered
in the white band

Economy

Economy - overview: By the end of the 1980s Egypt - hit by the
collapse of the world oil market and servicing a foreign debt totaling
about $50 billion - faced crises in virtually all economic sectors.
Problems of low productivity and poor economic management were
compounded by the adverse social effects of large population growth
rates, high inflation, and massive urban overcrowding. In the face of
these pressures, in 1991, Egypt undertook wide-ranging macroeconomic
stabilization and structural reform measures. This reform effort has
been supported by three successive IMF arrangements, the last of which
was concluded in October 1996. Egypt's reform efforts - and its
participation in the Gulf war coalition - also led to massive debt
relief under the Paris Club arrangements. Egypt's foreign debt fell to
about $31 billion at yearend 1996. Although the pace of reform has
been uneven and slower than envisaged under the IMF programs,
substantial progress has been made in improving macroeconomic
performance - budget deficits have been slashed while foreign reserves
in 1996 were at an all-time high - and in moving toward a more
decentralized, market-oriented economy. Egypt was able to capitalize
on its progress during the third Middle East/North Africa economic
conference which it hosted in November 1996. Egypt's President MUBARAK
told reporters that Egypt had concluded deals worth $10 billion in
investment during the conference, 20 times the country's estimated
total direct foreign investment for the 1995/96 fiscal year. According
to press reports, Egypt and foreign investors agreed on nine
megaprojects, including the export of liquefied natural gas from Egypt
to Turkey, estimated at $2 billion to $4 billion. Egypt has a
broad-based inventory of geographic, human, and physical assets which
in a liberalized market environment could spur rapid, sustainable
growth into the next century. But rapid population growth continues to
cast a shadow over economic prospects.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $183.9 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.9% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,900 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 16%
industry : 34%
services: 50% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7.3% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 17.4 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 40%, services, including government 38%,
industry 22% (1990 est.)

Unemployment rate: 9.4% (FY95/96 official estimate)

Budget:
revenues: $17.4 billion
expenditures: $18.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.5
billion (FY95/96)

Industries: textiles, food processing, tourism, chemicals, petroleum,
construction, cement, metals

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 13.04 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 47.89 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 723 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: cotton, rice, corn, wheat, beans, fruits,
vegetables; cattle, water buffalo, sheep, goats; annual fish catch
about 140,000 metric tons

Exports:
total value : $4.6 billion (f.o.b., FY95/96 est.)
commodities: crude oil and petroleum products, cotton yarn, raw
cotton, textiles, metal products, chemicals
partners: EU, US, Japan

Imports:
total value: $13.8 billion (c.i.f., FY95/96 est.)
commodities: machinery and equipment, foods, fertilizers, wood
products, durable consumer goods, capital goods
partners: US, EU, Japan

Debt - external: $31 billion (yearend 1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $1.713 billion (1993)

Currency: 1 Egyptian pound (£E) = 100 piasters

Exchange rates: Egyptian pounds (£E) per US$1 - 3.4 (November 1994),
3.369 (November 1993), 3.345 (November 1992); market rate - 3.3900
(January 1997), 3.3880 (1996), 3.3900 (1995), 3.3910 (1994), 3.3718
(1993), 3.3386 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Egypt:Communications

Telephones: 2.2 million (1993)

Telephone system: large system by Third World standards but inadequate
for present requirements and undergoing extensive upgrading
domestic: principal centers at Alexandria, Cairo, Al Mansurah,
Ismailia, Suez, and Tanta are connected by coaxial cable and microwave
radio relay
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean
and Indian Ocean), 1 Arabsat, and 1 Inmarsat; 5 coaxial submarine
cables; tropospheric scatter to Sudan; microwave radio relay to
Israel; participant in Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 39, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 41

Televisions: 5 million (1993 est.)

@Egypt:Transportation

Railways:
total: 4,751 km
standard gauge: 4,751 km 1,435-m gauge (42 km electrified; 951 km
double track)

Highways:
total: 50,000 km
paved: 15,000 km
unpaved : 35,000 km (1990 est.)

Waterways: 3,500 km (including the Nile, Lake Nasser, Alexandria-Cairo
Waterway, and numerous smaller canals in the delta); Suez Canal, 193.5
km long (including approaches), used by oceangoing vessels drawing up
to 16.1 m of water

Pipelines: crude oil 1,171 km; petroleum products 596 km; natural gas
460 km

Ports and harbors: Alexandria, Al Ghardaqah, Aswan, Asyut, Bur
Safajah, Damietta, Marsa Matruh, Port Said, Suez

Merchant marine:
total: 156 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,151,960 GRT/1,771,863
DWT
ships by type: bulk 21, cargo 65, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker
14, passenger 35, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 16,
short-sea passenger 3 (1996 est.)

Airports: 81 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 73
over 3,047 m: 11
2,438 to 3,047 m : 34
1,524 to 2,437 m: 16
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m: 10 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 8
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense Command

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 16,942,953 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 10,987,037 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 672,197 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $3.28 billion (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 8.2% (FY95/96)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: administrative boundary with Sudan does not
coincide with international boundary creating the "Hala'ib Triangle,"
a barren area of 20,580 sq km

Illicit drugs: a transit point for Southwest Asian and Southeast Asian
heroin and opium moving to Europe and the US; popular transit stop for
Nigerian couriers; large domestic consumption of hashish from Lebanon
and Syria
______________________________________________________________________

EL SALVADOR

@El Salvador:Geography

Location: Middle America, bordering the North Pacific Ocean, between
Guatemala and Honduras

Geographic coordinates: 13 50 N, 88 55 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 21,040 sq km
land: 20,720 sq km
water: 320 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Massachusetts

Land boundaries:
total: 545 km
border countries: Guatemala 203 km, Honduras 342 km

Coastline: 307 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy season (May to October); dry season (November
to April)

Terrain: mostly mountains with narrow coastal belt and central plateau

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Cerro El Pital 2,730 m

Natural resources: hydropower, geothermal power, petroleum

Land use:
arable land: 27%
permanent crops: 8%
permanent pastures: 29%
forests and woodland : 5%
other: 31% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,200 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: known as the Land of Volcanoes; frequent and
sometimes very destructive earthquakes and volcanic activity

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; water
pollution; contamination of soils from disposal of toxic wastes

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography - note: smallest Central American country and only one
without a coastline on Caribbean Sea

@El Salvador:People

Population: 5,661,827 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 38% (male 1,084,198; female 1,038,248)
15-64 years: 57% (male 1,538,609; female 1,709,756)
65 years and over : 5% (male 133,038; female 157,978) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.6% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 27.22 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.44 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -4.81 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.9 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.84 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 30.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 69.27 years
male : 65.89 years
female: 72.81 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.13 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Salvadoran(s)
adjective: Salvadoran

Ethnic groups: mestizo 94%, Amerindian 5%, white 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 75%
note: there is extensive activity by Protestant groups throughout the
country; by the end of 1992, there were an estimated 1 million
Protestant evangelicals in El Salvador

Languages: Spanish, Nahua (among some Amerindians)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 71.5%
male : 73.5%
female: 69.8% (1995 est.)

@El Salvador:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of El Salvador
conventional short form: El Salvador
local long form: Republica de El Salvador
local short form: El Salvador

Data code: ES

Government type: republic

National capital: San Salvador

Administrative divisions: 14 departments (departamentos, singular -
departamento); Ahuachapan, Cabanas, Chalatenango, Cuscatlan, La
Libertad, La Paz, La Union, Morazan, San Miguel, San Salvador, Santa
Ana, San Vicente, Sonsonate, Usulutan

Independence: 15 September 1821 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 15 September (1821)

Constitution: 20 December 1983

Legal system: based on civil and Roman law, with traces of common law;
judicial review of legislative acts in the Supreme Court; accepts
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Armando CALDERON Sol (since 1 June 1994);
Vice President Enrique BORGO Bustamante (since 1 June 1994); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Armando CALDERON Sol (since 1 June
1994); Vice President Enrique BORGO Bustamante (since 1 June 1994);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Council of Ministers
elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 20 March 1994,
with a run-off election held 24 April 1994 (next to be held NA March
1999)
election results: Armando CALDERON Sol elected president; percent of
vote - Armando CALDERON SOL (ARENA) 49.03%, Ruben ZAMORA Rivas
(CD/FMLN/MNR) 24.09%, Fidel CHAVEZ Mena (PDC) 16.39%, other 10.49%;
because no candidate received a majority, a run-off election was held
and the results were as follows - Armando CALDERON SOL (ARENA) 68.35%,
Ruben ZAMORA Rivas (CD/FMLN/MNR) 31.65%

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly or Asamblea
Legislativa (84 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
serve three-year terms)
elections : last held 16 March 1997 (next to be held NA March 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - ARENA 35.4%, FMLN 34.3%,
PCN 8.1%, PDC 7.9%, CD 3.8%, PRSC 3.4%, PLD 3.2%, MU 2.1%, PD 1.0%,
other 0.8%; seats by party - ARENA 28, FMLN 27, PCN 11, PDC 9, PRSC 3,
CD 2, PLD 2, MU 1, PD 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), judges are selected by
the Legislative Assembly

Political parties and leaders: National Republican Alliance or ARENA
[Gloria SALGUERO Gross, president]; Farabundo Marti National
Liberation Front or FMLN [Salvador SANCHEZ Ceren (aka Leonel
GONZALEZ), general coordinator]; Christian Democratic Party or PDC
[Ronal UMANA, secretary general]; National Conciliation Party or PCN
[Ciro CRUZ Zepeda, secretary general]; Democratic Convergence or CD
[Ruben ZAMORA, secretary general]; Unity Movement Party or MU [Jorge
MARTINEZ Menendez, president]; Liberal Democratic Party or PLD [Kirio
Waldo SALGADO, founder]; Democratic Party or PD (breakaway from FMLN)
[Joaquin VILLALOBOS, founder, Ana Guadalupe MARTINEZ, leader]; Social
Christian Renovation Party or PRSC (breakaway from PDC) [Abraham
RODRIGUEZ, founder]

Political pressure groups and leaders: labor organizations -
Salvadoran Communal Union or UCS (peasant association); General
Confederation of Workers or CGT (moderate); United Workers Front or
FUT; business organizations - Productive Alliance or AP
(conservative); National Federation of Salvadoran Small Businessmen or
FENAPES (conservative)

International organization participation: BCIE, CACM, ECLAC, FAO,
G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer),
MINURSO, NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Ana Cristina SOL
chancery: 2308 California Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 265-9671, 9672
consulate(s) general: Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
New Orleans, New York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Anne PATTERSON
embassy: Final Boulevard Santa Elena, Station Antiguo Cuscatlan, San
Salvador
mailing address: Unit 3116, APO AA 34023
telephone: [503] 278-4444
FAX : [503] 278-6011

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white,
and blue with the national coat of arms centered in the white band;
the coat of arms features a round emblem encircled by the words
REPUBLICA DE EL SALVADOR EN LA AMERICA CENTRAL; similar to the flag of
Nicaragua, which has a different coat of arms centered in the white
band - it features a triangle encircled by the words REPUBLICA DE
NICARAGUA on top and AMERICA CENTRAL on the bottom; also similar to
the flag of Honduras, which has five blue stars arranged in an X
pattern centered in the white band

Economy

Economy - overview: El Salvador possesses a fast-growing
entrepreneurial economy in which 90% of economic activity is in
private hands, with growth averaging 5% since 1990. Yet, because the
1980s were a decade of civil war and stagnation, per capita GDP has
not regained the level of the late 1970s. The rebound in the 1990s
stems from the government program, in conjunction with the IMF, of
privatization, deregulation, and fiscal stabilization. The economy now
is oriented more toward manufacturing and services compared with
agriculture. The sizable trade deficits are in the main covered by
remittances from the large number of Salvadorans abroad.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $12.2 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,080 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 14%
industry : 27%
services: 59% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7.4% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 2.2 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 40%, commerce 16%, manufacturing 15%,
government 13%, financial services 9%, transportation 6%, other 1%

Unemployment rate: 7.6% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $1.75 billion
expenditures: $1.82 billion, including capital expenditures of $317
million (1997 est.)

Industries: food processing, beverages, petroleum, chemicals,
fertilizer, textiles, furniture, light metals

Industrial production growth rate: 7.6% (1993)

Electricity - capacity: 900,000 kW (1996)

Electricity - production: 3.32 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 580 kWh (1996 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, sugarcane, corn, rice, beans, oilseed,
cotton, sorghum; beef, dairy products; shrimp

Exports:
total value: $1.8 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: coffee, sugarcane; shrimp; textiles, chemicals
partners: US, Guatemala, Germany, Costa Rica, Honduras

Imports:
total value: $3.2 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities : raw materials, consumer goods, capital goods
partners: US, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama, Venezuela, Japan

Debt - external: $2.54 billion (yearend 1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $763 million (1996)
note: US has committed $250 million in aid to El Salvador for 1992-96

Currency: 1 Salvadoran colon (C) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Salvadoran colones (C) per US$1 (end of period) -
8.755 (January 1997), 8.755 (1996), 8.755 (1995), 8.750 (1994), 8.670
(1993), 9.170 (1992), 8.080 (1991)
note: as of 1 June 1990, the rate is based on the average of the
buying and selling rates, set on a weekly basis, for official receipts
and payments, imports of petroleum, and coffee exports; prior to that
date, a system of floating was in effect

Fiscal year: calendar year

@El Salvador:Communications

Telephones: 300,000 (1996 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: nationwide microwave radio relay system
international : satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
connected to Central American Microwave System

Radio broadcast stations: AM 18, FM 80, shortwave 2

Radios: 1 million (1996 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 11 (1996 est.)

Televisions: 600,000 (1996 est.)

@El Salvador:Transportation

Railways:
total: 602 km (single track; note - some sections abandoned, unusable,
or operating at reduced capacity)
narrow gauge: 602 km 0.914-m gauge

Highways:
total: 12,320 km
paved: 1,712 km (including 110 km of expressways)
unpaved : 10,608 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: Rio Lempa partially navigable

Ports and harbors: Acajutla, Puerto Cutuco, La Libertad, La Union,
Puerto El Triunfo

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 72 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 52
over 3,047 m : 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m: 48 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 20
914 to 1,523 m: 20 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,330,498 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 844,314 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 64,530 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $101 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 0.9% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: land boundary dispute with Honduras mostly
resolved by 11 September 1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ)
decision; with respect to the maritime boundary in the Golfo de
Fonseca, ICJ referred to an earlier agreement in this century and
advised that some tripartite resolution among El Salvador, Honduras
and Nicaragua likely would be required

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine; marijuana produced for
local consumption
______________________________________________________________________

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

@Equatorial Guinea:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the Bight of Biafra, between
Cameroon and Gabon

Geographic coordinates: 2 00 N, 10 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 28,050 sq km
land: 28,050 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
total: 539 km
border countries: Cameroon 189 km, Gabon 350 km

Coastline: 296 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; always hot, humid

Terrain: coastal plains rise to interior hills; islands are volcanic

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Malabo 3,008 m

Natural resources: timber, petroleum, small unexploited deposits of
gold, manganese, uranium

Land use:
arable land : 5%
permanent crops: 4%
permanent pastures: 4%
forests and woodland: 46%
other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: violent windstorms

Environment - current issues: tap water is not potable;
desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ship
Pollution
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: insular and continental regions rather widely
separated

@Equatorial Guinea:People

Population: 442,516 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 95,636; female 95,090)
15-64 years : 53% (male 111,801; female 123,257)
65 years and over: 4% (male 7,407; female 9,325) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.57% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 39.33 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 13.67 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.91 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.79 male(s)/female
total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 95.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 53.46 years
male: 51.2 years
female: 55.8 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.11 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Equatorial Guinean(s) or Equatoguinean(s)
adjective: Equatorial Guinean or Equatoguinean

Ethnic groups: Bioko (primarily Bubi, some Fernandinos), Rio Muni
(primarily Fang), Europeans less than 1,000, mostly Spanish

Religions: nominally Christian and predominantly Roman Catholic, pagan
practices

Languages: Spanish (official), pidgin English, Fang, Bubi, Ibo

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 78.5%
male: 89.6%
female: 68.1% (1995 est.)

@Equatorial Guinea:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Equatorial Guinea
conventional short form: Equatorial Guinea
local long form: Republica de Guinea Ecuatorial
local short form: Guinea Ecuatorial
former : Spanish Guinea

Data code: EK

Government type: republic in transition to multiparty democracy

National capital: Malabo

Administrative divisions: 7 provinces (provincias, singular -
provincia); Annobon, Bioko Norte, Bioko Sur, Centro Sur, Kie-Ntem,
Litoral, Wele-Nzas

Independence: 12 October 1968 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 12 October (1968)

Constitution: new constitution 17 November 1991

Legal system: partly based on Spanish civil law and tribal custom

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Brig. Gen. (Ret.) Teodoro OBIANG NGUEMA
MBASOGO (since 3 August 1979)
head of government: Prime Minister Serafin Seriche DOUGAN (since April
1996); Vice Prime Minister Francisco Javier Ndongo MBENGONO (since
April 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote to a seven-year term;
election last held 25 February 1996 (next to be held NA February 2003)
election results : President OBIANG NGUEMA MBASOGO reelected without
opposition; percent of popular vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Peoples Representatives or
Camara de Representantes del Pueblo (80 seats; members are directly
elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 21 November 1993 (next to be held November 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PDGE
68, CSD 6, UDS 5, CLD 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Tribunal

Political parties and leaders:
ruling party: Democratic Party for Equatorial Guinea or PDGE [Brig.
Gen. (Ret.) Teodoro OBIANG NGUEMA MBASOGO]
opposition parties: Convergence for Social Democracy or CSD [Santiago
Obama Ndong, president]; Democratic Social Union or UDS [Camelo MODU,
general secretary]; Liberal Democratic Convention or CLD [Alfonso Nsue
MIFUMU, president]; Liberal Party or PL [Santos PASCUAL]; National
Democratic Union or UDENA [Jose MECHEBA Ikaka, president]; Party of
the Social Democratic Coalition or PCSD [Buenaventura Moswi M'Asumu,
general coordinater]; Party of Progress or PP [Severo MOTO Nsa,
president]; Popular Action of Equatorial Guinea or APGE [Casiano Masi
Edu]; Popular Union or UP [Juan BITUI, president]; Party for Progress
of Equatorial Guinea or PPGE [Severo Moto NSA, president]; Progressive
Democratic Alliance or ADP [Antonio-Ebang Mbele Abang, president];
Social Democratic and Popular Convergence or CSDP [Secundino Oyono
Agueng Ada, general secretary]; Social Democratic Party or PSD
[Benjamin-Gabriel Balingha Balinga Alene, general secretary];
Socialist Party of Equatorial Guinea or PSGE [Tomas MICHEBE Fernandez,
general secretary]

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC,
CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OAU,
UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Pastor Micha ONDO BILE
chancery: Suite 405, 1511 K Street NW, Washington, DC 20005
telephone : [1] (202) 393-0525
FAX: [1] (202) 393-0348

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Equatorial Guinea (embassy closed September 1995); US relations
with Equatorial Guinea are handled through the US Embassy in Yaounde,
Cameroon

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white,
and red with a blue isosceles triangle based on the hoist side and the
coat of arms centered in the white band; the coat of arms has six
yellow six-pointed stars (representing the mainland and five offshore
islands) above a gray shield bearing a silk-cotton tree and below
which is a scroll with the motto UNIDAD, PAZ, JUSTICIA (Unity, Peace,
Justice)

Economy

Economy - overview: Farming, forestry, and fishing account for about
half of GDP. Subsistence farming predominates. Although
pre-independence Equatorial Guinea counted on cocoa production for
hard currency earnings, the deterioration of the rural economy under
successive brutal regimes has diminished potential for agriculture-led
growth. A number of aid programs sponsored by the World Bank and the
IMF have been cut off since 1993 because of the government's gross
corruption and mismanagement. Businesses, for the most part, are owned
by government officials and their family members. Undeveloped natural
resources include titanium, iron ore, manganese, uranium, and alluvial
gold. Oil exploration, taking place under concessions offered to US,
French, and Spanish firms, has been moderately successful and has
contributed to Equatorial Guinea's strong growth rates in the early
1990s. The country responded favorably to the devaluation of the CFA
franc in January 1994.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $328 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 11.2% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $800 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 50%
industry: 14%
services: 36% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 10.9% (1995 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $27 million
expenditures: $34.1 million, including capital expenditures of $11.2
million (1994)

Industries: fishing, sawmilling

Industrial production growth rate: 7.4% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 23,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: coffee, cocoa, rice, yams, cassava (tapioca),
bananas, palm oil nuts, manioc; livestock; timber

Exports:
total value : $83.5 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: timber, petroleum, cocoa
partners: US 34%, Japan 16%, Spain 15%, China 12%, Cote d'Ivoire,
Nigeria

Imports:
total value: $52.3 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities : petroleum, food, beverages, clothing, machinery
partners: Spain 51%, Cameroon 21%, France 6%, US 4%

Debt - external: $252 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note: beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF
100 per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since
1948

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Equatorial Guinea:Communications

Telephones: 2,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: poor system with adequate government services
domestic: NA
international: international communications from Bata and Malabo to
African and European countries; satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat
(Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 4,000 (1992 est.)

@Equatorial Guinea:Transportation

Railways:
total : 0 km

Highways:
total: 2,820 km
paved : 0 km
unpaved: 2,820 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Bata, Luba, Malabo

Merchant marine:
total: 3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 7,997 GRT/7,105 DWT
ships by type: cargo 1, passenger 1, passenger-cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 3

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 3 (1996 est.)
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Rapid Intervention Force,
National Police

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 95,788 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 48,696 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $2.5 million (FY93/94)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: maritime boundary dispute with Gabon because
of disputed sovereignty over islands in Corisco Bay
______________________________________________________________________

ERITREA

Introduction

Historical perspective: on 29 May 1991, ISAIAS Afworke, secretary
general of the Peoples' Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ), which
then served as the country's legislative body, announced the formation
of the Provisional Government in Eritrea (PGE) in preparation for the
23-25 April 1993 referendum on independence for the Autonomous Region
of Eritrea; the referendum resulted in a landslide vote for
independence which was proclaimed on 27 April 1993

@Eritrea:Geography

Location: Eastern Africa, bordering the Red Sea, between Djibouti and
Sudan

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 39 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total : 121,320 sq km
land: 121,320 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Pennsylvania

Land boundaries:
total: 1,630 km
border countries: Djibouti 113 km, Ethiopia 912 km, Sudan 605 km

Coastline: 2,234 km total; mainland on Red Sea 1,151 km, islands in
Red Sea 1,083 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: hot, dry desert strip along Red Sea coast; cooler and wetter
in the central highlands (up to 61 cm of rainfall annually); semiarid
in western hills and lowlands; rainfall heaviest during June-September
except on coastal desert

Terrain: dominated by extension of Ethiopian north-south trending
highlands, descending on the east to a coastal desert plain, on the
northwest to hilly terrain and on the southwest to flat-to-rolling
plains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Kobar Sink -75 m
highest point: Soira 3,013 m

Natural resources: gold, potash, zinc, copper, salt, probably oil
(petroleum geologists are prospecting for it), fish

Land use:
arable land: 12%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 48%
forests and woodland: 20%
other : 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 280 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent droughts

Environment - current issues: deforestation; desertification; soil
erosion; overgrazing; loss of infrastructure from civil warfare

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: strategic geopolitical position along world's
busiest shipping lanes; Eritrea retained the entire coastline of
Ethiopia along the Red Sea upon de jure independence from Ethiopia on
27 April 1993

@Eritrea:People

Population: 3,589,687 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 781,169; female 770,497)
15-64 years: 54% (male 963,542; female 966,083)
65 years and over: 3% (male 55,811; female 52,585) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 6.35% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 43.96 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 15.26 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 34.82 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)
note: it is estimated that between 200,000 and 350,000 Eritrean
refugees were still living in Sudan in mid-1997

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.06 male(s)/female
total population : 1.01 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 117.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 50.61 years
male: 48.85 years
female : 52.42 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.47 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Eritrean(s)
adjective: Eritrean

Ethnic groups: ethnic Tigrinya 50%, Tigre and Kunama 40%, Afar 4%,
Saho (Red Sea coast dwellers) 3%

Religions: Muslim, Coptic Christian, Roman Catholic, Protestant

Languages: Afar, Amharic, Arabic, Italian, Tigre and Kunama, Tigrinya,
minor tribal languages

@Eritrea:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: State of Eritrea
conventional short form: Eritrea
local long form : Hagere Ertra
local short form: Ertra
former: Eritrea Autonomous Region in Ethiopia

Data code: ER

Government type: transitional government
note : following a successful referendum on independence for the
Autonomous Region of Eritrea on 23-25 April 1993, a National Assembly,
composed entirely of the Peoples' Front for Democracy and Justice or
PFDJ, was established as a transitional legislature; a Constitutional
Commission was also established to draft a constitution; ISAIAS
Afworki was elected president by the transitional legislature pending
the promulgation of a constitution and popular elections

National capital: Asmara (formerly Asmera)

Administrative divisions: 8 provinces (singular - awraja); Akele
Guzay, Barka, Denkel, Hamasen, Sahil, Semhar, Senhit, Seraye
note: in May 1995 the National Assembly adopted a resolution stating
that the administrative structure of Eritrea, which had been
established by former colonial powers, would consist of only six
provinces when the new constitution, then being drafted, would go into
effect sometime in 1998; the new provinces, which have not been
recommended by the US Board on Geographic Names for recognition by the
US government, pending acceptable definition of the boundaries, are:
Anseba, Debub, Debubawi, Gash-Barka, Maakel, and Semanawi Keyih Bahri

Independence: 27 May 1993 (from Ethiopia; formerly the Eritrea
Autonomous Region)

National holiday: National Day (independence from Ethiopia), 24 May
(1993)

Constitution: transitional "constitution" decreed 19 May 1993; the
promulgation of a draft constitution is expected in 1998

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: NA; note - the transitional constitution of 19 May 1993 did
not provide rules for suffrage, but it seems likely that the final
version of the constitution, to be promulgated some time in 1998, will
follow the example set in the referendum of 1993 and extend suffrage
to all persons 18 years of age or older

Executive branch:
chief of state: President ISAIAS Afworki (since 8 June 1993); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President ISAIAS Afworki (since 8 June 1993); note
- the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: State Council is the collective executive authority
note: the president is head of the State Council and National Assembly
elections: president elected by the National Assembly; election last
held 8 June 1993 (next to be held NA 1997)
election results: ISAIAS Afworki elected president; percent of
National Assembly vote - ISAIAS Afworki 95%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (150 seats; term
limits not established pending new constitution)
elections: 75 members of the PFDJ Central Committee (the old Central
Committee of the EPLF) and 75 directly elected members serve as the
country's legislative body until country-wide elections are held in
1997

Judicial branch: Judiciary

Political parties and leaders: People's Front for Democracy and
Justice or PFDJ, the only party recognized by the government [ISAIAS
Afworki, PETROS Solomon]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Eritrean Islamic Jihad or EIJ;
Eritrean Liberation Front or ELF [ABDULLAH Muhammed]; Eritrean
Liberation Front - United Organization or ELF-UO [Mohammed Said
NAWUD]; Eritrean Liberation Front - Revolutionary Council or ELF-RC
[Ahmed NASSER]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA, FAO,
IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IGADD, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat
(nonsignatory user), ITU, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador AMDEMICHAEL Berhane Khasai
chancery: 1708 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone : [1] (202) 319-1991
FAX: [1] (202) 319-1304

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador John HICKS
embassy: Franklin D. Roosevelt St., Asmara
mailing address: P.O. Box 211, Asmara
telephone: [291] (1) 120004
FAX : [291] (1) 127584

Flag description: red isosceles triangle (based on the hoist side)
dividing the flag into two right triangles; the upper triangle is
green, the lower one is blue; a gold wreath encircling a gold olive
branch is centered on the hoist side of the red triangle

Economy

Economy - overview: With independence from Ethiopia on 27 April 1993,
Eritrea faced the bitter economic problems of a small, desperately
poor African country. Most of the population must continue to depend
on subsistence farming. Domestic output (GDP) is substantially
augmented by worker remittances from abroad. Government revenues come
from custom duties and income and sales taxes. Road construction is a
top domestic priority. Shortages persist in housing, education, and
health care. Eritrea has inherited the entire coastline of Ethiopia
and has long-term prospects for revenues from the development of
offshore oil, offshore fishing, and tourism. Ethiopia is largely
dependent on Eritrean ports for its foreign commerce.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $2 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.9% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $570 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 19%
industry: 18%
services : 63% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 8% (1995 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $214 million
expenditures: $397 million, including capital expenditures of $78
million (1995 est.)

Industries: food processing, beverages, clothing and textiles

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 73,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: sorghum, lentils, vegetables, maize, cotton,
tobacco, coffee, sisal (for making rope); livestock (including goats);
fish

Exports:
total value: $81 million (1995 est.)
commodities: livestock, sorghum, textiles
partners: Ethiopia, Italy, Saudi Arabia, UK, US, Yemen

Imports:
total value : $404 million (1995 est.)
commodities: processed goods, machinery, petroleum products
partners: Ethiopia, Saudi Arabia, Italy, United Arab Emirates

Debt - external: $162 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 birr (Br) = 100 cents; at present, Ethiopian currency
used; note - new Eritrean currency, the nakfa, to be circulated in
1997

Exchange rates: birr (Br) per US$1 (end of the period) - 6.4260
(December 1996), 6.4260 (1996), 6.3200 (1995), 5.9500 (1994), 5.000
(fixed rate 1992-93); note - following independence from Ethiopia,
Eritrea continued to use Ethiopian currency
note: since May 1993, the birr market rate has been determined in an
interbank market supported by weekly wholesale auction; prior to that
date, the official rate was pegged to US$1 = 5.000 birr

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Eritrea:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
domestic : very inadequate; about 4 telephones per 100 families, most
of which are in Asmara; government is seeking international tenders to
improve the system
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (government controlled)

Televisions: NA

@Eritrea:Transportation

Railways:
total: 307 km
narrow gauge: 307 km 0.950-m gauge (1995 est.)
note: nonoperational since 1978 except for an about 5 km stretch that
was reopened in Massawa in 1994; rehabilitation of the remainder and
of the rolling stock is under way; links Ak'ordat and Asmara (formerly
Asmera) with the port of Massawa (formerly Mits'iwa)

Highways:
total: 3,930 km
paved: 841 km
unpaved : 3,089 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Assab (Aseb), Massawa (Mits'iwa)

Merchant marine:
total : 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 11,573 GRT/13,593
DWT (1996 est.)

Airports: 14 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 4
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 10
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $40 million (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: a dispute with Yemen over sovereignty of the
Hanish Islands in the southern Red Sea has been submitted to
arbitration under the auspices of the ICJ
______________________________________________________________________

ESTONIA

@Estonia:Geography

Location: Eastern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea and Gulf of
Finland, between Latvia and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 59 00 N, 26 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total : 45,226 sq km
land: 43,211 sq km
water: 2,015 sq km
note: includes 1,520 islands in the Baltic Sea

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than New Hampshire and Vermont
combined

Land boundaries:
total: 633 km
border countries: Latvia 339 km, Russia 294 km

Coastline: 3,794 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: limits to be fixed in coordination with
neighboring states
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: maritime, wet, moderate winters, cool summers

Terrain: marshy, lowlands

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Baltic Sea 0 m
highest point: Suur Munamagi 318 m

Natural resources: shale oil (kukersite), peat, phosphorite, amber,
cambrian blue clay

Land use:
arable land : 27%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 7%
forests and woodland: 48%
other : 18% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 110 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding occurs frequently in the spring

Environment - current issues: air heavily polluted with sulfur dioxide
from oil-shale burning power plants in northeast; contamination of
soil and groundwater with petroleum products, chemicals at former
Soviet military bases; Estonia has more than 1,400 natural and manmade
lakes, the smaller of which in agricultural areas are heavily affected
by organic waste; coastal sea water is polluted in many locations

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Ship Pollution, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

@Estonia:People

Population: 1,436,558 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 19% (male 141,814; female 136,895)
15-64 years: 67% (male 460,067; female 495,935)
65 years and over: 14% (male 65,302; female 136,545) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -1.14% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 9.04 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 14.08 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -6.4 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.93 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.48 male(s)/female
total population: 0.87 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 14.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 68.38 years
male : 62.39 years
female: 74.67 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.29 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Estonian(s)
adjective: Estonian

Ethnic groups: Estonian 64.2%, Russian 28.7%, Ukrainian 2.7%,
Byelorussian 1.5%, Finn 1%, other 1.9% (1995)

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran, others include Baptist, Methodist,
7th Day Adventist, Roman Catholic, Pentecostal, Word of Life, 7th Day
Baptist, Judaism

Languages: Estonian (official), Latvian, Lithuanian, Russian, other

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 100%
male : 100%
female: 100% (1989 est.)

@Estonia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Estonia
conventional short form : Estonia
local long form: Eesti Vabariik
local short form: Eesti
former: Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: EN

Government type: republic

National capital: Tallinn

Administrative divisions: 15 counties (maakonnad, singular - maakond):
Harju maakond (Tallinn), Hiiu maakond (Kardla), Ida-Viru maakond
(Johvi), Jarva maakond (Paide), Jogeva maakond (Jogeva), Laane maakond
(Haapsalu), Laane-Viru maakond (Rakvere), Parnu maakond (Parnu), Polva
maakond (Polva), Rapla maakond (Rapla), Saare maakond (Kuessaare),
Tartu maakond (Tartu), Valga maakond (Valga), Viljandi maakond
(Viljandi), Voru maakond (Voru)
note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center name
following in parentheses)

Independence: 6 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 24 February (1918)

Constitution: adopted 28 June 1992

Legal system: based on civil law system; no judicial review of
legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Lennart MERI (since 21 October 1992)
head of government: Prime Minister Tiit VAHI (acting since NA March
1995; confirmed 17 April 1995)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister,
approved by Parliament
elections: president elected by Parliament for a five-year term; if he
or she does not secure two-thirds of the votes after 3 rounds of
balloting, then an electoral assembly (made up of Parliament plus
members of local governments) elects the president, choosing between
the two candidates with the largest percentage of votes; election last
held August-September 1996 (next to be held fall 2001); prime minister
nominated by the president and approved by Parliament
election results: Lennart MERI elected president by an electoral
assembly after Parliament was unable to break a deadlock between MERI
and RUUTEL; percent of electoral assembly vote - Lennert MERI 61%,
Arnold RUUTEL 39%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Riigikogu (101 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : last held 5 March 1995 (next to be held NA 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - KMU 32.22%, RE 16.18%, K
14.17%, Pro Patria and ERSP 7.85%, M 5.98%, Our Home is Estonia and
Right-Wingers 5.0%; seats by party - KMU 41, RE 19, K 16, Pro Patria
8, Our Home is Estonia 6, M 6, Right-Wingers 5

Judicial branch: National Court

Political parties and leaders: Coalition Party and Rural Union or KMU
[Tiit VAHI, chairman] made up of 4 parties: Coalition Party, Country
People's Party/Farmer's Assembly, Rural Union, and Pensioners' and
Families' League; Reform Party-Liberals or RE [Siim KALLAS, chairman];
Center Party or K [Edgar SAVISAAR, chairman]; Union of Pro Patria or
Fatherland League (Isamaa) [Toivo JURGENSON, chairman]; National
Independence Party or ERSP [Kelam TUNNE, chairman]; Our Home is
Estonia made up of 2 parties: United Peoples Party and the Russian
People's Party of Estonia; United Peoples Party [Viktor ANDREJEV,
chairman]; Russian Party of Estonia [Nikolai MASPANOV, chairman];
Moderates or M made up of 2 parties: Social Democratic Party and Rural
Center Party; Social Democratic Party [Eiki NESTOR, chairman]; Rural
Center Party [Vambo KAAL, chairman]; Right-Wingers [Ulo NUGIS,
chairman]; Republican Conservative [Vootele HANSEN];
Development/Progressive Party [Andra VEIDEMANN, chairwoman], note -
party was created by defectors from Center Party in late spring 1996,
now holds 6 or 7 seats in Parliament

International organization participation: BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, EBRD,
ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFC, IFRCS,
IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, ISO
(correspondent), ITU, NACC, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNMIBH,
UPU, WEU (associate partner), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Lauri LEPIK
chancery: 2131 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 588-0101
FAX: [1] (202) 588-0108
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Lawrence P. TAYLOR
embassy: Kentmanni 20, Tallinn EE 0001
mailing address: American Embassy, Tallinn; PSC 78, Box T; APO AE
09723
telephone: [372] (6) 312-021
FAX: [372] (6) 312-025

Flag description: pre-1940 flag restored by Supreme Soviet in May 1990
- three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), black, and white

Economy

Economy - overview: Estonia continues to experience strong economic
growth after its economy bottomed out in 1993. Bolstered by a
widespread national desire to reintegrate into Western Europe, Estonia
has adhered to disciplined fiscal and financial policies and has led
the FSU countries in pursuing economic reform. Monthly inflation has
been held to 2% in 1995-96. Following four years of decline, Estonia's
GDP grew at 3% in 1995 and 1996. Despite these positive economic
indicators, the current account deficit is widening. The resident IMF
representative in Estonia has been worried since early 1996 about a
rising public sector deficit boosted by local government spending.
Small- and medium-scale privatization is essentially complete, and
large-scale privatization is progressing gradually. In 1996, Estonia's
national airline was privatized; in 1997 Estonia plans to privatize
large infrastructure, i.e., Eesti Energia, Tallinn Port, Estonian
Telecom, and Oil Shale. Estonia has successfully reoriented its trade
toward the West, two-thirds of exports now going to Western markets.
Estonia's free trade policies were the cornerstone of its negotiations
with the European Union, and led to the signing of an association
agreement in June 1995. Estonia was the only Baltic state not to have
a transition period imposed by the EU prior to its implementation of a
free trade agreement.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $8.1 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,560 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 10%
industry: 37%
services : 53% (1993 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 23% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 750,000 (1992)
by occupation: industry and construction 42%, agriculture and forestry
20%, other 38% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 5% (1996 official est.)

Budget:
revenues: $620 million
expenditures : $582 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(January-October 1995)

Industries: oil shale, shipbuilding, phosphates, electric motors,
excavators, cement, furniture, clothing, textiles, paper, shoes,
apparel

Industrial production growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 3.29 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 8.6 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 4,005 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: potatoes, fruits, vegetables; livestock and
dairy products; fish

Exports:
total value: $2 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: textiles 16%, food products 16%, machinery and equipment
16%, metals 9% (1995)
partners: Finland, Russia, Sweden, Germany, Latvia (1995)

Imports:
total value : $3.1 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: machinery and equipment 29%, foodstuffs 14%, minerals
13%, textiles 13%, metals 12% (1995)
partners: Finland, Russia, Sweden, Germany (1995)

Debt - external: $270 million (January 1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $147 million (1993)
note: Western commitments $285 million (including international
financial institutions)

Currency: 1 Estonian kroon (EEK) = 100 cents (introduced in August
1992)

Exchange rates: krooni (EEK) per US$1 - 12.6 (January 1997), 12.410
(December 1996), 12.034 (1996), 11.465 (1995), 12.991 (1994), 13.223
(1993); note - krooni are tied to the German deutsche mark at a fixed
rate of 8 to 1

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Estonia:Communications

Telephones: 400,000 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: system is antiquated; improvements are being made
piecemeal, with emphasis on business needs and international
connections; there are still about 150,000 unfulfilled requests for
subscriber service
domestic : substantial investment has been made in cellular systems
which are operational throughout Estonia
international: international traffic is carried to the other former
Soviet republics by landline or microwave radio relay and to other
countries partly by leased connection to the Moscow international
gateway switch and partly by a new Tallinn-Helsinki fiber-optic,
submarine cable which gives Estonia access to international circuits
everywhere; access to the international packet-switched digital
network via Helsinki

Radio broadcast stations: 3 commercial broadcast stations, 1
government broadcast station (1994)

Radios: 710,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1993)
note: provide Estonian programs as well as Moscow Ostenkino's first
and second programs

Televisions: 600,000 (1993 est.)

@Estonia:Transportation

Railways:
total : 1,018 km common carrier lines only; does not include dedicated
industrial lines
broad gauge: 1,018 km 1.520-m gauge (132 km electrified) (1995)

Highways:
total: 14,992 km
paved: 8,096 km (including 65 km of expressways)
unpaved : 6,896 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 500 km perennially navigable

Pipelines: natural gas 420 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Haapsalu, Narva, Paldiski, Parnu, Tallinn

Merchant marine:
total: 55 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 364,492 GRT/478,441 DWT
ships by type : bulk 7, cargo 31, container 4, oil tanker 3,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 6, short-sea passenger 4 (1996 est.)

Airports: 22 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 10
2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 12
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 4
under 914 m: 5 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Ground Forces, Navy/Coast Guard, Air and Air
Defense Force (not officially sanctioned), Maritime Border Guard,
Volunteer Defense League (Kaitseliit), Security Forces (internal and
border troops)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 353,616 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 277,489 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 10,396 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $35 million (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.5% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Estonian and Russian negotiators reached a
technical border agreement in December 1996, which Estonia is prepared
to sign and ratify in January 1997; Estonia had claimed over 2,000 sq
km territory in the Narva and Pechory regions in Russia - based on
boundary established under the 1920 Peace Treaty of Tartu

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for opiates and cannabis from
Southwest Asia and the Caucasus, and cocaine from Latin America to
Western Europe and Scandinavia
______________________________________________________________________

ETHIOPIA

Introduction

Historical perspective: on 28 May 1991 the Ethiopian People's
Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) toppled the authoritarian
government of MENGISTU Haile-Mariam and took control in Addis Ababa; a
new constitution was promulgated in December 1994 and national and
regional popular elections were held in May and June 1995

@Ethiopia:Geography

Location: Eastern Africa, west of Somalia

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 N, 38 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 1,127,127 sq km
land: 1,119,683 sq km
water: 7,444 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 5,311 km
border countries: Djibouti 337 km, Eritrea 912 km, Kenya 830 km,
Somalia 1,626 km, Sudan 1,606 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical monsoon with wide topographic-induced variation

Terrain: high plateau with central mountain range divided by Great
Rift Valley

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Denakil -125 m
highest point: Ras Dashen Terara 4,620 m

Natural resources: small reserves of gold, platinum, copper, potash

Land use:
arable land: 12%
permanent crops : 1%
permanent pastures: 40%
forests and woodland: 25%
other: 22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,900 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: geologically active Great Rift Valley susceptible to
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions; frequent droughts

Environment - current issues: deforestation; overgrazing; soil
erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Ozone
Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Environmental Modification,
Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography - note: landlocked - entire coastline along the Red Sea was
lost with the de jure independence of Eritrea on 27 April 1993

@Ethiopia:People

Population: 58,732,577 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 46% (male 13,492,323; female 13,444,656)
15-64 years: 51% (male 15,167,806; female 15,020,499)
65 years and over: 3% (male 745,554; female 861,739) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.67% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 45.59 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 17.56 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.32 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)
note: repatriation of Ethiopians who fled to Sudan, Kenya and Somalia
for refuge from war and famine in earlier years, is expected to
continue in 1997; entry into Ethiopia of Sudanese and Somalis fleeing
the fighting in their own countries is also continuing in 1997

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.86 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 121.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 46.62 years
male : 45.48 years
female: 47.8 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.94 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Ethiopian(s)
adjective: Ethiopian

Ethnic groups: Oromo 40%, Amhara and Tigrean 32%, Sidamo 9%, Shankella
6%, Somali 6%, Afar 4%, Gurage 2%, other 1%

Religions: Muslim 45%-50%, Ethiopian Orthodox 35%-40%, animist 12%,
other 3%-8%

Languages: Amharic (official), Tigrinya, Orominga, Guaraginga, Somali,
Arabic, English (major foreign language taught in schools)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 35.5%
male: 45.5%
female : 25.3% (1995 est.)

@Ethiopia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
conventional short form: Ethiopia
local long form: YeItyop'iya Federalawi Demokrasiyawi Ripeblik
local short form: YeItyop'iya
abbreviation: FDRE

Data code: ET

Government type: federal republic

National capital: Addis Ababa

Administrative divisions: 9 ethnically-based administrative regions
(astedader akababiwach, singular - astedader akababi) and 1 federal
capital*: Addis Ababa*; Afar; Amhara; Benshangul/Gumaz; Gambela;
Harar; Oromia; Somali; Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples;
Tigray

Independence: oldest independent country in Africa and one of the
oldest in the world - at least 2,000 years

National holiday: National Day, 28 May (1991) (defeat of Mengistu
regime)

Constitution: new constitution promulgated in December 1994

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President NEGASSO Gidada (since 22 August 1995)
head of government: Prime Minister MELES Zenawi (since NA August 1995)
cabinet: Council of Ministers as provided in the December 1994
constitution; ministers are selected by the prime minister and
approved by the Council of People's Representatives
elections : president elected by the Council of People's
Representatives for a six-year term; election last held June 1995
(next to be held NA 2001); prime minister designated by the party in
power following legislative elections
election results: NEGASSO Gidada elected president; percent of vote by
the Council of People's Representatives - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Council of
the Federation or upper chamber (117 seats; members are chosen by
state assemblies to serve five-year terms) and the Council of People's
Representatives or lower chamber (548 seats; members are directly
elected by popular vote from single-member districts to serve
five-year terms); note - the upper chamber represents the ethnic
interests of the regional governments
elections: regional and national popular elections were held in May
and June 1995 (next to be held NA 2000) and the Federal Parliamentary
Assembly assumed legislative power on 21 August 1995
election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - NA; note - EPRDF won
nearly all seats

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are elected by the national
legislature

Political parties and leaders: Ethiopian People's Revolutionary
Democratic Front or EPRDF [MELES Zenawi]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Oromo Liberation Front or OLF;
All Amhara People's Organization; Southern Ethiopia People's
Democratic Coalition; numerous small, ethnic-based groups have formed
since MENGISTU'S resignation, including several Islamic militant
groups

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA, FAO,
G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IGADD, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador BERHANE Gebre-Christos
chancery: 2134 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 234-2281, 2282
FAX: [1] (202) 328-7950

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador David H. SHINN (17 June 1996)
embassy : Entoto Street, Addis Ababa
mailing address: P. O. Box 1014, Addis Ababa
telephone: [251] (1) 550666
FAX: [251] (1) 552191

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top), yellow,
and red with a yellow pentagram and single yellow rays emanating from
the angles between the points on a light blue disk centered on the
three bands; Ethiopia is the oldest independent country in Africa, and
the colors of her flag were so often adopted by other African
countries upon independence that they became known as the pan-African
colors

Economy

Economy - overview: Ethiopia continues to face difficult economic
problems as one of the poorest and least developed countries in the
world. Its economy is based on agriculture, which accounts for more
than half of GDP, 90% of exports, and 80% of total employment; coffee
generates 60% of export earnings. The agricultural sector suffers from
frequent periods of drought, poor cultivation practices, and
deterioration of internal security conditions. The manufacturing
sector is heavily dependent on inputs from the agricultural sector.
Over 90% of large-scale industry, but less than 10% of agriculture, is
state-run. The government is considering selling off a portion of
state-owned plants and is implementing reform measures that are
gradually liberalizing the economy. A major medium-term problem is the
improvement of roads, water supply, and other parts of an
infrastructure badly neglected during years of civil strife.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $24.8 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7.7% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $430 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 57%
industry: 10%
services: 33% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 10% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 18 million
by occupation: agriculture and animal husbandry 80%, government and
services 12%, industry and construction 8% (1985)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $1 billion
expenditures: $1.48 billion, including capital expenditures of $415
million (FY96/97)

Industries: food processing, beverages, textiles, chemicals, metals
processing, cement

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 630,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 1.27 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 23 kWh (1994 est.)

Agriculture - products: cereals, pulses, coffee, oilseed, sugarcane,
potatoes, other vegetables; hides, cattle, sheep, goats

Exports:
total value : $423 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: coffee, leather products, gold (1995)
partners: Germany 18%, Japan 13%, Djibouti 10%, Saudi Arabia 8% (1993)

Imports:
total value: $1.15 billion (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: food and live animals, petroleum and petroleum products,
chemicals (1995)
partners : Saudi Arabia 13.3%, Italy 11.6%, US 10.2%, Germany 9.1%,
Japan (1993)

Debt - external: $4.3 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $367 million (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 birr (Br) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: birr (Br) per US$1 (end of period) - 6.4260 (December
1996), 6.4260 (1996), 6.3200 (1995), 5.9500 (1994), 5.0000 (fixed rate
1992-93); fixed at 2.070 before 1992
note: since May 1993, the birr market rate has been determined in an
interbank market supported by weekly wholesale auction; prior to that
date, the official rate was pegged to US$1 = 5.000 birr

Fiscal year: 8 July - 7 July

@Ethiopia:Communications

Telephones: 100,000 (1983 est.)

Telephone system: open wire and microwave radio relay system adequate
for government use
domestic: open wire and microwave radio relay
international: open wire to Sudan and Djibouti; microwave radio relay
to Kenya and Djibouti; satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (1
Atlantic Ocean and 2 Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 9.9 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 100,000 (1993 est.)

@Ethiopia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 681 km (Ethiopian segment of the Addis Ababa-Djibouti railroad)
narrow gauge: 681 km 1.000-m gauge

Highways:
total: 28,360 km
paved : 4,254 km
unpaved: 24,106 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: none; Ethiopia is landlocked but by agreement with
Eritrea may use the ports of Assab and Massawa

Merchant marine:
total: 12 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 60,081 GRT/84,686 DWT
ships by type: cargo 7, oil tanker 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 3 (1996
est.)

Airports: 59 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 13
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 1
under 914 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 46
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
914 to 1,523 m: 31 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Ground Forces, Air Force, Police
note: following the secession of Eritrea, Ethiopia's naval facilities
remained in Eritrea's possession; current reorganization plans do not
include a navy

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 13,257,668 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 6,889,800 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 605,030 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $110 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: most of the southern half of the boundary
with Somalia is a Provisional Administrative Line; territorial dispute
with Somalia over the Ogaden

Illicit drugs: transit hub for heroin originating in Southwest and
Southeast Asia and destined for Europe and North America as well as
cocaine destined for markets in southern Africa; cultivates qat (chat)
for local use and regional export
______________________________________________________________________

EUROPA ISLAND

(possession of France)

@Europa Island:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, island in the Mozambique Channel, about
one-half of the way from southern Madagascar to southern Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 22 20 S, 40 22 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 28 sq km
land: 28 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.16 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 22.2 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: NA

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 24 m

Natural resources: negligible

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures : NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: NA%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: wildlife sanctuary

@Europa Island:People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants
note: there is a small military garrison

@Europa Island:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Europa Island
local long form: none
local short form: Ile Europa

Data code: EU

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by a high
commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

National capital: none; administered by France from Reunion

Independence: none (possession of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Europa Island:Communications

Communications - note: 1 meteorological station

@Europa Island:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claimed by Madagascar
______________________________________________________________________

FALKLAND ISLANDS (ISLAS MALVINAS)
(Islas Malvinas)]

(dependent territory of the UK)

@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):Geography

Location: Southern South America, islands in the South Atlantic Ocean,
east of southern Argentina

Geographic coordinates: 51 45 S, 59 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total: 12,170 sq km
land: 12,170 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes the two main islands of East and West Falkland and
about 200 small islands

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,288 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200 nm
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: cold marine; strong westerly winds, cloudy, humid; rain
occurs on more than half of days in year; occasional snow all year,
except in January and February, but does not accumulate

Terrain: rocky, hilly, mountainous with some boggy, undulating plains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Usborne 705 m

Natural resources: fish, wildlife

Land use:
arable land : 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 99%
forests and woodland: 0%
other : 1% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: strong winds persist throughout the year

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: deeply indented coast provides good natural harbors;
short growing season

@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):People

Population: 2,432 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 2.43% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population : NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: NA years
male: NA years
female: NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
noun: Falkland Islander(s)
adjective: Falkland Island

Ethnic groups: British

Religions: primarily Anglican, Roman Catholic, United Free Church,
Evangelist Church, Jehovah's Witnesses, Lutheran, Seventh-Day
Adventist

Languages: English

@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Colony of the Falkland Islands
conventional short form: Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)

Data code: FA

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK

Government type: NA

National capital: Stanley

Administrative divisions: none (dependent territory of the UK)

Independence: none (dependent territory of the UK)

National holiday: Liberation Day, 14 June (1982)

Constitution: 3 October 1985

Legal system: English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952)
head of government: Governor Richard RALPH (since 29 January 1996)
cabinet: Executive Council; three members elected by the Legislative
Council, two ex-officio members (chief executive and the financial
secretary), and the governor
elections : none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor
appointed by the queen

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council (10 seats, 8
elected; members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held NA October 1993 (next was to be held NA October
1998)
election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - independents 8

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chief justice is non-resident

Political parties and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ICFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (dependent territory of
the UK)

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
quadrant and the Falkland Island coat of arms in a white disk centered
on the outer half of the flag; the coat of arms contains a white ram
(sheep raising is the major economic activity) above the sailing ship
Desire (whose crew discovered the islands) with a scroll at the bottom
bearing the motto DESIRE THE RIGHT

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy was formerly based on agriculture,
mainly sheep farming, which directly or indirectly employs most of the
work force. Dairy farming supports domestic consumption; crops furnish
winter fodder. Exports feature shipments of high-grade wool to the UK
and the sale of postage stamps and coins. Rich stocks of fish in the
surrounding waters are not presently exploited by the islanders. So
far, efforts to establish a domestic fishing industry have been
unsuccessful. The economy has diversified since 1987, when the
government began selling fishing licenses to foreign trawlers
operating within the Falklands exclusive fishing zone. These license
fees total more than $40 million per year and support the island's
health, education, and welfare system. To encourage tourism, the
Falkland Islands Development Corporation has built three lodges for
visitors attracted by the abundant wildlife and trout fishing. The
islands are now self-financing except for defense. The British
Geological Survey announced a 200-mile oil exploration zone around the
islands in 1993, and early seismic surveys suggest substantial
reserves capable of producing 500,000 barrels per day. An agreement
between Argentina and the United Kingdom in 1995 seeks to defuse
licensing and sovereignty conflicts that would dampen foreign interest
in exploiting potential oil reserves.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 1,100 (est.)
by occupation: agriculture 95% (mostly sheepherding)

Unemployment rate: NA%; labor shortage

Budget:
revenues: $53.4 million
expenditures: $53.1 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1994-95 est.)

Industries: wool and fish processing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: fodder and vegetable crops; sheep farming,
small dairy herds

Exports:
total value: $7.6 million (1995)
commodities: wool, hides, meat
partners: UK, Netherlands, Japan (1992)

Imports:
total value : $24.7 million (1995)
commodities: food, clothing, timber, and machinery
partners : UK, Netherlands Antilles (Curacao), Japan (1992)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note: UK, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments totaled $18 million
(1993-94)

Currency: 1 Falkland pound (£F) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Falkland pound (£F) per US$1 - 0.6023 (January 1997),
0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995), 0.6529 (1994), 0.6658 (1993), 0.5664
(1992); note - the Falkland pound is at par with the British pound

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):Communications

Telephones: 1,180 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: government-operated radiotelephone and private VHF/CB
radiotelephone networks provide effective service to almost all points
on both islands
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)
with links through London to other countries

Radio broadcast stations: 1 (government operated)

Radios: 1,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (government operated)

Televisions: NA

@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 510 km
paved: 30 km
unpaved : 480 km

Ports and harbors: Stanley

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 5 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 5
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: British Forces Falkland Islands (includes Army,
Royal Air Force, Royal Navy, and Royal Marines), Police Force

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: administered by the UK, claimed by Argentina
______________________________________________________________________

FAROE ISLANDS

(part of the Danish realm)

@Faroe Islands:Geography

Location: Northern Europe, island group between the Norwegian Sea and
the north Atlantic Ocean, about one-half of the way from Iceland to
Norway

Geographic coordinates: 62 00 N, 7 00 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 1,399 sq km
land: 1,399 sq km
water: 0 sq km (some lakes and streams)

Area - comparative: eight times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,117 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: mild winters, cool summers; usually overcast; foggy, windy

Terrain: rugged, rocky, some low peaks; cliffs along most of coast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Slaettaratindur 882 m

Natural resources: fish, whales

Land use:
arable land: 6%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 94% (1996)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: archipelago of 17 inhabited islands and one
uninhabited island, and a few uninhabited islets; strategically
located along important sea lanes in northeastern Atlantic;
precipitous terrain limits habitation to small coastal lowlands

@Faroe Islands:People

Population: 39,873 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 25% (male 4,960; female 4,812)
15-64 years: 60% (male 12,913; female 11,117)
65 years and over: 15% (male 2,708; female 3,363) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -6.36% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 11.46 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.05 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -38.75 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.16 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.8 male(s)/female
total population: 1.07 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 10.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.37 years
male: 75.41 years
female : 81.32 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.37 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Faroese (singular and plural)
adjective: Faroese

Ethnic groups: Scandinavian

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran

Languages: Faroese (derived from Old Norse), Danish

Literacy: NA
note: similar to Denmark proper

@Faroe Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Faroe Islands
local long form : none
local short form: Foroyar

Data code: FO

Dependency status: part of the Danish realm; self-governing overseas
administrative division of Denmark

Government type: NA

National capital: Torshavn

Administrative divisions: none (self-governing overseas administrative
division of Denmark)

Independence: none (part of the Danish realm; self-governing overseas
administrative division of Denmark)

National holiday: Birthday of the Queen, 16 April (1940)

Constitution: 5 June 1953 (Danish constitution)

Legal system: Danish

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen MARGRETHE II of Denmark (since 14 January 1972),
represented by High Commissioner Ms. Vibeke LARSEN, chief
administrative officer (since mid-1995)
head of government : Prime Minister Edmund JOENSEN (since 15 September
1994)
cabinet: Landsstyri elected by the Faroese Parliament
elections: the queen is a constitutional monarch; high commissioner
appointed by the queen; following legislative elections, the leader of
the party that wins the most seats is usually elected prime minister
by the Faroese Parliament; election last held NA 1994 (next to be held
NA 1998)
election results: Edmund JOENSEN elected prime minister; percent of
parliamentary vote - 23.4%

Legislative branch: unicameral Faroese Parliament or Logting (32
seats; members are elected on a proportional basis from the seven
constituencies to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 7 July 1994 (next to be held by NA July 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - Unionist Party 23.4%,
People's Party 16.0%, Social Democrats 15.4%, Republicans 13.7%,
Workers' Party 9.5%, Christian People 6.3%, Center Party 5.8%, Home
Rule Party 5.6%; seats by party - Unionist Party 8, People's Party 6,
Social Democrats 5, Republicans 4, Workers' Party 3, Christian People
2, Center Party 2, Home Rule Party 2
note: election of 2 seats to the Danish Parliament was last held on 21
September 1994 (next to be held by September 1998); results - percent
of vote by party - Unionist Party 22.5%, People's Party 21.7%; seats
by party - Unionist Party 1, People's Party 1

Judicial branch: none

Political parties and leaders: Social Democratic Party [Joannes
EIDESGAARD]; Workers' Party [Alis JACOBSEN]; Home Rule Party [Helena
Dam A NEYSTABO]; Unionist Party [Edmund JOENSEN]; Republican Party
[Heini O. HEINESEN]; Center Party [Tordur NICLASEN]; Christian
People's Party [Niels Pauli DANIELSEN]; People's Party [Arnfinn
KALLSBERG]

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (self-governing overseas
administrative division of Denmark)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (self-governing overseas
administrative division of Denmark)

Flag description: white with a red cross outlined in blue that extends
to the edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to
the hoist side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

Economy

Economy - overview: The Faroese economy in 1995 and 1996 saw a
noticeable upturn after several years of decline brought on by a drop
in fish catches and declining prices and by over-spending by the
Faroese Home Rule Government (FHRG). In the early 1990s, property
values plummeted, and the FHRG had to bail out and merge the two
largest Faroese banks. Fishing is now improving; wage costs are
increasing; the FHRG's budget is almost in balance; and the large
foreign debt has come down significantly. Nevertheless, the total
dependence on fishing makes the Faroese economy extremely vulnerable,
and the reduction in the foreign debt is at the cost of low
investment. Oil finds close to the Faroese area give hope for deposits
in the immediate Faroese area, which may lay the basis for an eventual
economic rebound. Aided by a substantial annual subsidy from Denmark,
the Faroese have a standard of living comparable to the Danes and
other Scandinavians.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $800 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $16,300 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 20%
industry: 16%
services : 64% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.8% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 20,345 (1995 est.)
by occupation: largely engaged in fishing, manufacturing,
transportation, and commerce

Unemployment rate: 11% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $467 million
expenditures: $468 million, including capital expenditures of $11
million (1996 est.)

Industries: fishing, shipbuilding, construction, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 91,000 kW 000 kW

Electricity - production: 175.4 million kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: 4,043 kWh (1995)

Agriculture - products: milk, potatoes, vegetables; sheep; salmon
farming; fish

Exports:
total value: $362 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities : fish and fish products 92%, animal feedstuffs, transport
equipment (ships)
partners: Denmark 22.2%, UK 25.8%, Germany 9.7%, France 8.3%, Norway
6.2%, US 2.0%

Imports:
total value: $315.6 (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment 17.0%, consumer goods
33%, raw materials and semi-manufactures 26.9%, fuels 11.4%, fish and
salt 6.7%
partners : Denmark 34.5%, Norway 15.9%, UK 8.4% Germany 7.8%, Sweden
5.8%, US 1.5%

Debt - external: $767 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid: receives an annual subsidy from Denmark of about $150
million (1995)

Currency: 1 Danish krone (DKr) = 100 oere

Exchange rates: Danish kroner (DKr) per US$1 - 6.117 (January 1997),
5.799 (1966), 5.602 (1995), 6.361 (1994), 6.484 (1993), 6.036 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Faroe Islands:Communications

Telephones: 26,000 of which about 3,500 are mobile telephones (1996)

Telephone system: good international communications; good domestic
facilities
domestic: digitalization to be completed in 1998
international: satellite earth stations - 1 Orion; 1 optical fiber
submarine cable linking the Faroe Islands with Denmark and Iceland

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1 (repeaters 13), shortwave 0

Radios: 11,800 (1996 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (repeaters 45)

Televisions: 11,600 (1996 est.)

@Faroe Islands:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 458 km
paved: 450 km
unpaved: 8 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Torshavn, Klaksvik, Tvoroyri, Runavik,
Fuglafjordhur

Merchant marine:
total : 6 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 18,979 GRT/14,531 DWT
ships by type: cargo 3, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo
1, short-sea passenger 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: no organized native military forces; only a small
Police Force and Coast Guard are maintained

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Denmark

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

FIJI

@Fiji:Geography

Location: Oceania, island group in the South Pacific Ocean, about
two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 18 00 S, 175 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 18,270 sq km
land: 18,270 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,129 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation;
rectilinear shelf claim added
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; only slight seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: mostly mountains of volcanic origin

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Tomanivi 1,324 m

Natural resources: timber, fish, gold, copper, offshore oil potential

Land use:
arable land : 10%
permanent crops: 4%
permanent pastures: 10%
forests and woodland: 65%
other : 11% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: cyclonic storms can occur from November to January

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Marine Life
Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical
Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: includes 332 islands of which approximately 110 are
inhabited

@Fiji:People

Population: 792,441 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 35% (male 140,685; female 135,044)
15-64 years: 62% (male 246,128; female 246,001)
65 years and over : 3% (male 11,620; female 12,963) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.28% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.12 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.3 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -4.07 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.9 male(s)/female
total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 17 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 66 years
male: 63.66 years
female : 68.46 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.78 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Fijian(s)
adjective: Fijian

Ethnic groups: Fijian 49%, Indian 46%, European, other Pacific
Islanders, overseas Chinese, and other 5%

Religions: Christian 52% (Methodist 37%, Roman Catholic 9%), Hindu
38%, Muslim 8%, other 2%
note: Fijians are mainly Christian, Indians are Hindu, and there is a
Muslim minority (1986)

Languages: English (official), Fijian, Hindustani

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 91.6%
male: 93.8%
female: 89.3% (1995 est.)

@Fiji:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Fiji
conventional short form : Fiji

Data code: FJ

Government type: republic
note: military coup leader Maj. Gen. Sitiveni RABUKA formally declared
Fiji a republic on 6 October 1987

National capital: Suva

Administrative divisions: 4 divisions and 1 dependency*; Central,
Eastern, Northern, Rotuma*, Western

Independence: 10 October 1970 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 10 October (1970)

Constitution: 10 October 1970 (suspended 1 October 1987); a new
constitution was proposed on 23 September 1988 and promulgated on 25
July 1990; the 1990 constitution is under review; the review is
scheduled to be completed by 1997

Legal system: based on British system

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Ratu Sir Kamisese MARA (acting president
since 15 December 1993, president since 12 January 1994); First Vice
President Ratu Sir Josaia TAIVAIQIA (since 12 January 1994); Second
Vice President Ratu Inoke TAKIVEIKATA (since 12 January 1994)
head of government: Prime Minister Sitiveni RABUKA (since 2 June 1992)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the prime minister from among the
members of Parliament and is responsible to Parliament
note : there is also a Presidential Council that advises the president
on matters of national importance and a Great Council of Chiefs which
consists of the highest ranking members of the traditional chiefly
system
elections: president elected by the Great Council of Chiefs for a
five-year term; prime minister appointed by the president
election results : Ratu Sir Kamisese MARA elected president; percent
of Great Council of Chiefs vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (34
seats; 24 reserved for ethnic Fijians, 9 for Indians and others, and 1
for the island of Rotuma; members appointed by the president to serve
five-year terms) and the House of Representatives (70 seats; 37
reserved for ethnic Fijians, 27 for ethnic Indians, and 6 for
independents and others; members elected by popular vote on a communal
basis to serve five-year terms)
elections: House of Representatives - last held 18-25 February 1994
(next to be held NA 1999)
election results: House of Representatives - percent of vote by party
- NA; seats by party - SVT 31, NFP 20, FLP 7, FAP 5, GVP 4,
independents 2, ANC 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Fijian Political Party (SVT - primarily
Fijian), leader Maj. Gen. Sitivini RABUKA; National Federation Party
(NFP; primarily Indian), Jai Ram REDDY; Fijian Nationalist Party
(FNP), Sakeasi BUTADROKA; Fiji Labor Party (FLP), Mahendra CHAUDHRY;
General Voters Party (GVP), Leo SMITH; Fiji Conservative Party (FCP),
leader NA; Conservative Party of Fiji (CPF), leader NA; Fiji Indian
Liberal Party, leader NA; Fiji Indian Congress Party, leader NA; Fiji
Independent Labor (Muslim), leader NA; Four Corners Party, leader NA;
Fijian Association Party (FAP), Josevata KAMIKAMICA; General Electors'
Association, leader NA
note: in early 1995, ethnic Fijian members of the All National
Congress (ANC) merged with the Fijian Association (FA); the remaining
members of the ANC have renamed their party the General Electors'
Association

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, CP, ESCAP, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (subscriber), ITU, PCA, Sparteca,
SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNTAES, UPU,
WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Ratu Napolioni MASIREWA
chancery: Suite 240, 2233 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone: [1] (202) 337-8320
FAX : [1] (202) 337-1996
consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Don Lee GEVIRTZ
embassy: 31 Loftus Street, Suva
mailing address: P. O. Box 218, Suva
telephone: [679] 314466
FAX: [679] 300081

Flag description: light blue with the flag of the UK in the upper
hoist-side quadrant and the Fijian shield centered on the outer half
of the flag; the shield depicts a yellow lion above a white field
quartered by the cross of Saint George featuring stalks of sugarcane,
a palm tree, bananas, and a white dove

Economy

Economy - overview: Fiji, endowed with forest, mineral, and fish
resources, is one of the most developed of the Pacific island
economies, though still with a large subsistence sector. Sugar exports
and tourism are the major sources of foreign exchange. Sugar
processing makes up one-third of industrial activity. Roughly 250,000
tourists visit each year. Political uncertainty and drought, however,
contribute to substantial fluctuations in earnings from tourism and
sugar and to the emigration of skilled workers. In 1992, growth was
approximately 3%, based on growth in tourism and a lessening of
labor-management disputes in the sugar and gold-mining sectors. In
1993, the government's budgeted growth rate of 3% was not achieved
because of a decline in non-sugar agricultural output and damage from
Cyclone Kina. Growth in 1994 of 5% was largely attributable to
increased tourism and expansion in the manufacturing sector.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $5.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,500 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 21%
industry: 18%
services: 61% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3% (1997 est.)

Labor force:
total: 235,000
by occupation: subsistence agriculture 67%, wage earners 18%, salary
earners 15% (1987)

Unemployment rate: 6% (1997 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $540.65 million
expenditures : $742.65 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: sugar, tourism, copra, gold, silver, clothing, lumber,
small cottage industries

Industrial production growth rate: 2.9% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 200,000 kW (1993)

Electricity - production: 510 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 660 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: sugarcane, coconuts, cassava (tapioca), rice,
sweet potatoes, bananas; cattle, pigs, horses, goats; fish catch
13,796 tons (1991)

Exports:
total value : $607 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: sugar 32%, clothing, gold, processed fish, lumber
partners: EU 26%, Australia 15%, other Pacific island countries 11%,
Japan 6%

Imports:
total value: $864 million (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment, petroleum products,
food, consumer goods, chemicals
partners: Australia 30%, NZ 17%, Japan 13%, EU 6%, US 6%

Debt - external: $333.8 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $14.35 million from Australia (FY96/97 est.); $3.5
million from New Zealand (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 Fijian dollar (F$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Fijian dollars (F$) per US$1 - 1.4000 (January 1997),
1.4033 (1996), 1.4063 (1995), 1.4641 (1994), 1.5418 (1993), 1.5030
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Fiji:Communications

Telephones: 60,017 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: modern local, interisland, and international
(wire/radio integrated) public and special-purpose telephone,
telegraph, and teleprinter facilities; regional radio communications
center
domestic: NA
international: access to important cable link between US and Canada
and NZ and Australia; satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific
Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: 12,000 (1992 est.)

@Fiji:Transportation

Railways:
total : 597 km; note - belongs to the government-owned Fiji Sugar
Corporation
narrow gauge: 597 km 0.610-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 3,370 km
paved: 1,655 km
unpaved : 1,715 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 203 km; 122 km navigable by motorized craft and
200-metric-ton barges

Ports and harbors: Labasa, Lautoka, Levuka, Savusavu, Suva

Merchant marine:
total: 6 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 17,800 GRT/18,034 DWT
ships by type: chemical tanker 2, oil tanker 1, passenger 1,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 (1996 est.)

Airports: 21 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 18
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 1
under 914 m: 15 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Republic of Fiji Military Forces (RFMF; includes
army, navy, and a small air wing)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 210,048 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 115,766 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 8,986 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $32 million (1997)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 5% (1997)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

FINLAND

@Finland:Geography

Location: Northern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea, Gulf of Bothnia,
and Gulf of Finland, between Sweden and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 64 00 N, 26 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 337,030 sq km
land: 305,470 sq km
water: 31,560 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Montana

Land boundaries:
total : 2,628 km
border countries: Norway 729 km, Sweden 586 km, Russia 1,313 km

Coastline: 1,126 km (excludes islands and coastal indentations)

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 6 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 12 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm (in the Gulf of Finland - 3 nm)

Climate: cold temperate; potentially subarctic, but comparatively mild
because of moderating influence of the North Atlantic Current, Baltic
Sea, and more than 60,000 lakes

Terrain: mostly low, flat to rolling plains interspersed with lakes
and low hills

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Baltic Sea 0 m
highest point: Haltiatunturi 1,328 m

Natural resources: timber, copper, zinc, iron ore, silver

Land use:
arable land: 8%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures : 0%
forests and woodland: 76%
other : 16% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 640 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: air pollution from manufacturing and
power plants contributing to acid rain; water pollution from
industrial wastes, agricultural chemicals; habitat loss threatens
wildlife populations

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine
Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified : Air Pollution-Sulphur 94

Geography - note: long boundary with Russia; Helsinki is northernmost
national capital on European continent; population concentrated on
small southwestern coastal plain

@Finland:People

Population: 5,137,269 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 19% (male 493,427; female 473,166)
15-64 years: 67% (male 1,729,996; female 1,694,111)
65 years and over: 14% (male 280,231; female 466,338) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.26% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 11.75 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.62 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.48 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.6 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 3.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 76.97 years
male: 73.41 years
female: 80.68 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.78 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Finn(s)
adjective: Finnish

Ethnic groups: Finn 93%, Swede 6%, Lapp 0.11%, Gypsy 0.12%, Tatar
0.02%

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran 89%, Greek Orthodox 1%, none 9%, other
1%

Languages: Finnish 93.5% (official), Swedish 6.3% (official), small
Lapp- and Russian-speaking minorities

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 100% (1980 est.)
male: NA%
female: NA%

@Finland:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Finland
conventional short form: Finland
local long form : Suomen Tasavalta
local short form: Suomi

Data code: FI

Government type: republic

National capital: Helsinki

Administrative divisions: 12 provinces (laanit, singular - laani);
Ahvenanmaa, Hame, Keski-Suomi, Kuopio, Kymi, Lappi, Mikkeli, Oulu,
Pohjois-Karjala, Turku ja Pori, Uusimaa, Vaasa

Independence: 6 December 1917 (from Russia)

National holiday: Independence Day, 6 December (1917)

Constitution: 17 July 1919

Legal system: civil law system based on Swedish law; Supreme Court may
request legislation interpreting or modifying laws; accepts compulsory
ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Martti AHTISAARI (since 1 March 1994)
head of government : Prime Minister Paavo LIPPONEN (since 13 April
1995) and Deputy Prime Minister Sauli NIINISTO (since 13 April 1995)
cabinet: Council of State or Valtioneuvosto appointed by the
president, responsible to Parliament
elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
election last held 31 January-6 February 1994 (next to be held NA
January 2000); prime minister and deputy prime minister appointed by
the president
election results: Martti AHTISAARI elected president; percent of vote
- Martti AHTISAARI 54%, Elisabeth REHN 46%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Eduskunta (200 seats;
members are elected by popular vote on a proportional basis to serve
four-year terms)
elections: last held 19 March 1995 (next to be held NA March 1999)
election results : percent of vote by party - Social Democratic Party
28.3%, Center Party 19.9%, National Coalition (Conservative) Party
17.9%, Leftist Alliance (Communist) 11.2%, Swedish People's Party
5.1%, Green League 6.5%, Ecology Party 0.3%, Rural 1.3%, Finnish
Christian League 3.0%, Liberal People's Party 0.6%, Young Finns 2.8%;
seats by party - Social Democratic Party 63, Center Party 44, National
Coalition (Conservative) Party 39, Leftist Alliance (Communist) 22,
Swedish People's Party 11, Green League 9, Ecology Party 1, Rural 1,
Finnish Christian League 7, Young Finns 2, Aaland Islands 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Korkein Oikeus, judges appointed by
the president

Political parties and leaders:
government coalition : Social Democratic Party [Paavo LIPPONEN];
National Coalition (conservative) Party [Sauli NIINISTO]; Leftist
Alliance (Communist) People's Democratic League and Democratic
Alternative [Claes ANDERSSON]; Swedish People's Party [(Johan) Ole
NORRBACK]; Green League [Pekka HAAVISTO]
other : Center Party [Esko AHO]; Finnish Christian League [Toimi
KANKAANNIEMI]; Rural Party [Raimo VISTBACKA]; Liberal People's Party
[Tuulikki UKKOLA]; Greens Ecological Party or EPV; Young Finns [Risto
PENTTILA]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Finnish Communist Party-Unity
[Yrjo HAKANEN]; Constitutional Rightist Party; Finnish Pensioners
Party; Communist Workers Party [Timo LAHDENMAKI]

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB,
Australia Group, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN, EBRD, ECE, EIB, ESA, EU,
FAO, G- 9, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NACC (observer), NAM (guest), NC, NEA, NIB, NSG,
OAS (observer), OECD, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP,
UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMOGIP, UNMOP, UNPREDEP,
UNTAES, UNTSO, UPU, WEU (observer), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO,
ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Jaakko Tapani LAAJAVA
chancery: 3301 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 298-5800
FAX: [1] (202) 298-6030
consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Derek N. SHEARER
embassy: Itainen Puistotie 14A, FIN-00140, Helsinki
mailing address: APO AE 09723
telephone: [358] (9) 171931
FAX : [358] (9) 174681

Flag description: white with a blue cross that extends to the edges of
the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side
in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

Economy

Economy - overview: Finland has a highly industrialized, largely
free-market economy, with per capita output equaling that of the UK,
France and Italy. Its key economic sector is manufacturing -
principally the wood, metals, and engineering industries. Trade is
important, with the export of goods representing about 30% of GDP.
Except for timber and several minerals, Finland depends on imports of
raw materials, energy, and some components for manufactured goods.
Because of the climate, agricultural development is limited to
maintaining self-sufficiency in basic products. Forestry, an important
export earner, provides a secondary occupation for the rural
population. The economy has come back from the recession of 1990-92,
which had been caused by economic overheating, depressed foreign
markets, and the dismantling of the barter system between Finland and
the former Soviet Union under which Soviet oil and gas had been
exchanged for Finnish manufactured goods. The Finns voted in an
October 1994 referendum to enter the EU, and Finland officially joined
the Union on 1 January 1995. Attempts to cut the unacceptably high
rate of unemployment and increasing integration with Western Europe
will dominate the economic picture over the next few years.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $97.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $19,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 7%
industry: 37%
services: 56% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 0.7% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 2.533 million
by occupation: public services 30.4%, industry 20.9%, commerce 15.0%,
finance, insurance, and business services 10.2%, agriculture and
forestry 8.6%, transport and communications 7.7%, construction 7.2%

Unemployment rate: 16.6% (1996)

Budget:
revenues: $25.9 billion
expenditures: $35 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1995
est.)

Industries: metal products, shipbuilding, pulp and paper, copper
refining, foodstuffs, chemicals, textiles, clothing

Industrial production growth rate: 7.4% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 14.14 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 60.5 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 12,373 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: cereals, sugar beets, potatoes; dairy cattle;
annual fish catch about 160,000 metric tons

Exports:
total value: $29.7 billion (f.o.b., 1994)
commodities: paper and pulp, machinery, chemicals, metals, timber
partners: EU 46.5% (Germany 13.4%, UK 10.3%), Sweden 11%, US 7.2%,
Japan 2.1%, FSU 8.6% (1994)

Imports:
total value : $23.2 billion (c.i.f., 1994)
commodities: foodstuffs, petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals,
transport equipment, iron and steel, machinery, textile yarn and
fabrics, fodder grains
partners : EU 44% (Germany 15%, UK 8.3%), Sweden 10.4%, US 7.6%, Japan
6.5%, FSU 10.3 (1994)

Debt - external: $30 billion (December 1993)

Economic aid:
donor : ODA, $355 million (1993)

Currency: 1 markka (FMk) or Finmark = 100 pennia

Exchange rates: markkaa (FMk) per US$1 - 4.7765 (January 1997), 4.5936
(1996), 4.3667 (1995), 5.2235 (1994), 5.7123 (1993), 4.4794 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Finland:Communications

Telephones: 2.5 million (1995 est.)

Telephone system: good service from cable and microwave radio relay
network
domestic: cable and microwave radio relay
international : 1 submarine cable; satellite earth stations - access
to Intelsat transmission service via a Swedish satellite earth
station, 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic and Indian Ocean Regions); note -
Finland shares the Inmarsat earth station with the other Nordic
countries (Denmark, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 105, shortwave 0

Radios: 4.98 million (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 235

Televisions: 1.92 million (1995 est.)

@Finland:Transportation

Railways:
total: 5,895 km
broad gauge: 5,895 km 1.524-m gauge (1,993 km electrified; 480 km
double- or more-track) (1995)

Highways:
total: 77,722 km
paved: 48,965 km (including 394 km of expressways)
unpaved: 28,757 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 6,675 km total (including Saimaa Canal); 3,700 km suitable
for steamers

Pipelines: natural gas 580 km

Ports and harbors: Hamina, Helsinki, Kokkola, Kotka, Loviisa, Oulu,
Pori, Rauma, Turku, Uusikaupunki, Varkaus

Merchant marine:
total : 94 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,066,918 GRT/1,091,309
DWT
ships by type: bulk 8, cargo 22, chemical tanker 5, oil tanker 12,
passenger 2, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 31,
short-sea passenger 12, vehicle carrier 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 156 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 151
over 3,047 m: 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 23
1,524 to 2,437 m: 13
914 to 1,523 m: 21
under 914 m : 91 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 5
914 to 1,523 m: 5 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Frontier Guard (includes Sea
Guard)

Military manpower - military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 1,298,576 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,068,503 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 32,985 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.9 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.6% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: minor transshipment point for Latin American cocaine
for the West European market
______________________________________________________________________

FRANCE

@France:Geography

Location: Western Europe, bordering the Bay of Biscay and English
Channel, between Belgium and Spain southeast of the UK; bordering the
Mediterranean Sea, between Italy and Spain

Geographic coordinates: 46 00 N, 2 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 547,030 sq km
land : 545,630 sq km
water: 1,400 sq km
note: includes only metropolitan France, but excludes the overseas
administrative divisions

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Colorado

Land boundaries:
total: 2,892.4 km
border countries: Andorra 60 km, Belgium 620 km, Germany 451 km, Italy
488 km, Luxembourg 73 km, Monaco 4.4 km, Spain 623 km, Switzerland 573
km

Coastline: 3,427 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 24 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm (does not apply to the Mediterranean)
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: generally cool winters and mild summers, but mild winters and
hot summers along the Mediterranean

Terrain: mostly flat plains or gently rolling hills in north and west;
remainder is mountainous, especially Pyrenees in south, Alps in east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Rhone River delta -2 m
highest point: Mont Blanc 4,807 m

Natural resources: coal, iron ore, bauxite, fish, timber, zinc, potash

Land use:
arable land: 33%
permanent crops: 2%
permanent pastures : 20%
forests and woodland: 27%
other : 18% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 16,300 sq km (1995 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding

Environment - current issues: some forest damage from acid rain; air
pollution from industrial and vehicle emissions; water pollution from
urban wastes, agricultural runoff

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic
Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation,
Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Desertification

Geography - note: largest West European nation; occasional strong,
cold, dry, north-to-northwesterly wind known as mistral

@France:People

Population: 58,609,285 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 19% (male 5,712,739; female 5,449,139)
15-64 years : 65% (male 19,178,683; female 19,126,672)
65 years and over: 16% (male 3,687,216; female 5,454,836) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.35% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 11.98 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.08 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.63 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.68 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.38 years
male: 74.44 years
female: 82.53 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.66 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Frenchman(men), Frenchwoman(women)
adjective: French

Ethnic groups: Celtic and Latin with Teutonic, Slavic, North African,
Indochinese, Basque minorities

Religions: Roman Catholic 90%, Protestant 2%, Jewish 1%, Muslim (North
African workers) 1%, unaffiliated 6%

Languages: French 100%, rapidly declining regional dialects and
languages (Provencal, Breton, Alsatian, Corsican, Catalan, Basque,
Flemish)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99%
male: 99%
female: 99% (1980 est.)

@France:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: French Republic
conventional short form: France
local long form : Republique Francaise
local short form: France

Data code: FR

Government type: republic

National capital: Paris

Administrative divisions: 22 regions (regions, singular - region);
Alsace, Aquitaine, Auvergne, Basse-Normandie, Bourgogne, Bretagne,
Centre, Champagne-Ardenne, Corse, Franche-Comte, Haute-Normandie,
Ile-de-France, Languedoc-Roussillon, Limousin, Lorraine,
Midi-Pyrenees, Nord-Pas-de-Calais, Pays de la Loire, Picardie,
Poitou-Charentes, Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur, Rhone-Alpes
note: metropolitan France is divided into 22 regions (including the
"territorial collectivity" of Corse or Corsica) and is subdivided into
96 departments; see separate entries for the overseas departments
(French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Reunion) and the overseas
territorial collectivities (Mayotte, Saint Pierre and Miquelon)

Dependent areas: Bassas da India, Clipperton Island, Europa Island,
French Polynesia, French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Glorioso
Islands, Juan de Nova Island, New Caledonia, Tromelin Island, Wallis
and Futuna
note: the US does not recognize claims to Antarctica

Independence: 486 (unified by Clovis)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958, amended concerning election of
president in 1962, amended to comply with provisions of EC Maastricht
Treaty in 1992; amended to tighten immigration laws 1993

Legal system: civil law system with indigenous concepts; review of
administrative but not legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May 1995)
head of government: Prime Minister Lionel JOSPIN (since 3 June 1997)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
suggestion of the prime minister
elections: president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
election last held 23 April and 7 May 1995 (next to be held by May
2002); prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Jacques CHIRAC elected president; percent of vote,
second ballot - Jacques CHIRAC 52.64%, Lionel JOSPIN 47.36%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Parlement consists of the
Senate or Senat (321 seats - 296 for metropolitan France, 13 for
overseas departments and territories, and 12 for French nationals
abroad; members are indirectly elected by an electoral college to
serve nine-year terms; elected by thirds every three years) and the
National Assembly or Assemblee Nationale (577 seats; members are
elected under a single-member majoritarian system to serve five-year
terms)
elections: Senate - last held 24 September 1995 (next to be held
September 1998); National Assembly - last held 25 May-1 June 1997
(next to be held NA May 2002)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - RPR 94, UDF 127, PS 75, PCF 15, other 10; National Assembly -
percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PS 245, RPR 140, UDF
109, PCF 37, PRS 13, Ecologists 8, MDC 7, LDI-MPF 1, FN 1, various
left 9, various right 7

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Appeals or Cour de Cassation, judges
are appointed by the president from nominations of the High Council of
the Judiciary

Political parties and leaders: Rally for the Republic or RPR [Alain
JUPPE, president]; Union for French Democracy or UDF (coalition of PR,
FD, RAD, PPDF) [Francois LEOTARD]; Republican Party or PR [Francois
LEOTARD]; Democratic Force or FD [Francois BAYROU]; Socialist Party or
PS [Lionel JOSPIN]; Radical Party or RRRS [Andre ROSSINOT, Aymeri de
MONTESQUIEU]; Communist Party or PCF [Robert HUE]; National Front or
FN [Jean-Marie LE PEN]; The Greens [Dominique VOYNET]; Generation
Ecology or GE [Brice LALONDE]; Citizens Movement or MDC [Jean Pierre
CHEVENEMENT]; National Center of Independents and Peasants or CNIP
[Jean-Antoine GIANSILY]; Radical Socialist Party or PRS; Movement for
France or LDI-MPF

Political pressure groups and leaders: Communist-controlled labor
union (Confederation Generale du Travail) or CGT, nearly 2.4 million
members (claimed); Socialist-leaning labor union (Confederation
Francaise Democratique du Travail) or CFDT, about 800,000 members
(est.); independent labor union or Force Ouvriere, 1 million members
(est.); independent white-collar union or Confederation Generale des
Cadres, 340,000 members (claimed); National Council of French
Employers (Conseil National du Patronat Francais) or CNPF or Patronat

International organization participation: ACCT, AfDB, AG (observer),
AsDB, Australia Group, BDEAC, BIS, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE, CERN,
EBRD, ECA (associate), ECE, ECLAC, EIB, ESA, ESCAP, EU, FAO, FZ, G- 5,
G- 7, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MTCR, NACC, NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer),
OECD, OSCE, PCA, SPC, UN, UN Security Council, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMIH, UNOMIG,
UNRWA, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WEU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Francois V. BUJON DE L'ESTANG
chancery: 4101 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone: [1] (202) 944-6000
FAX : [1] (202) 944-6166
consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Honolulu, Houston, Los
Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, San Francisco, and San Juan
(Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Pamela C. HARRIMAN (died in office 2
February 1997)
embassy: 2 Avenue Gabriel, 75382 Paris Cedex 08
mailing address: PSC 116, APO AE 09777
telephone: [33] (1) 43-12-22-22
FAX : [33] (1) 42 66 97 83
consulate(s) general: Marseille, Strasbourg

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side),
white, and red; known as the French Tricouleur (Tricolor); the design
and colors are similar to a number of other flags, including those of
Belgium, Chad, Ireland, Cote d'Ivoire, and Luxembourg; the official
flag for all French dependent areas

Economy

Economy - overview: One of the four West European trillion-dollar
economies, the French economy features considerable state control over
its capitalistic market system. In running important industrial
segments (railways, airlines, electricity, telecommunications),
administering an exceptionally generous social welfare system, and
staffing an enormous bureaucracy, the state spends about 55% of GDP.
France has substantial agricultural resources and a diversified modern
industrial sector. Large tracts of fertile land, the application of
modern technology, and subsidies have combined to make it the leading
agricultural producer in Western Europe. Largely self-sufficient in
agricultural products, France is a major exporter of wheat and dairy
products. The industrial sector generates about one-quarter of GDP,
and the growing services sector has become crucial to the economy.
Following stagnation and recession in 1991-93, French GDP expanded
2.4% in 1994 and in 1995 but at only 1.3% in 1996. Persistently high
unemployment still poses a major problem for the government, as will
the need to cut back on government spending to keep the economy
internationally competitive and enable France to qualify for European
Economic and Monetary Union, slated to introduce a common European
currency in January 1999. The government also has laid plans to sell
off much of its stake in the telecommunications and defense industries
in 1997 as part of its bid to make domestic companies more competitive
with foreign rivals. However, the socialist victory at the polls in
June 1997 casts doubt on France's future policy toward economic union
and privatization of domestic economic activity.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.22 trillion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $20,900 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 2.4%
industry: 26.5%
services: 71.1% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.7% (1996)

Labor force:
total : 25.5 million
by occupation: services 69%, industry 26%, agriculture 5% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 12.7% (1966)

Budget:
revenues: $250 billion
expenditures: $300 billion, including capital expenditures of $34
billion (1996 est.)

Industries: steel, machinery, chemicals, automobiles, metallurgy,
aircraft, electronics, mining, textiles, food processing, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 0.6% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 102.94 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 492.7 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 6,278 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, cereals, sugar beets, potatoes, wine
grapes; beef, dairy products; fish catch of 850,000 metric tons ranks
among world's top 20 countries and is all used domestically

Exports:
total value: $275 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: machinery and transportation equipment, chemicals,
foodstuffs, agricultural products, iron and steel products, textiles
and clothing
partners: Germany 17%, Italy 9%, UK 9%, Spain 8%, Belgium-Luxembourg
8%, US 6%, Netherlands 4.5%, Japan 2%, Russia 0.7% (1996)

Imports:
total value: $255.5 billion f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: crude oil, machinery and equipment, agricultural
products, chemicals, iron and steel products
partners: Germany 17%, Italy 10%, US 8%, Belgium-Luxembourg 8%, UK 8%,
Spain 7%, Netherlands 5%, Japan 3%, Russia 1.5% (1996)

Debt - external: $117.6 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
donor : ODA, $7.915 billion (1993)

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.4169 (January 1997),
5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520 (1994), 5.6632 (1993), 5.2938
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@France:Communications

Telephones: 35 million (1987 est.)

Telephone system: highly developed
domestic: extensive cable and microwave radio relay; extensive
introduction of fiber-optic cable; domestic satellite system
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (with total of 5
antennas - 2 for Indian Ocean and 3 for Atlantic Ocean), NA Eutelsat,
1 Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean Region); HF radiotelephone communications
with more than 20 countries

Radio broadcast stations: AM 41, FM 800 (mostly repeaters), shortwave
0

Radios: 49 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 846 (mostly repeaters)
note: Eutelsat receive-only TV service

Televisions: 29.3 million (1993 est.)

@France:Transportation

Railways:
total: 34,123 km
standard gauge: 33,524 km 1.435-m gauge; 32,275 km are operated by
French National Railways (SNCF); 13,741 km of SNCF routes are
electrified and 12,132 km are double- or multiple-tracked
narrow gauge : 599 km 1.000-m gauge
note: does not include 33 tourist railroads, totaling 469 km, many
being of very narrow gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 1,512,700 km
paved : 812,700 km (including 9,140 km of expressways)
unpaved: 700,000 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 14,932 km; 6,969 km heavily traveled

Pipelines: crude oil 3,059 km; petroleum products 4,487 km; natural
gas 24,746 km

Ports and harbors: Bordeaux, Boulogne, Cherbourg, Dijon, Dunkerque, La
Pallice, Le Havre, Lyon, Marseille, Mullhouse, Nantes, Paris, Rouen,
Saint Nazaire, Saint Malo, Strasbourg

Merchant marine:
total: 52 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,038,151 GRT/1,441,498
DWT
ships by type: bulk 5, cargo 3, chemical tanker 4, combination bulk 1,
container 7, liquefied gas tanker 3, multi-function large load carrier
1, oil tanker 13, passenger 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 5, short-sea
passenger 7, specialized tanker 1
note: France also maintains a captive register for French-owned ships
in the Kerguelen Islands (French Southern and Antarctic Lands) (1996
est.)

Airports: 460 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 382
over 3,047 m: 13
2,438 to 3,047 m: 26
1,524 to 2,437 m: 91
914 to 1,523 m : 73
under 914 m: 179 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 78
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m : 75 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 3 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army (includes Marines), Navy (includes Naval Air),
Air Force (includes Air Defense, National Gendarmerie

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 14,800,821 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 12,315,337 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 394,362 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $47.7 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.5% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Madagascar claims Bassas da India, Europa
Island, Glorioso Islands, Juan de Nova Island, and Tromelin Island;
Comoros claims Mayotte; Mauritius claims Tromelin Island; Seychelles
claims Tromelin Island; Suriname claims part of French Guiana;
territorial claim in Antarctica (Adelie Land); Saint Pierre and
Miquelon is focus of maritime boundary dispute between Canada and
France; in 1992 an arbitration panel awarded the islands an exclusive
economic zone area of 12,348 sq km to settle the dispute; claims
Matthew and Hunter Islands east of New Caledonia

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for and consumer of South American
cocaine and Southwest Asian heroin
______________________________________________________________________

FRENCH GUIANA

(overseas department of France)

@French Guiana:Geography

Location: Northern South America, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
between Brazil and Suriname

Geographic coordinates: 4 00 N, 53 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total: 91,000 sq km
land: 89,150 sq km
water: 1,850 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Indiana

Land boundaries:
total: 1,183 km
border countries : Brazil 673 km, Suriname 510 km

Coastline: 378 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: low-lying coastal plains rising to hills and small mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Bellevue de l'Inini 851 m

Natural resources: bauxite, timber, gold (widely scattered), cinnabar,
kaolin, fish

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 83%
other : 17% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: high frequency of heavy showers and severe
thunderstorms; flooding

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: mostly an unsettled wilderness

@French Guiana:People

Population: 156,946 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 32% (male 25,267; female 24,146)
15-64 years: 63% (male 54,051; female 45,489)
65 years and over: 5% (male 4,014; female 3,979) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.62% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 24.19 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.56 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 16.57 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.19 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 1.01 male(s)/female
total population: 1.13 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 14 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 76.06 years
male: 72.84 years
female : 79.45 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.38 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: French Guianese (singular and plural)
adjective: French Guianese

Ethnic groups: black or mulatto 66%, white 12%, East Indian, Chinese,
Amerindian 12%, other 10%

Religions: Roman Catholic

Languages: French

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 83%
male: 84%
female: 82% (1982 est.)

@French Guiana:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Department of Guiana
conventional short form: French Guiana
local long form: none
local short form : Guyane

Data code: FG

Dependency status: overseas department of France

Government type: NA

National capital: Cayenne

Administrative divisions: none (overseas department of France)

Independence: none (overseas department of France)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French legal system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President of France Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May
1995), represented by Prefect Pierre DARTOUT (since NA)
head of government: President of the General Council Stephan PHINERA
(since NA March 1994)
cabinet : NA
elections: representative of the French Government appointed by the
president of France on the advice of the French Ministry of Interior;
presidents of the General and Regional Councils are appointed by the
members of those councils, who vote on party lines

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council or Conseil General (19
seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms)
and a unicameral Regional Council or Conseil Regional (31 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms)
elections: General Council - last held NA March 1994 (next to be held
NA 2000); Regional Council - last held 22 March 1992 (next to be held
NA 1998)
election results: General Council - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - PSG 8, FDP 4, RPR 1, other left 2, other right 2,
other 2; Regional Council - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - PSG 16, FDG 10, RPR 2, independents 3
note: one seat was elected to the French Senate on 24 September 1989
(next to be held NA September 1998); results - percent of vote by
party - NA; seats by party - FDG 1; 2 seats were elected to the French
National Assembly on 21 and 28 March 1993 (next to be held 25 May-1
June 1997 - special election); results - percent of vote by party -
NA; seats by party - RPR 1, independent (left) 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeals or Cour d'Appel (highest local court
based in Martinique with jurisdiction over Martinique, Guadeloupe, and
French Guiana)

Political parties and leaders: Guianese Socialist Party or PSG [Leone
MICHOTTE]; Socialist Party or PS [Jean BART] (may be a subset of PSG);
Nationalist Popular Party of Guyana (Parti Nationaliste Populaire
Guiana) or PNPG [Jose DORCY]; Union of Social Democrats (Union des
Socialistes Democates) or USD [Leon BERTRAND] (umbrella group of RPR
and UDF); Rally for the Republic or RPR [Leon BERTRAND]; Union for
French Democracy or UDF [R. CHOW-CHINE]; Guyana Democratic Front or
FDG [Georges OTHILY]; Walwari Committee [Christine TAUBIRA-DELANON];
Action Democrate Guiana or ADG [Andre LECANTE]; Forces de Progres or
FDP

International organization participation: FZ, WCL, WFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas department of
France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas department of
France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is tied closely to that of France
through subsidies and imports. Besides the French space center at
Kourou, fishing and forestry are the most important economic
activities, with exports of fish and fish products (mostly shrimp)
accounting for more than 60% of total revenue in 1992. The large
reserves of tropical hardwoods, not fully exploited, support an
expanding sawmill industry that provides sawn logs for export.
Cultivation of crops is limited to the coastal area, where the
population is largely concentrated. French Guiana is heavily dependent
on imports of food and energy. Unemployment is a serious problem,
particularly among younger workers.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $800 million (1993 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,000 (1993 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.5% (1992)

Labor force:
total: 46,300 (1993)
by occupation: services, government, and commerce 60.6%, industry
21.2%, agriculture 18.2% (1980)

Unemployment rate: 24.1% (1993 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $180 million
expenditures: $350 million, including capital expenditures of $95
million (1994)

Industries: construction, shrimp processing, forestry products, rum,
gold mining

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 228,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 185 million kWh (1993 est.)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: rice, corn, manioc, cocoa, vegetables,
bananas, sugar; cattle, pigs, poultry

Exports:
total value: $80 million (f.o.b., 1994)
commodities: shrimp, timber, rum, rosewood essence
partners: France 52%, Spain 15%, US 5% (1992)

Imports:
total value: $610 million (c.i.f., 1994)
commodities : food (grains, processed meat), other consumer goods,
producer goods, petroleum
partners: France 77%, Germany 11%, US 5% (1992)

Debt - external: $1.2 billion (1988)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.4169 (January 1997),
5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520 (1994), 5.6632 (1993), 5.2938
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@French Guiana:Communications

Telephones: 31,000 (1990 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: fair open wire and microwave radio relay system
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 7, shortwave 0

Radios: 79,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 9

Televisions: 22,000 (1992 est.)

@French Guiana:Transportation

Railways: 0 km (1995)

Highways:
total: 1,817 km (national 432 km, departmental 385 km, community 1,000
km)
paved: 727 km
unpaved: 1,090 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 460 km, navigable by small oceangoing vessels and river and
coastal steamers; 3,300 km navigable by native craft

Ports and harbors: Cayenne, Degrad des Cannes, Saint-Laurent du Maroni

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 10 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 7
over 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: French Forces, Gendarmerie

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 44,799 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 29,033 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Suriname claims area between Riviere Litani
and Riviere Marouini (both headwaters of the Lawa)

Illicit drugs: small amount of marijuana grown for local consumption;
minor transshipment point to Europe
______________________________________________________________________

FRENCH POLYNESIA

(overseas territory of France)

@French Polynesia:Geography

Location: Oceania, archipelago in the South Pacific Ocean, about
one-half of the way from South America to Australia

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 S, 140 00 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 4,167 sq km (118 islands and atolls)
land: 3,660 sq km
water: 507 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than one-third the size of
Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 2,525 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, but moderate

Terrain: mixture of rugged high islands and low islands with reefs

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Orohena 2,241 m

Natural resources: timber, fish, cobalt

Land use:
arable land: 1%
permanent crops: 6%
permanent pastures : 5%
forests and woodland: 31%
other: 57% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: occasional cyclonic storms in January

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: includes five archipelagoes; Makatea in French
Polynesia is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the
Pacific Ocean - the others are Banaba (Ocean Island) in Kiribati and
Nauru

@French Polynesia:People

Population: 233,488 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 34% (male 39,958; female 38,492)
15-64 years : 62% (male 75,450; female 69,441)
65 years and over: 4% (male 5,063; female 5,084) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.89% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.27 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.95 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.59 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.09 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1 male(s)/female
total population: 1.07 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 13.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 72.17 years
male: 69.81 years
female : 74.65 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.77 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : French Polynesian(s)
adjective: French Polynesian

Ethnic groups: Polynesian 78%, Chinese 12%, local French 6%,
metropolitan French 4%

Religions: Protestant 54%, Roman Catholic 30%, other 16%

Languages: French (official), Tahitian (official)

Literacy:
definition: age 14 and over can read and write, but definition of
literacy not available
total population: 98%
male : 98%
female: 98% (1977 est.)

@French Polynesia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Territory of French Polynesia
conventional short form : French Polynesia
local long form: Territoire de la Polynesie Francaise
local short form: Polynesie Francaise

Data code: FP

Dependency status: overseas territory of France since 1946

Government type: NA

National capital: Papeete

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of France); there
are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
Government, but there are 5 archipelagic divisions named Archipel des
Marquises, Archipel des Tuamotu, Archipel des Tubuai, Iles du Vent,
and Iles Sous-le-Vent
note: Clipperton Island is administered by France from French
Polynesia

Independence: none (overseas territory of France)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: based on French system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President of France Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May
1995), represented by High Commissioner of the Republic Dominique BUR
(since NA)
head of government: President of the Territorial Government of French
Polynesia Gaston FLOSSE (since 4 April 1991); President of the
Territorial Assembly Tinomana EBB (since NA)
cabinet: Council of Ministers; president submits a list of members of
the Territorial Assembly for approval by them to serve as ministers
elections: high commissioner appointed by the president of France on
the advice of the French Ministry of Interior; president of the
Territorial Government and the president of the Territorial Assembly
are elected by the members of the assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral Territorial Assembly or Assemblee
Territoriale (41 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms)
elections: last held 12 May 1996 (next to be held NA March 2001)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
People's Rally for the Republic (Gaullist) 22, Polynesian Liberation
Front 10, New Fatherland Party 5, other 4
note : one seat was elected to the French Senate on 24 September 1989
(next to be held NA September 1998); results - percent of vote by
party - NA; seats by party - NA; two seats were elected to the French
National Assembly on 21 and 28 March 1993 (next to be held 25 May-1
June 1997 - special election); results - percent of vote by party -
NA; seats by party - People's Rally for the Republic (Gaullist) 2

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel; Court of the First
Instance or Tribunal de Premiere Instance; Court of Administrative Law
or Tribunal Administratif

Political parties and leaders: People's Rally for the Republic
(Tahoeraa Huiraatira) [Gaston FLOSSE]; Polynesian Union Party
(includes Te Tiarama and Here Ai'a Party) [Jean JUVENTIN]; Polynesian
Liberation Front (Tavini Huiraatira) [Oscar TEMARU]; New Fatherland
Party (Ai'a Api) [Emile VERNAUDON]; Independent Party (Ia Mana Te
Nunaa) [Jacques DROLLET]; Te Aratia Ote Nunaa [Tinomana EBB]; Haere i
Mua [Alexandre LEONTIEFF]; other small parties

International organization participation: ESCAP (associate), FZ,
ICFTU, SPC, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory of
France)

Flag description: two narrow red horizontal bands encase a wide white
band; centered on the white band is a disk with blue and white wave
pattern on the lower half and gold and white ray pattern on the upper
half; a stylized red, blue and white ship rides on the wave pattern;
the French flag is used for official occasions

Economy

Economy - overview: Since 1962, when France stationed military
personnel in the region, French Polynesia has changed from a
subsistence economy to one in which a high proportion of the work
force is either employed by the military or supports the tourist
industry. Tourism accounts for about 20% of GDP and is a primary
source of hard currency earnings. The territory will continue to
benefit from a five-year (1994-98) development agreement with France
aimed principally at creating new jobs.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.76 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $8,000 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 4%
industry: 18%
services: 78% (1992 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.5% (1994)

Labor force:
total: 118,744 (of which 70,044 are employed) (1988)
by occupation : agriculture 13%, industry 19%, services 68% (1992
est.)

Unemployment rate: 15% (1992 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $713 million
expenditures : $1.36 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1994)

Industries: tourism, pearls, agricultural processing, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: 320 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,409 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coconuts, vanilla, vegetables, fruits;
poultry, beef, dairy products

Exports:
total value: $245 million (f.o.b., 1994)
commodities : cultured pearls 53.8%, coconut products,
mother-of-pearl, vanilla, shark meat (1992)
partners: France 33%, US 8.5% (1994)

Imports:
total value: $967 million (c.i.f., 1994)
commodities : fuels, foodstuffs, equipment
partners: France 44.7%, US 13.9% (1994)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 CFP franc (CFPF) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique francs (CFPF) per US$1
- 98.48 (January 1997), 93.00 (1996), 90.75 (1995), 100.94 (1994),
102.96 (1993), 96.24 (1992); note - linked at the rate of 18.18 to the
French franc

Fiscal year: calendar year

@French Polynesia:Communications

Telephones: 33,200 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 116,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 6

Televisions: 35,000 (1992 est.)

@French Polynesia:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 792 km
paved: 792 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Mataura, Papeete, Rikitea, Uturoa

Merchant marine:
total : 4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 32,127 GRT/53,710 DWT
ships by type: chemical tanker 1, passenger-cargo 2, refrigerated
cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 41 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 35
over 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
914 to 1,523 m: 13
under 914 m: 15 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 6
914 to 1,523 m : 6 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: French Forces (includes Army, Navy, Air Force),
Gendarmerie

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

FRENCH SOUTHERN AND ANTARCTIC LANDS
and Antarctic Lands]

(overseas territory of France)

@French Southern and Antarctic Lands:Geography

Location: South of Africa, islands in the southern Indian Ocean, about
equidistant between Africa, Antarctica, and Australia; note - French
Southern and Antarctic Lands includes Ile Amsterdam, Ile Saint-Paul,
Iles Crozet, and Iles Kerguelen in the southern Indian Ocean, along
with the French-claimed sector of Antarctica, "Adelie Land"; the US
does not recognize the French claim to "Adelie Land"

Geographic coordinates: 43 00 S, 67 00 E

Map references: Antarctic Region

Area:
total: 7,781 sq km
land: 7,781 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Ile Amsterdam, Ile Saint-Paul, Iles Crozet and Iles
Kerguelen; excludes "Adelie Land" claim of about 500,000 sq km in
Antarctica that is not recognized by the US

Area - comparative: slightly less than 1.3 times the size of Delaware

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,232 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm from Iles Kerguelen only
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: antarctic

Terrain: volcanic

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mont Ross on Kerguelen 1,850 m

Natural resources: fish, crayfish

Land use:
arable land : 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: Ile Amsterdam and Ile Saint-Paul are extinct
volcanoes

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: remote location in the southern Indian Ocean

@French Southern and Antarctic Lands:People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants
note: there were 134 (1996) mostly researchers whose numbers vary from
winter (July) to summer (January)

@French Southern and Antarctic Lands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Territory of the French Southern and Antarctic
Lands
conventional short form: French Southern and Antarctic Lands
local long form: Territoire des Terres Australes et Antarctiques
Francaises
local short form : Terres Australes et Antarctiques Francaises

Data code: FS

Dependency status: overseas territory of France since 1955;
administered by a high commissioner of the Republic

National capital: none; administered from Paris, France

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of France); there
are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
Government, but there are 3 districts named Ile Crozet, Iles
Kerguelen, and Iles Saint-Paul et Amsterdam; excludes "Adelie Land"
claim in Antarctica that is not recognized by the US

Independence: none (overseas territory of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used

Economy

Economy - overview: Economic activity is limited to servicing
meteorological and geophysical research stations and French and other
fishing fleets. The fish catches landed on Iles Kerguelen by foreign
ships are exported to France and Reunion.

Budget:
revenues: $24.5 million
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA (1996)

@French Southern and Antarctic Lands:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international : NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

@French Southern and Antarctic Lands:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Merchant marine:
total: 73 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,535,552 GRT/4,382,987
DWT
ships by type: bulk 4, cargo 7, chemical tanker 7, container 11,
liquefied gas tanker 5, multifunction large-load carrier 1, oil tanker
22, refrigerated cargo 4, roll-on/roll-off cargo 11, specialized
tanker 1
note: a subset of the French register allowing French-owned ships to
operate under more liberal taxation and manning regulations than
permissible under the main French register (1996 est.)

Airports: none

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: "Adelie Land" claim in Antarctica is not
recognized by the US
______________________________________________________________________

GABON

@Gabon:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the Atlantic Ocean at the Equator,
between Republic of the Congo and Equatorial Guinea

Geographic coordinates: 1 00 S, 11 45 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 267,670 sq km
land: 257,670 sq km
water: 10,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Colorado

Land boundaries:
total: 2,551 km
border countries: Cameroon 298 km, Republic of the Congo 1,903 km,
Equatorial Guinea 350 km

Coastline: 885 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; always hot, humid

Terrain: narrow coastal plain; hilly interior; savanna in east and
south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mont Iboundji 1,575 m

Natural resources: petroleum, manganese, uranium, gold, timber, iron
ore

Land use:
arable land: 1%
permanent crops : 1%
permanent pastures: 18%
forests and woodland: 77%
other: 3% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 40 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: deforestation; poaching

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Desertification, Endangered Species, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea

@Gabon:People

Population: 1,190,159 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 34% (male 199,730; female 199,369)
15-64 years: 61% (male 368,086; female 359,086)
65 years and over : 5% (male 31,475; female 32,413) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.47% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 28.11 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 13.39 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.97 male(s)/female
total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 87.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 56.05 years
male: 53.13 years
female : 50.06 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.85 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Gabonese (singular and plural)
adjective: Gabonese

Ethnic groups: Bantu tribes including four major tribal groupings
(Fang, Eshira, Bapounou, Bateke), other Africans and Europeans
154,000, including 6,000 French and 11,000 persons of dual nationality

Religions: Christian 55%-75%, Muslim less than 1%, animist

Languages: French (official), Fang, Myene, Bateke, Bapounou/Eschira,
Bandjabi

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 63.2%
male: 73.7%
female : 53.3% (1995 est.)

@Gabon:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Gabonese Republic
conventional short form: Gabon
local long form: Republique Gabonaise
local short form: Gabon

Data code: GB

Government type: republic; multiparty presidential regime (opposition
parties legalized 1990)

National capital: Libreville

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces; Estuaire, Haut-Ogooue,
Moyen-Ogooue, Ngounie, Nyanga, Ogooue-Ivindo, Ogooue-Lolo,
Ogooue-Maritime, Woleu-Ntem

Independence: 17 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 17 August (1960) (Gabon granted
full independence from France)

Constitution: adopted 14 March 1991

Legal system: based on French civil law system and customary law;
judicial review of legislative acts in Constitutional Chamber of the
Supreme Court; compulsory ICJ jurisdiction not accepted

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President El Hadj Omar BONGO (since 2 December 1967)
head of government : Prime Minister Paulin OBAME Nguema (since 9
December 1994)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister in
consultation with the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 5 December 1993 (next to be held NA 1998); prime
minister appointed by the president
election results: President Omar BONGO reelected; percent of vote -
Omar BONGO 51%

Legislative branch: bicameral legislature consists of a Senate (91
seats) and a National Assembly or Assemblee Nationale (120 seats);
members are elected by direct popular vote to serve five-year terms
elections : National Assembly - last held in December 1996 (next to be
held in December 2001); Senate - last held 12 January 1997 (next to be
held in January 2002)
election results: National Assembly - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - PDG 100, Morena-Bucherons/RNB 8, PUP 3, CLR 3, FAR 1,
UPG 1, USG 2, PGP 2; Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - PDG 51, RNB 17, PGP 4, ADERA 3, RDP 1, others 15
note: the provision of the constitution for the establishment of a
senate was implemented in the 12 January 1997 elections

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Cour Supreme consisting of three
chambers - Judicial, Administrative, and Accounts; Constitutional
Court; Courts of Appeal (2); Court of State Security; County Courts

Political parties and leaders: Action Forum for Renewal or FAR [Leon
MBOU-YEMBI, secretary general]; Circle of Liberal Reformers or CLR
[General Jean Boniface ASSELE]; Gabonese Democratic Party or PDG,
former sole party [Simplice Guedet MANZELA, secretary general];
Gabonese Party for Progress or PGP [Pierre-Louis AGONDJO-OKAWE,
president]; Gabonese People's Union or UPG [Pierre MAMBOUNDOU];
Gabonese Socialist Union or USG [Dr. Serge Mba BEKALE]; National
Recovery Movement - Lumberjacks or Morena-Bucherons/RNB [Fr. Paul
M'BA-ABESSOLE]; People's Unity Party or PUP [Louis Gaston MAYILA];
ADERA

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC, CCC,
CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IDB,
IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM,
OAU, OIC, UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Paul BOUNDOUKOU-LATHA
chancery: Suite 200, 2034 20th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone : [1] (202) 797-1000
FAX: [1] (202) 332-0668
consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Elizabeth RASPOLIC
embassy: Boulevard de la Mer, Libreville
mailing address : B. P. 4000, Libreville
telephone: [241] 76 20 03 through 76 20 04, 74 34 92
FAX: [241] 74 55 07

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top), yellow,
and blue

Economy

Economy - overview: Notwithstanding its serious ongoing economic
problems, Gabon enjoys a per capita income three times that of most
nations of sub-Saharan Africa. Gabon depended on timber and manganese
until oil was discovered offshore in the early 1970s. The oil sector
now accounts for 50% of GDP. Real GDP growth has been feeble since
1991 and Gabon continues to face fluctuating prices for its oil,
timber, manganese, and uranium exports. Despite an abundance of
natural wealth and a manageable rate of population growth, the economy
is hobbled by poor fiscal management. In 1992, the fiscal deficit
widened to 2.4% of GDP, and Gabon failed to settle arrears on its
bilateral debt, leading to a cancellation of rescheduling agreements
with official and private creditors. Devaluation of its Francophone
currency by 50% on 12 January 1994 sparked a one-time inflationary
surge, to 35%; the rate dropped to 6% in 1996. The IMF provided a
one-year standby arrangement in 1994-95 and a three-year Enhanced
Financing Facility (EFF) at near commercial rates beginning in late
1995. Those agreements mandate progress in privatization and fiscal
discipline. France provided additional financial support in January
1997 after Gabon had met IMF targets for mid-1996.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $6.3 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 8.2%
industry: 44.7%
services: 47.1% (1993 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 6.2% (1996 est.)

Labor force: NA
by occupation: agriculture 65%, industry and commerce, services

Unemployment rate: 10%-14% (1993 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $1.3 billion
expenditures: $1.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $311
million (1993 est.)

Industries: food and beverage; textile; lumbering and plywood; cement;
petroleum extraction and refining; manganese, uranium, and gold
mining; chemicals; ship repair

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 301,000 kW (1992)

Electricity - production: 930 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 744 kWh (1994 est.)

Agriculture - products: cocoa, coffee, sugar, palm oil; rubber; okoume
(a tropical softwood); cattle; small fishing operations (provide a
catch of about 30,000 metric tons)

Exports:
total value: $2.7 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: crude oil 78%, timber 14%, manganese 4%, uranium
partners: US 59%, France 12%, Japan 4%, China 5%, Spain, Germany

Imports:
total value: $700 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, chemicals, petroleum
products, construction materials
partners : France 39%, Cote d'Ivoire 13%, US 6%, Netherlands 5%, Japan

Debt - external: $3.9 billion (1996 )

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note: beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF
100 per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since
1948

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Gabon:Communications

Telephones: 22,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: adequate system of cable, microwave radio relay,
tropospheric scatter, radiotelephone communication stations, and a
domestic satellite system with 12 earth stations
international: satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: 250,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (repeaters 5)

Televisions: 40,000 (1993 est.)

@Gabon:Transportation

Railways:
total: 649 km Gabon State Railways (OCTRA)
standard gauge: 649 km 1.435-m gauge; single track (1994)

Highways:
total : 7,633 km
paved: 626 km (including 23 km of expressways)
unpaved: 7,007 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,600 km perennially navigable

Pipelines: crude oil 270 km; petroleum products 14 km

Ports and harbors: Cape Lopez, Kango, Lambarene, Libreville, Mayumba,
Owendo, Port-Gentil

Merchant marine:
total: 3 bulk (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 37,003 GRT/60,663 DWT (1996
est.)

Airports: 54 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 31
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 21 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 23
1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
914 to 1,523 m: 13 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Republican Guard (charged
with protecting the president and other senior officials), National
Gendarmerie, National Police

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 275,520 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 140,777 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 11,293 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $154 million (1993)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.4% (1993)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: maritime boundary dispute with Equatorial
Guinea because of disputed sovereignty over islands in Corisco Bay
______________________________________________________________________

THE GAMBIA

@The Gambia:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean and
Senegal

Geographic coordinates: 13 28 N, 16 34 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 11,300 sq km
land : 10,000 sq km
water: 1,300 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Delaware

Land boundaries:
total: 740 km
border countries: Senegal 740 km

Coastline: 80 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 18 nm
continental shelf : not specified
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, rainy season (June to November); cooler, dry
season (November to May)

Terrain: flood plain of the Gambia River flanked by some low hills

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 53 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
arable land: 18%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 9%
forests and woodland: 28%
other: 45% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 150 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: rainfall has dropped by 30% in the last 30 years

Environment - current issues: deforestation; desertification;
water-borne diseases prevalent

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Ship Pollution, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: almost an enclave of Senegal; smallest country on
the continent of Africa

@The Gambia:People

Population: 1,248,085 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 46% (male 286,422; female 285,379)
15-64 years: 51% (male 318,699; female 324,264)
65 years and over: 3% (male 17,723; female 15,598) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.48% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 43.86 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 13.29 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 4.23 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.14 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 78.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 53.43 years
male : 51.16 years
female: 55.76 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.98 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Gambian(s)
adjective: Gambian

Ethnic groups: African 99% (Mandinka 42%, Fula 18%, Wolof 16%, Jola
10%, Serahuli 9%, other 4%), non-Gambian 1%

Religions: Muslim 90%, Christian 9%, indigenous beliefs 1%

Languages: English (official), Mandinka, Wolof, Fula, other indigenous
vernaculars

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 38.6%
male : 52.8%
female: 24.9% (1995 est.)

@The Gambia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of The Gambia
conventional short form : The Gambia

Data code: GA

Government type: republic under multiparty democratic rule

National capital: Banjul

Administrative divisions: 5 divisions and 1 city*; Banjul*, Lower
River, MacCarthy Island, North Bank, Upper River, Western

Independence: 18 February 1965 (from UK); note - The Gambia and
Senegal signed an agreement on 12 December 1981 that called for the
creation of a loose confederation to be known as Senegambia, but the
agreement was dissolved on 30 September 1989

National holiday: Independence Day, 18 February (1965)

Constitution: 24 April 1970; suspended July 1994; rewritten and
published in March 1996; approved by national referendum 8 August
1996; rewritten and reestablished in January 1997

Legal system: based on a composite of English common law, Koranic law,
and customary law; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Yahya A. J. J. JAMMEH (since 12 October
1996); Vice President Isaton Njie SAIDY (since 20 March 1997); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Yahya A. J. J. JAMMEH (since 18 October
1996); Vice President Isaton Njie SAIDY (since 20 March 1997); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet is appointed by the president
elections: the president is elected by popular vote to a five-year
term; the number of terms is not restricted; election last held 26
September 1996 (next to be held NA 2001)
election results: percent of vote - President Yahya A. J. J. JAMMEH
55.5%, Ousinou DARBOE 35.8%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly; 49 seats (45
elected, 4 appointed by the president)
elections: last popular election held 2 January 1997 (next to be held
NA)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
APRC 33, UDP 7, NRP 2, PDOIS 1, independents 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Alliance for Patriotic Reorientation
and Construction or APRC [Yahya A. J. J. JAMMEH]; National
Reconciliation Party or NRP [Hamat N. K. BAH]; People's Democratic
Organization for Independence and Socialism or PDOIS [Sidia JATTA];
United Democratic Party or UDP [Ousainou DARBOE]; note - in August
1996 the government banned the following from participation in the
elections of 1996: People's Progressive Party or PPP [former President
Dawda K. JAWARA (in exile)], and two opposition parties - the National
Convention Party or NCP [former vice president Sheriff DIBBA (in
exile)] and the Gambian People's Party or GPP [Hassan Musa CAMARA]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC,
ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Counselor, Charge d'Affaires ad
interim Malamin K. JUWARA
chancery: Suite 1000, 1155 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005
telephone: [1] (202) 785-1399, 1379, 1425
FAX: [1] (202) 785-1430

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Gerald Wesley SCOTT
embassy: Fajara, Kairaba Avenue, Banjul
mailing address: P. M. B. No. 19, Banjul
telephone : [220] 392856, 392858, 391970, 391971
FAX: [220] 392475

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), blue with
white edges, and green

Economy

Economy - overview: The Gambia has no important mineral or other
natural resources and has a limited agricultural base. About 75% of
the population depends on crops and livestock for its livelihood.
Small-scale manufacturing activity features the processing of peanuts,
fish, and hides. Reexport trade normally constitutes a major segment
of economic activity, but the 50% devaluation of the CFA franc in
January 1994 made Senegalese goods more competitive and hurt the
reexport trade. The Gambia has benefited from a rebound in tourism in
1996 after its decline in response to the military's takeover in July
1994. Short-run economic progress remains highly dependent on
sustained bilateral and multilateral aid and on government willingness
to reduce intervention in market processes.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.1 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,100 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 27%
industry: 15%
services: 58% (1993 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 400,000 (1986 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 75.0%, industry, commerce, and services
18.9%, government 6.1%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $88.6 million
expenditures: $98.2 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY96/97 est.)

Industries: processing peanuts, fish, and hides; tourism; beverages;
agricultural machinery assembly, woodworking, metalworking; clothing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 30,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 65 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 74 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: peanuts, millet, sorghum, rice, corn, cassava
(tapioca), palm kernels; cattle, sheep, goats; forest and fishing
resources not fully exploited

Exports:
total value : $127 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: peanuts and peanut products 70%, fish, cotton lint, palm
kernels
partners: Japan, Senegal, Hong Kong, France, Switzerland, UK,
Indonesia

Imports:
total value: $201 million (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, manufactures, raw materials, fuel, machinery
and transport equipment
partners: China, Cote d'Ivoire, France, UK, Germany

Debt - external: $419 million (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: bilateral $36.1 million; multilateral $34.7 million (1994)

Currency: 1 dalasi (D) = 100 butut

Exchange rates: dalasi (D) per US$1 - 9.875 (November 1996), 9.546
(1995), 9.576 (1994), 9.129 (1993), 8.888 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@The Gambia:Communications

Telephones: 11,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: adequate network of microwave radio relay and open wire
international: microwave radio relay links to Senegal and
Guinea-Bissau; satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 180,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

@The Gambia:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 2,640 km
paved: 932 km
unpaved : 1,708 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 400 km

Ports and harbors: Banjul

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
over 3,047 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, National Police

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 276,923 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 139,531 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $14 million (FY93/94)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.8% (FY93/94)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: short section of boundary with Senegal is
indefinite
______________________________________________________________________

GAZA STRIP

Introduction

Current issues: The Israel-PLO Declaration of Principles on Interim
Self-Government Arrangements ("the DOP"), signed in Washington on 13
September 1993, provides for a transitional period not exceeding five
years of Palestinian interim self-government in the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank. Permanent status negotiations began on 5 May 1996. Under
the DOP, Israel agreed to transfer certain powers and responsibilities
to the Palestinian Authority, which includes a Palestinian Legislative
Council elected in January 1996, as part of interim self-governing
arrangements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. A transfer of powers and
responsibilities for the Gaza Strip and Jericho has taken place
pursuant to the Israel-PLO 4 May 1994 Cairo Agreement on the Gaza
Strip and the Jericho Area and in additional areas of the West Bank
pursuant to the Israel-PLO 28 September 1995 Interim Agreement. The
DOP provides that Israel will retain responsibility during the
transitional period for external security and for internal security
and public order of settlements and Israelis. Permanent status is to
be determined through direct negotiations which began on 5 May 1996.

@Gaza Strip:Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between Egypt
and Israel

Geographic coordinates: 31 25 N, 34 20 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 360 sq km
land: 360 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Washington,
DC

Land boundaries:
total: 62 km
border countries : Egypt 11 km, Israel 51 km

Coastline: 40 km

Maritime claims: Israeli occupied with current status subject to the
Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement - permanent status to be
determined through further negotiation

Climate: temperate, mild winters, dry and warm to hot summers

Terrain: flat to rolling, sand- and dune-covered coastal plain

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
highest point: Abu 'Awdah (Joz Abu 'Auda) 105 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land: 24%
permanent crops: 39%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 11%
other: 26% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 120 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: desertification; salination of fresh
water

Environment - international agreements:
party to : none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: there are 24 Israeli settlements and civilian land
use sites in the Gaza Strip (August 1996 est.)

@Gaza Strip:People

Population: 987,869 (July 1997 est.)
note: in addition, there are 5,000 Israeli settlers in the Gaza Strip
(August 1996 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 51% (male 261,014; female 248,236)
15-64 years: 46% (male 225,707; female 224,483)
65 years and over: 3% (male 12,281; female 16,148) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 6.59% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 49.85 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.2 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 20.25 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.76 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 26 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 72.46 years
male: 71.12 years
female : 73.87 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 7.68 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: NA
adjective: NA

Ethnic groups: Palestinian Arab and other 99.4%, Jewish 0.6%

Religions: Muslim (predominantly Sunni) 98.7%, Christian 0.7%, Jewish
0.6%

Languages: Arabic, Hebrew (spoken by Israeli settlers and many
Palestinians), English (widely understood)

Literacy: NA

@Gaza Strip:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Gaza Strip
local long form: none
local short form: Qita Ghazzah

Data code: GZ

Economy

Economy - overview: Economic progress in the Gaza Strip has been
hampered by tight Israeli security restrictions. In 1991 roughly 40%
of Gaza Strip workers were employed across the border by Israeli
industrial, construction, and agricultural enterprises, with worker
remittances supplementing GDP by roughly 50%. Gaza has depended upon
Israel for nearly 90% of its external trade. The Persian Gulf crisis
and its aftershocks has dealt blows to Gaza since August 1990. Worker
remittances from the Gulf states have dropped, unemployment and
popular unrest have increased, and living standards have fallen. The
withdrawal of Israel from the Gaza Strip in May 1994 has added to the
set of adjustment problems. This series of disruptions has meant a
sharp decline in employment in Israel since 1991 and a drop in GDP as
a whole. An estimated 378,000 persons were in refugee camps in 1996.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -1% to -2% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,100 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 33%
industry: 25%
services: 42% (1995 est., includes West Bank)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 11% (1995 est.)

Labor force: NA
by occupation: construction 33.4%, agriculture 20.0%, commerce,
restaurants, and hotels 14.9%, industry 10.0%, other services 21.7%
(1991)
note: excluding Israeli settlers

Unemployment rate: 35% to 40% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $684 million
expenditures : $779 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996)
note: includes West Bank

Industries: generally small family businesses that produce textiles,
soap, olive-wood carvings, and mother-of-pearl souvenirs; the Israelis
have established some small-scale modern industries in an industrial
center

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW
note: electricity supplied by Israel

Electricity - production: NA kWh
note : electricity supplied by Israel

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: olives, citrus, other fruits, vegetables;
beef, dairy products

Exports:
total value: $235 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.) (includes West Bank)
commodities: citrus
partners: Israel, Egypt, West Bank

Imports:
total value : $1.55 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.) (includes West Bank)
commodities: food, consumer goods, construction materials
partners: Israel, Egypt, West Bank

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 new Israeli shekel (NIS) = 100 new agorot

Exchange rates: new Israeli shekels (NIS) per US$1 - 3.41 (May 1997),
3.2882 (1996), 3.0113 (1995), 3.0111 (1994), 2.8301 (1993), 2.4591
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year (since 1 January 1992)

@Gaza Strip:Communications

Telephones: NA
note: 3.1% of Palestinian households have telephones

Telephone system:
domestic : NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 0, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA; note - 95% of Palestinian households have radios (1992
est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: NA; note - 59% of Palestinian households have televisions
(1992 est.)

@Gaza Strip:Transportation

Railways:
total: NA km; note - one line, abandoned and in disrepair, little
trackage remains

Highways:
total : NA km
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km
note: small, poorly developed road network

Ports and harbors: Gaza

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)
note: new international airport under construction and scheduled to
open in June 1997

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: NA

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: West Bank and Gaza Strip are Israeli
occupied with current status subject to the Israeli-Palestinian
Interim Agreement - permanent status to be determined through further
negotiation
______________________________________________________________________

GEORGIA

Introduction

Current issues: Beset by ethnic and civil strife since independence in
1991, Georgia began to stabilize in 1994. Separatist conflicts in
Abkhazia and South Ossetia have been dormant since spring 1994,
although political settlements remain elusive. Russian peacekeepers
are deployed in both regions and a UN Observer Mission is operating in
Abkhazia. As a result of these conflicts, Georgia still has about
250,000 internally displaced people. In 1995, Georgia adopted a new
constitution and conducted generally free and fair nationwide
presidential and parliamentary elections. In 1996, the government
focused its attention to implementing an ambitious economic reform
program and professionalizing its parliament. Violence and organized
crime were sharply curtailed in 1995 and 1996, but corruption remains
rife.

@Georgia:Geography

Location: Southwestern Asia, bordering the Black Sea, between Turkey
and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 42 00 N, 43 30 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
total: 69,700 sq km
land : 69,700 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than South Carolina

Land boundaries:
total: 1,461 km
border countries: Armenia 164 km, Azerbaijan 322 km, Russia 723 km,
Turkey 252 km

Coastline: 310 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: warm and pleasant; Mediterranean-like on Black Sea coast

Terrain: largely mountainous with Great Caucasus Mountains in the
north and Lesser Caucasus Mountains in the south; Kolkhida Lowland
opens to the Black Sea in the west; Mtkvari River Basin in the east;
good soils in river valley flood plains, foothills of Kolkhida Lowland

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Black Sea 0 m
highest point: Mt'a Mqinvartsveri (Gora Kazbek) 5,048 m

Natural resources: forests, hydropower, manganese deposits, iron ore,
copper, minor coal and oil deposits; coastal climate and soils allow
for important tea and citrus growth

Land use:
arable land : 9%
permanent crops: 4%
permanent pastures: 25%
forests and woodland: 34%
other: 28% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 4,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: air pollution, particularly in Rust'avi;
heavy pollution of Mtkvari River and the Black Sea; inadequate
supplies of potable water; soil pollution from toxic chemicals

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

@Georgia:People

Population: 5,160,042 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 22% (male 581,370; female 558,390)
15-64 years : 66% (male 1,640,361; female 1,766,319)
65 years and over: 12% (male 231,698; female 381,904) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -1.09% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 11.82 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 13.88 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -8.83 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.93 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.61 male(s)/female
total population: 0.91 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 50.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 64.96 years
male: 61.59 years
female : 68.49 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.56 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Georgian(s)
adjective: Georgian

Ethnic groups: Georgian 70.1%, Armenian 8.1%, Russian 6.3%, Azeri
5.7%, Ossetian 3%, Abkhaz 1.8%, other 5%

Religions: Christian Orthodox 75% (Georgian Orthodox 65%, Russian
Orthodox 10%), Muslim 11%, Armenian Apostolic 8%, unknown 6%

Languages: Armenian 7%, Azeri 6%, Georgian 71% (official), Russian 9%,
other 7%

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99%
male: 100%
female: 98% (1989 est.)

@Georgia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Georgia
local long form: none
local short form : Sak'art'velo
former: Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: GG

Government type: republic

National capital: T'bilisi

Administrative divisions: 53 rayons (raionebi, singular - raioni), 9
cities* (k'alak'ebi, singular - k'alak'i), and 2 autonomous
republics** (avtomnoy respubliki, singular - avtom respublika);
Abashis, Abkhazia (Ap'khazet'is Avtonomiuri Respublika)** (Sokhumi),
Adigenis, Ajaria (Acharis Avtonomiuri Respublika)** (Bat'umi),
Akhalgoris, Akhalk'alak'is, Akhalts'ikhis, Akhmetis, Ambrolauris,
Aspindzis, Baghdat'is, Bolnisis, Borjomis, Chiat'ura*, Ch'khorotsqus,
Ch'okhatauris, Dedop'listsqaros, Dmanisis, Dushet'is, Gardabanis,
Gori*, Goris, Gurjaanis, Javis, K'arelis, Kaspis, Kharagaulis,
Khashuris, Khobis, Khonis, K'ut'aisi*, Lagodekhis, Lanch'khut'is,
Lentekhis, Marneulis, Martvilis, Mestiis, Mts'khet'is, Ninotsmindis,
Onis, Ozurget'is, P'ot'i*, Qazbegis, Qvarlis, Rust'avi*, Sach'kheris,
Sagarejos, Samtrediis, Senakis, Sighnaghis, T'bilisi*, T'elavis,
T'erjolis, T'et'ritsqaros, T'ianet'is, Tqibuli*, Ts'ageris,
Tsalenjikhis, Tsalkis, Tsqaltubo*, Vanis, Zestap'onis, Zugdidi*,
Zugdidis
note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center name
following in parentheses)

Independence: 9 April 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 26 May (1991)

Constitution: adopted 17 October 1995

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Eduard Amvrosiyevich SHEVARDNADZE
(previously elected chairman of the Government Council 10 March 1992,
Council has since been disbanded; previously elected chairman of
Parliament 11 October 1992; elected president 5 November 1995); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Eduard Amvrosiyevich SHEVARDNADZE
(previously elected chairman of the Government Council 10 March 1992,
Council has since been disbanded; previously elected chairman of
Parliament 11 October 1992; elected president 5 November 1995); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet of Ministers
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 5 November 1995 (next to be held NA April 2001)
election results: Eduard SHEVARDNADZE elected president; percent of
vote - Eduard SHEVARDNADZE 74%

Legislative branch: unicameral Supreme Council or Umaghiesi Sabcho
(235 seats; members are elected to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 5 November 1995 (next to be held NA November
2000)
election results : percent of vote by party - CUG 24%, NDP 8%, All
Georgia Revival Union 7%, all other parties received less than 5%
each; seats by party - NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Citizens Union of Georgia or CUG
[Eduard SHEVARDNADZE, Zurab ZHVANIA, general secretary]; National
Democratic Party or NDP [Irina SARISHVILI-CHANTARIA]; United
Republican Party, umbrella organization for parties including the GPF
and the Charter 1991 Party [Notar NATADZE, chairman]; Georgian Popular
Front or GPF [Nodar NATADZE, chairman]; Charter 1991 Party [Tedo
PAATASHVILI]; Georgian Social Democratic Party or GSDP [Guram
MUCHAIDZE, secretary general]; All Georgia Union for Revival [Alsan
ABASHIDZE]; Christian Democratic Union or CDU [Irakli SHENGELAYA];
Democratic Georgia Union or DGU [Avtandil MARGIANI]; National
Independence Party or NIP [Irakliy TSERETELI, chairman]; Georgian
Monarchists' Party or GMP [Temur ZHORZHOLIANI]; Greens Party; Agrarian
Party of Georgia or APG [Roin LIPARTELIANI]; United Communist Party of
Georgia or UCP [Panteleimon GIORGADZE, chairman]

Political pressure groups and leaders: supporters of ousted President
Zviad GAMSAKHURDIA (deceased 1 January 1994) remain a source of
opposition; separatist elements in the breakaway region of Abkhazia

International organization participation: BSEC, CCC, CE (guest), CIS,
EBRD, ECE, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Inmarsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NACC, OSCE, PFP, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Tedo JAPARIDZE
chancery: (temporary) Suite 424, 1511 K Street NW, Washington, DC
20005
telephone: [1] (202) 393-5959
FAX : [1] (202) 393-4537

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador William H. COURTNEY
embassy: #25 Antoneli Street, T'bilisi 380026
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone : 995-32-989-967 or 995-32-933-803 (operator assisted)
FAX: tie-line FAX 997-0200; 933-759 or 938-951

Flag description: maroon field with small rectangle in upper hoist
side corner; rectangle divided horizontally with black on top, white
below

Economy

Economy - overview: Georgia's economy has traditionally revolved
around Black Sea tourism; cultivation of citrus fruits, tea, and
grapes; mining of manganese and copper; and output of a small
industrial sector producing wine, metals, machinery, chemicals, and
textiles. The country imports the bulk of its energy needs, including
natural gas and oil products. Its only sizable internal energy
resource is hydropower. Despite the severe damage the economy has
suffered due to civil strife, Georgia, with the help of the IMF and
World Bank, has made substantial economic gains in 1995-96, pushing
GDP growth and slashing inflation. Georgia had been suffering from
acute energy shortages, although energy deliveries improved in 1996.
Georgia is pinning its hopes for long-term recovery on the development
of an international transportation corridor through the key Black Sea
ports of P'ot'i and Bat'umi. The decision in 1996 to construct an
early Caspian oil pipeline through Georgia underscores the viability
of such a corridor and may spur greater western investment in the
economy. A growing trade deficit and political uncertainties cloud the
short-term economic picture.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $7.1 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: 11% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,350 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 70.4%
industry: 10.2%
services: 19.4% (1993 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 13.3% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 2.2 million (1996)
by occupation: industry and construction 31%, agriculture and forestry
25%, other 44% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 21% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: steel, aircraft, machine tools, foundry equipment,
electric locomotives, tower cranes, electric welding equipment,
machinery for food preparation and meat packing, electric motors,
process control equipment, trucks, tractors, textiles, shoes,
chemicals, wood products, wine

Industrial production growth rate: 7.7% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 4.56 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 7.1 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,095 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: citrus, grapes, tea, vegetables, potatoes;
small livestock sector

Exports:
total value: $356 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: citrus fruits, tea, wine, other agricultural products;
diverse types of machinery; ferrous and nonferrous metals; textiles;
chemicals; fuel re-exports
partners : Russia, Turkey, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria (1996)

Imports:
total value: $647 million (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: fuel, grain and other foods, machinery and parts,
transport equipment
partners: Russia, Turkey, Azerbaijan (1996); note - EU and US send
humanitarian food shipments

Debt - external: $1.6 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $28 million (1993)
note : commitments, 1992-95, $1,200 million ($675 million
disbursements)

Currency: lari introduced September 1995 replacing the coupon

Exchange rates: lari per US$1 (end of period) - 1.28 (December 1996),
1.24 (December 1995)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Georgia:Communications

Telephones: 672,000 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: poor service; 339,000 unsatisfied applications for
telephones (December 1990 est.)
domestic: NA
international: landline to CIS members and Turkey; satellite earth
station - 1 Eutelsat; leased connections with other countries via the
Moscow international gateway switch; international electronic mail and
telex service available

Radio broadcast stations: 2 national broadcast stations, 3 regional
broadcast stations

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 3

Televisions: NA

@Georgia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,583 km in common carrier service; does not include industrial
lines
broad gauge: 1,583 km 1.520-m gauge (1993)

Highways:
total: 21,000 km
paved: NA km
unpaved : NA km
note: Georgia reports 19,635 km of "hard surfaced" roads which combine
the lengths of paved and graveled roads; 1,365 km of unsurfaced or
dirt roads are reported separately (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 370 km; refined products 300 km; natural gas 440
km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Bat'umi, P'ot'i, Sokhumi

Merchant marine:
total: 15 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 183,202 GRT/292,021 DWT
ships by type : bulk 4, cargo 3, oil tanker 8 (1996 est.)

Airports: 28 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 14
over 3,047 m : 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
1,524 to 2,437 m : 4
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 14
over 3,047 m : 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 5
under 914 m: 6 (1994 est.)

Transportation - note: transportation network is in poor condition and
disrupted by ethnic conflict, criminal activities, and fuel shortages;
network lacks maintenance and repair

Military

Military branches: Ground Forces, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense Forces,
National Guard, Republic Security Forces (internal and border troops)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,288,694 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 1,020,609 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 40,799 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 38.2 trillion coupons (1995);
note - conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the
current exchange rate could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: limited cultivation of cannabis and opium poppy, mostly
for domestic consumption; used as transshipment point for opiates to
Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

GERMANY

@Germany:Geography

Location: Central Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea and the North Sea,
between the Netherlands and Poland, south of Denmark

Geographic coordinates: 51 00 N, 9 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 356,910 sq km
land : 349,520 sq km
water: 7,390 sq km
note: includes the formerly separate Federal Republic of Germany, the
German Democratic Republic, and Berlin, following formal unification
on 3 October 1990

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Montana

Land boundaries:
total: 3,621 km
border countries : Austria 784 km, Belgium 167 km, Czech Republic 646
km, Denmark 68 km, France 451 km, Luxembourg 138 km, Netherlands 577
km, Poland 456 km, Switzerland 334 km

Coastline: 2,389 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate and marine; cool, cloudy, wet winters and summers;
occasional warm, tropical foehn wind; high relative humidity

Terrain: lowlands in north, uplands in center, Bavarian Alps in south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Freepsum Lake -2 m
highest point: Zugspitze 2,962 m

Natural resources: iron ore, coal, potash, timber, lignite, uranium,
copper, natural gas, salt, nickel

Land use:
arable land : 33%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 15%
forests and woodland: 31%
other : 20% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 4,750 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: emissions from coal-burning utilities
and industries and lead emissions from vehicle exhausts (the result of
continued use of leaded fuels) contribute to air pollution; acid rain,
resulting from sulfur dioxide emissions, is damaging forests; heavy
pollution in the Baltic Sea from raw sewage and industrial effluents
from rivers in eastern Germany; hazardous waste disposal

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Air Pollution-Sulphur 94

Geography - note: strategic location on North European Plain and along
the entrance to the Baltic Sea

@Germany:People

Population: 82,071,765 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 16% (male 6,652,245; female 6,315,479)
15-64 years: 68% (male 28,649,361; female 27,498,980)
65 years and over: 16% (male 4,772,547; female 8,183,153) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 8.98 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.82 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.87 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.58 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 76.81 years
male: 73.64 years
female: 80.16 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.24 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : German(s)
adjective: German

Ethnic groups: German 91.5%, Turkish 2.4%, Italians 0.7%, Greeks 0.4%,
Poles 0.4%, other 4.6% (made up largely of people fleeing the war in
the former Yugoslavia)

Religions: Protestant 38%, Roman Catholic 34%, Muslim 1.7%,
unaffiliated or other 26.3%

Languages: German

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99% (1977 est.)
male: NA%
female : NA%

@Germany:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Federal Republic of Germany
conventional short form: Germany
local long form : Bundesrepublik Deutschland
local short form: Deutschland

Data code: GM

Government type: federal republic

National capital: Berlin
note: the shift from Bonn to Berlin will take place over a period of
years, with Bonn retaining many administrative functions and several
ministries even after parliament moves in 1999

Administrative divisions: 16 states (laender, singular - land);
Baden-Wuerttemberg, Bayern, Berlin, Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg,
Hessen, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Niedersachsen, Nordrhein-Westfalen,
Rheinland-Pfalz, Saarland, Sachsen, Sachsen-Anhalt,
Schleswig-Holstein, Thueringen

Independence: 18 January 1871 (German Empire unification); divided
into four zones of occupation (UK, US, USSR, and later, France) in
1945 following World War II; Federal Republic of Germany (FRG or West
Germany) proclaimed 23 May 1949 and included the former UK, US, and
French zones; German Democratic Republic (GDR or East Germany)
proclaimed 7 October 1949 and included the former USSR zone;
unification of West Germany and East Germany took place 3 October
1990; all four power rights formally relinquished 15 March 1991

National holiday: German Unity Day (Day of Unity), 3 October (1990)

Constitution: 23 May 1949, known as Basic Law; became constitution of
the united German people 3 October 1990

Legal system: civil law system with indigenous concepts; judicial
review of legislative acts in the Federal Constitutional Court; has
not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Roman HERZOG (since 1 July 1994)
head of government: Chancellor Dr. Helmut KOHL (since 4 October 1982)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president upon the proposal of the
chancellor
elections: president elected by the Federal Convention including
members of the Federal Assembly and an equal number of members elected
by the Land Parliaments for a five-year term; election last held 23
May 1994 (next to be held NA 1999); chancellor elected by an absolute
majority of the Federal Assembly for a four-year term; election last
held 16 October 1994 (next to be held NA 1998)
election results: Roman HERZOG elected president; percent of Federal
Convention vote - NA; Dr. Helmut KOHL reelected chancellor; percent of
Federal Assembly - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral chamber (no official name for the two
chambers as a whole) consists of the Federal Assembly or Bundestag
(656 seats usually, but 672 for the 1994 term; elected by direct
popular vote under a system combining direct and proportional
representation; a party must win 5% of the national vote or three
direct mandates to gain representation; members serve four-year terms)
and the Federal Council or Bundesrat (68 votes; state governments are
directly represented by votes; each has 3 to 6 votes depending on
population and are required to vote as a block)
elections: Federal Assembly - last held 16 October 1994 (next to be
held by NA 1998); Federal Council - last held NA ( next to be held NA)
election results: Federal Assembly - percent of vote by party - CDU
34.2%, SPD 36.4%, Alliance 90/Greens 7.3%, CSU 7.3%, FDP 6.9%, PDS
4.4%, Republicans 1.9%; seats by party - CDU 244, SPD 252, Alliance
90/Greens 49, CSU 50, FDP 47, PDS 30; Federal Council - current
composition - votes by party - SPD-led states 41, CDU-led states 27

Judicial branch: Federal Constitutional Court or
Bundesverfassungsgericht, half the judges are elected by the Bundestag
and half by the Bundesrat

Political parties and leaders: Christian Democratic Union or CDU
[Helmut KOHL, chairman]; Christian Social Union or CSU [Theo WAIGEL,
chairman]; Free Democratic Party or FDP [Wolfgang GERHARDT, chairman];
Social Democratic Party or SPD [Oskar LAFONTAINE, chairman]; Alliance
'90/Greens [Gunda ROESTEL, Juergen TRITTIN, cochairpersons]; Party of
Democratic Socialism or PDS [Lothar BISKY, chairman]; Republikaner
[Rolf SCHLIERER, chairman]; National Democratic Party or NPD
[Ellen-Doris SCHERER]; Communist Party or DKP [Rolf PRIEMER and Heinz
STEHR, cochairpersons]

Political pressure groups and leaders: employers' organizations,
expellee, refugee, trade unions, and veterans groups

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB,
Australia Group, BDEAC, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE, CERN,
EBRD, ECE, EIB, ESA, EU, FAO, G- 5, G- 7, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD,
ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NACC, NAM
(guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNOMIG, UPU, WEU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Juergen CHROBOG
chancery : 4645 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone: [1] (202) 298-4000
FAX: [1] (202) 298-4249
consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Detroit, Houston, Los
Angeles, Miami, New York, San Francisco, Seattle
consulate(s): Wellington (American Samoa)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires James D.
BINDENAGEL
embassy : Deichmanns Aue 29, 53170 Bonn
mailing address: APO AE 09080, PSC 117, Bonn
telephone: [49] (228) 3391
FAX: [49] (228) 339-2663
branch office : Berlin
consulate(s) general: Dusseldorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Leipzig,
Munich

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of black (top), red,
and gold

Economy

Economy - overview: Germany, the world's third-most powerful economy,
is gearing up for the European Economic and Monetary Union in 1999.
One key economic priority is meeting the Maastricht criteria for entry
into EMU, a goal complicated by record unemployment and stagnating
growth. The government has implemented an austerity budget in its
attempt to get the deficit down to 3% of GDP as required by
Maastricht, but further cuts probably will be necessary and there is
little consensus among the parties or elites about next steps toward
that end. In recent years business and political leaders have become
increasingly concerned about Germany's apparent decline in
attractiveness as a business location. They cite the increasing
preference of German companies to locate new manufacturing facilities
- long the strength of the postwar economy - in foreign countries,
including the US, rather than in Germany, so they can be closer to
their markets and avoid Germany's high taxes and labor costs. At the
same time, Germany faces its own unique problem of bringing its
eastern area up to scratch after 45 years of communist rule. Despite
substantial progress toward economic integration, the eastern states
will continue to rely on the annual subsidy of approximately $100
billion from the western part into the next century. Assistance from
the west helped the east to average nearly 8% annual economic growth
in 1992-95, even though the overall German economy had averaged less
than 2% growth; growth in the east, however, tumbled to 2% in 1996,
with unemployment a particularly severe problem.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.7 trillion (western: purchasing
power parity - $1.56 trillion; eastern: purchasing power parity - $142
billion) (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.4% (western 1.3%, eastern 2.0%) (1996)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $20,400 (western:
purchasing power parity - $23,100; eastern: purchasing power parity -
$9,000) (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 1.1%
industry: 34.5%
services: 64.4% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.5% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 38.7 million
by occupation: industry 41%, agriculture 3%, services 56% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 10.8% (western 9.6%, eastern 15.9%) (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $755 billion
expenditures: $832.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995)

Industries: western: among world's largest and technologically
advanced producers of iron, steel, coal, cement, chemicals, machinery,
vehicles, machine tools, electronics, food and beverages; eastern:
metal fabrication, chemicals, brown coal, shipbuilding, machine
building, food and beverages, textiles, petroleum refining

Industrial production growth rate: 1.3% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 109.73 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 529.1 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 5,727 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: western: potatoes, wheat, barley, sugar beets,
fruit, cabbage; cattle, pigs, poultry; eastern: wheat, rye, barley,
potatoes, sugar beets, fruit; pork, beef, chicken, milk, hides

Exports:
total value: $501.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: manufactures 88.2% (including machines and machine tools,
chemicals, motor vehicles, iron and steel products), agricultural
products 5.0%, raw materials 2.3%, fuels 1.0%, other 3.5% (1995)
partners: EU 57.7% (France 11.7%, UK 8.1%, Italy 7.6%, Netherlands
7.5%, Belgium-Luxembourg 6.5%, Austria 5.5%), Eastern Europe 8.0%,
other West European countries 7.5%, US 7.3%, NICs 5.6%, Japan 2.5%,
OPEC 2.2%, China 1.4% (1996 est. for first 10 months)

Imports:
total value: $430.7 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: manufactures 74.2%, agricultural products 9.9%, fuels
6.4%, raw materials 5.9%, other 3.6% (1995)
partners : EU 55.5% (France 10.8%, Netherlands 8.6%, Italy 8.4%,
Belgium-Luxembourg 6.6%, UK 6.4%, Austria 3.9%), Eastern Europe 8.7%,
other West European countries 7.2%, US 6.8%, Japan 5.3%, NICs 5.3%,
China 2.4%, OPEC 1.7%, other 7.1% (1995)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $9 billion (1996 est.)

Currency: 1 deutsche mark (DM) = 100 pfennige

Exchange rates: deutsche marks (DM) per US$1 - 1.6043 (January 1997),
1.5048 (1996), 1.4331 (1995), 1.6228 (1994), 1.6533 (1993), 1.5617
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Germany:Communications

Telephones: 44 million

Telephone system: Germany has one of the world's most technologically
advanced telecommunications systems; as a result of intensive capital
expenditures since reunification, the formerly backward system of the
eastern part of the country is being rapidly modernized and integrated
with that of the western part
domestic: the region which was formerly West Germany is served by an
extensive system of automatic telephone exchanges connected by modern
networks of fiber-optic cable, coaxial cable, microwave radio relay,
and a domestic satellite system; cellular telephone service is widely
available and includes roaming service to many foreign countries;
since the reunification of Germany, the telephone system of the
eastern region has been upgraded and enjoys many of the advantages of
the national system
international: satellite earth stations - 14 Intelsat (12 Atlantic
Ocean and 2 Indian Ocean), 1 Eutelsat, 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean
region), 2 Intersputnik (1 Atlantic Ocean region and 1 Indian Ocean
region); 6 submarine cable connections; 2 HF radiotelephone
communication centers; tropospheric scatter links

Radio broadcast stations: western - AM 80, FM 470, shortwave 0;
eastern - AM 23, FM 17, shortwave 0

Radios: 70 million (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 246 (repeaters 6,000); note - there are
15 Russian repeaters in eastern Germany

Televisions: 44.8 million (1992 est.)

@Germany:Transportation

Railways:
total: 43,966 km
standard gauge : 43,531 km 1.435-m; 40,355 km are owned by Deutsche
Bahn AG (DB); 17,015 km of the DB system are electrified and 16,941 km
are double- or more-tracked
narrow gauge: 389 km 1.000-m gauge (DB operates 146 km of 1.000-m
gauge); 7 km 0.900-m gauge; 39 km 0.750-m gauge
note : in addition to the DB system there are 54 privately-owned
industrial or excursion railways, ranging in route length from 2 km to
632 km, with a total length of 3,465 km (1995)

Highways:
total: 639,800 km
paved: 504,800 km (including 11,013 km of expressways)
unpaved : 135,000 km all-weather, graveled (1993 est.)

Waterways: western - 5,222 km, of which almost 70% are usable by craft
of 1,000-metric-ton capacity or larger; major rivers include the Rhine
and Elbe; Kiel Canal is an important connection between the Baltic Sea
and North Sea; eastern - 2,319 km (1988)

Pipelines: crude oil 3,644 km; petroleum products 3,946 km; natural
gas 97,564 km (1988)

Ports and harbors: Berlin, Bonn, Brake, Bremen, Bremerhaven, Cologne,
Dresden, Duisburg, Emden, Hamburg, Karlsruhe, Kiel, Lubeck, Magdeburg,
Mannheim, Rostock, Stuttgart

Merchant marine:
total : 450 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,402,437 GRT/6,649,382
DWT
ships by type: cargo 184, chemical tanker 15, combination bulk 3,
combination ore/oil 1, container 195, liquefied gas tanker 8,
multifunction large-load carrier 6, oil tanker 12, passenger 4,
railcar carrier 2, refrigerated cargo 4, roll-on/roll-off cargo 8,
short-sea passenger 8 (1996 est.)
note : includes ships from the former East Germany and West Germany

Airports: 613 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 544
over 3,047 m: 13
2,438 to 3,047 m: 63
1,524 to 2,437 m: 69
914 to 1,523 m: 51
under 914 m: 348 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 69
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
914 to 1,523 m : 55 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 65 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Naval Air Arm), Air Force,
Medical Corps, Border Police, Coast Guard

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 20,918,653 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 17,939,494 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 450,147 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $42.8 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.5% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: source of precursor chemicals for South American
cocaine processors; transshipment point for and consumer of Southwest
Asian heroin and hashish, Latin American cocaine, and
European-produced synthetic drugs
______________________________________________________________________

GHANA

@Ghana:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the Gulf of Guinea, between Cote
d'Ivoire and Togo

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 N, 2 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 238,540 sq km
land : 230,020 sq km
water: 8,520 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Oregon

Land boundaries:
total: 2,093 km
border countries: Burkina Faso 548 km, Cote d'Ivoire 668 km, Togo 877
km

Coastline: 539 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf : 200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; warm and comparatively dry along southeast coast;
hot and humid in southwest; hot and dry in north

Terrain: mostly low plains with dissected plateau in south-central
area

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Afadjato 880 m

Natural resources: gold, timber, industrial diamonds, bauxite,
manganese, fish, rubber

Land use:
arable land: 12%
permanent crops : 7%
permanent pastures: 22%
forests and woodland: 35%
other: 24% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 60 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dry, dusty, harmattan winds occur from January to
March; droughts

Environment - current issues: recent drought in north severely
affecting agricultural activities; deforestation; overgrazing; soil
erosion; poaching and habitat destruction threatens wildlife
populations; water pollution; inadequate supplies of potable water

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber
94, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: Lake Volta is the world's largest artificial lake;
northeasterly harmattan wind (January to March)

@Ghana:People

Population: 18,100,703 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 3,928,741; female 3,891,591)
15-64 years: 54% (male 4,775,610; female 4,939,664)
65 years and over : 3% (male 268,579; female 296,518) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.21% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 33.88 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.89 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.92 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.91 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 78.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 56.49 years
male : 54.47 years
female: 58.57 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.43 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Ghanaian(s)
adjective: Ghanaian

Ethnic groups: black African 99.8% (major tribes - Akan 44%,
Moshi-Dagomba 16%, Ewe 13%, Ga 8%), European and other 0.2%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 38%, Muslim 30%, Christian 24%, other 8%

Languages: English (official), African languages (including Akan,
Moshi-Dagomba, Ewe, and Ga)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 64.5%
male: 75.9%
female : 53.5% (1995 est.)

@Ghana:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Ghana
conventional short form: Ghana
former: Gold Coast

Data code: GH

Government type: constitutional democracy

National capital: Accra

Administrative divisions: 10 regions; Ashanti, Brong-Ahafo, Central,
Eastern, Greater Accra, Northern, Upper East, Upper West, Volta,
Western

Independence: 6 March 1957 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 6 March (1957)

Constitution: new constitution approved 28 April 1992

Legal system: based on English common law and customary law; has not
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Jerry John RAWLINGS (since 3 November 1992);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Jerry John RAWLINGS (since 3 November
1992); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
cabinet : Council of Ministers; president nominates members subject to
approval by the Parliament
elections: president and vice president elected by popular vote for
four-year terms; election last held 7 December 1996 (next to be held
NA 2000)
election results: Jerry John RAWLINGS elected president; percent of
vote - Rawlings 58.8%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (200 seats; members are
elected by direct popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : last held 7 December 1996 (next to be held NA December
2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - NDC
126, NPP 65, PCP 5, PNC 1, to be determined 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: National Democratic Congress or NDC
[Dr. Huudu YAHAYA]; New Patriotic Party or NPP [Peter Ala ADJETY];
People's Heritage Party or PHP [Alex ERSKINE]; National Convention
Party or NCP [Sarpong Kuman Kuman]; Every Ghanian Living Everywhere or
EGLE [Ashang OKINE]; Peoples Convention Party or PCP [P. K.
DONKOS-AYIFL, acting chairman]; Peoples National Convention or PNC
[Edward MAHAMA]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
ECOWAS, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM
(observer), ISO, ITU, MINURSO, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Designate Harry SAWYERS
chancery: 3512 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 686-4520
FAX : [1] (202) 686-4527
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Edward BRYNN
embassy: Ring Road East, East of Danquah Circle, Accra
mailing address: P. O. Box 194, Accra
telephone: [233] (21) 775348
FAX: [233] (21) 775747

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), yellow,
and green with a large black five-pointed star centered in the yellow
band; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia; similar to the
flag of Bolivia, which has a coat of arms centered in the yellow band

Economy

Economy - overview: Well endowed with natural resources, Ghana has
twice the per capita output of the poorer countries in West Africa.
Even so, Ghana remains heavily dependent on international financial
and technical assistance. Ghana has made steady progress in
liberalizing its economy since 1983. Overall growth continued at a
rate of approximately 5% in 1995 and 1996, due largely to increased
gold, timber, and cocoa production - major sources of foreign
exchange. The economy, however, continues to revolve around
subsistence agriculture, which accounts for almost half of GDP and
employs 55% of the work force, mainly small landholders. In 1995-96,
Ghana has made mixed progress under a three-year structural adjustment
program in cooperation with the IMF. On the minus side, public sector
wage increases, regional peacekeeping commitments, and the containment
of internal unrest in the underdeveloped north have led to continued
inflationary deficit financing, depreciation of the cedi, and rising
public discontent with Ghana's austerity program.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $27 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,530 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 46%
industry: 16%
services: 38% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 36% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 3.7 million
by occupation: agriculture and fishing 54.7%, industry 18.7%, sales
and clerical 15.2%, professional 3.7%, services, transportation, and
communications 7.7%

Unemployment rate: 10% (1993 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $1.05 billion
expenditures: $1.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $178
million (1993)

Industries: mining, lumbering, light manufacturing, aluminum, food
processing

Industrial production growth rate: 3.3% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 1.19 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 6.1 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 304 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: cocoa, rice, coffee, cassava (tapioca),
peanuts, corn, shea nuts, bananas; timber

Exports:
total value: $1.43 billion (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: gold 39%, cocoa 31%, timber 6%, tuna, bauxite, aluminum,
manganese ore, and diamonds (1994 est.)
partners: UK, Germany, US, Togo, Netherlands, Japan

Imports:
total value: $1.84 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: capital equipment, petroleum, consumer goods, foods,
intermediate goods
partners : UK, Nigeria, US, Germany, Japan, Netherlands

Debt - external: $5.2 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $472 million (1993)

Currency: 1 new cedi (C) = 100 pesewas

Exchange rates: new cedis per US$1 - 1,718.31 (October 1996), 1,200.43
(1995), 956.71 (1994), 649.06 (1993), 437.09 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Ghana:Communications

Telephones: 70,000 (1988 est.)

Telephone system: poor to fair system
domestic: primarily microwave radio relay
international : satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 4 (repeaters 8)

Televisions: 250,000 (1993 est.)

@Ghana:Transportation

Railways:
total: 953 km (undergoing major renovation)
narrow gauge : 953 km 1.067-m gauge (32 km double track) (1995 est.)

Highways:
total: 37,561 km
paved: 9,353 km (including 21 km of expressways)
unpaved: 28,208 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: Volta, Ankobra, and Tano Rivers provide 168 km of perennial
navigation for launches and lighters; Lake Volta provides 1,125 km of
arterial and feeder waterways

Pipelines: 0 km

Ports and harbors: Takoradi, Tema

Merchant marine:
total : 4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 28,900 GRT/37,240 DWT
ships by type: cargo 2, refrigerated cargo 2 (1996 est.)

Airports: 12 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 8
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Police Force, Palace Guard,
Civil Defense

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 4,254,386 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 2,365,286 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 178,560 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $30 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 0.8% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis for the international drug
trade; transit hub for Southwest and Southeast Asian heroin and South
American cocaine destined for Europe and the US
______________________________________________________________________

GIBRALTAR

(dependent territory of the UK)

@Gibraltar:Geography

Location: Southwestern Europe, bordering the Strait of Gibraltar,
which links the Mediterranean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean, on the
southern coast of Spain

Geographic coordinates: 36 11 N, 5 22 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 6.5 sq km
land: 6.5 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 11 times the size of The Mall in Washington,
DC

Land boundaries:
total: 1.2 km
border countries: Spain 1.2 km

Coastline: 12 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: Mediterranean with mild winters and warm summers

Terrain: a narrow coastal lowland borders the Rock of Gibraltar

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
highest point: Rock of Gibraltar 426 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland : NA%
other: 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: limited natural freshwater resources, so
large concrete or natural rock water catchments collect rain water

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: strategic location on Strait of Gibraltar that links
the North Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea

@Gibraltar:People

Population: 28,913 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 20% (male 3,121; female 2,725)
15-64 years: 66% (male 10,771; female 8,278)
65 years and over : 14% (male 1,629; female 2,389) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.48% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 13.45 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.78 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.14 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.14 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.3 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.68 male(s)/female
total population: 1.16 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.01 years
male : 74.7 years
female: 81.47 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.23 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Gibraltarian(s)
adjective: Gibraltar

Ethnic groups: Italian, English, Maltese, Portuguese, Spanish

Religions: Roman Catholic 74%, Protestant 11% (Church of England 8%,
other 3%), Muslim 8%, Jewish 2%, none or other 5% (1981)

Languages: English (used in schools and for official purposes),
Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Russian

Literacy:
definition: NA
total population: above 95%
male: NA%
female : NA%

@Gibraltar:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Gibraltar

Data code: GI

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK

Government type: NA

National capital: Gibraltar

Administrative divisions: none (dependent territory of the UK)

Independence: none (dependent territory of the UK)

National holiday: Commonwealth Day (second Monday of March)

Constitution: 30 May 1969

Legal system: English law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal, plus other UK subjects resident
six months or more

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor Admiral Sir Richard LUCE (NA February 1997)
head of government: Chief Minister Peter CARUANA (since 17 May 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed from among the elected members
of the House of Assembly by the governor in consultation with the
chief minister
note: there is also a Gibraltar Council that advises the governor
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor appointed
by the queen; chief minister appointed by the governor

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Assembly (18 seats, 15
elected; members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 16 May 1996 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results : percent of vote by party - SD 53%, SL 42%, NP 3%;
seats by party - SD 8, SL 7

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: Gibraltar Socialist Labor Party or SL
[Joe BOSSANO]; Gibraltar Labor Party/Association for the Advancement
of Civil Rights or GCL/AACR [Adolfo CANEPA]; Gibraltar Social
Democrats or SD [Peter CARUANA]; Gibraltar National Party or NP [Joe
GARCIA]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Housewives Association; Chamber
of Commerce; Gibraltar Representatives Organization

International organization participation: Interpol (subbureau)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (dependent territory of
the UK)

Flag description: two horizontal bands of white (top, double width)
and red with a three-towered red castle in the center of the white
band; hanging from the castle gate is a gold key centered in the red
band

Economy

Economy - overview: Gibraltar benefits from an extensive shipping
trade, offshore banking, and its position as an international
conference center. The British military presence has been sharply
reduced and now contributes about 11% to the local economy. The
financial sector accounts for 15% of GDP; tourism, shipping services
fees, and duties on consumer goods also generate revenue. Because more
than 70% of the economy is in the public sector, changes in government
spending have a major impact on the level of employment.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $205 million (1993 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,600 (1993 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services : NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 14,800 (including non-Gibraltar laborers)
by occupation : services 60%, industry 40%, agriculture NEGL

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $111.6 million
expenditures: $115.6 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995-96)

Industries: tourism, banking and finance, construction, commerce;
support to large UK naval and air bases; tobacco, mineral waters,
beer, canned fish

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 33,000 kW (1993)

Electricity - production: 90 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: none

Exports:
total value: $57 million (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: (principally reexports) petroleum 51%, manufactured goods
41%, other 8%
partners : UK, Morocco, Portugal, Netherlands, Spain, US, FRG

Imports:
total value: $708 million (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: fuels, manufactured goods, and foodstuffs
partners: UK, Spain, Japan, Netherlands

Debt - external: $318 million (1987)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Gibraltar pound (£G) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Gibraltar pounds (£G) per US$1 - 0.6023 (January
1997), 0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995), 0.6529 (1994), 0.6658 (1993),
0.5664 (1992); note - the Gibraltar pound is at par with the British
pound

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Gibraltar:Communications

Telephones: 19,356 (1994)

Telephone system: adequate, automatic domestic system and adequate
international facilities
domestic: automatic exchange facilities
international: radiotelephone; microwave radio relay; satellite earth
station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 4

Televisions: NA

@Gibraltar:Transportation

Railways:
total : NA km; 1.000-m gauge system in dockyard area only

Highways:
total: 49.9 km (including 12.9 km public highways)
paved: 49.9 km
unpaved: 0 km

Pipelines: 0 km

Ports and harbors: Gibraltar

Merchant marine:
total : 19 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 356,676 GRT/633,152 DWT
ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 1, chemical tanker 2, container 1, oil
tanker 14 (1996 est.)

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: British Army, Royal Navy, Royal Air Force

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: source of friction between Spain and the UK
______________________________________________________________________

GLORIOSO ISLANDS

(possession of France)

@Glorioso Islands:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, group of islands in the Indian Ocean,
northwest of Madagascar

Geographic coordinates: 11 30 S, 47 20 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 5 sq km
land : 5 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Ile Glorieuse, Ile du Lys, Verte Rocks, Wreck Rock, and
South Rock

Area - comparative: about eight times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 35.2 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: NA

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 12 m

Natural resources: guano, coconuts

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland : NA%
other: 100% (all lush vegetation and coconut palms)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: periodic cyclones

Environment - current issues: NA

@Glorioso Islands:People

Population: uninhabited

@Glorioso Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Glorioso Islands
local long form : none
local short form: Iles Glorieuses

Data code: GO

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by a high
commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Flag description: the flag of France is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Glorioso Islands:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claimed by Madagascar
______________________________________________________________________

GREECE

@Greece:Geography

Location: Southern Europe, bordering the Aegean Sea, Ionian Sea, and
the Mediterranean Sea, between Albania and Turkey

Geographic coordinates: 39 00 N, 22 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 131,940 sq km
land: 130,800 sq km
water: 1,140 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Alabama

Land boundaries:
total: 1,210 km
border countries : Albania 282 km, Bulgaria 494 km, Turkey 206 km, The
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 228 km

Coastline: 13,676 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
territorial sea : 6 nm

Climate: temperate; mild, wet winters; hot, dry summers

Terrain: mostly mountains with ranges extending into sea as peninsulas
or chains of islands

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
highest point : Mount Olympus 2,917 m

Natural resources: bauxite, lignite, magnesite, petroleum, marble

Land use:
arable land : 19%
permanent crops: 8%
permanent pastures: 41%
forests and woodland: 20%
other: 12% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 13,140 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: severe earthquakes

Environment - current issues: air pollution; water pollution

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Air Pollution, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic
Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Desertification, Tropical Timber 94

Geography - note: strategic location dominating the Aegean Sea and
southern approach to Turkish Straits; a peninsular country, possessing
an archipelago of about 2,000 islands

@Greece:People

Population: 10,616,055 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 17% (male 905,146; female 845,929)
15-64 years: 67% (male 3,583,854; female 3,565,882)
65 years and over: 16% (male 759,648; female 955,596) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.44% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 9.75 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.32 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.95 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.8 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.17 years
male: 75.64 years
female: 80.89 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.33 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Greek(s)
adjective: Greek

Ethnic groups: Greek 98%, other 2%
note: the Greek Government states there are no ethnic divisions in
Greece

Religions: Greek Orthodox 98%, Muslim 1.3%, other 0.7%

Languages: Greek (official), English, French

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 95%
male: 98%
female : 93% (1991 est.)

@Greece:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Hellenic Republic
conventional short form: Greece
local long form : Elliniki Dhimokratia
local short form: Ellas
former : Kingdom of Greece

Data code: GR

Government type: parliamentary republic; monarchy rejected by
referendum 8 December 1974

National capital: Athens

Administrative divisions: 51 prefectures (nomoi, singular - nomos)and
1 autonomous region*; Ayion Oros* (Mt. Athos), Aitolia kai Akarnania,
Akhaia, Argolis, Arkadhia, Arta, Attiki, Dhodhekanisos, Drama,
Evritania, Evros, Evvoia, Florina, Fokis, Fthiotis, Grevena, Ilia,
Imathia, Ioannina, Iraklion, Kardhitsa, Kastoria, Kavala, Kefallinia,
Kerkira, Khalkidhiki, Khania, Khios, Kikladhes, Kilkis, Korinthia,
Kozani, Lakonia, Larisa, Lasithi, Lesvos, Levkas, Magnisia, Messinia,
Pella, Pieria, Preveza, Rethimni, Rodhopi, Samos, Serrai, Thesprotia,
Thessaloniki, Trikala, Voiotia, Xanthi, Zakinthos

Independence: 1829 (from the Ottoman Empire)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 March (1821) (proclamation of
the war of independence)

Constitution: 11 June 1975

Legal system: based on codified Roman law; judiciary divided into
civil, criminal, and administrative courts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Konstandinos (Kostis) STEPHANOPOULOS (since
10 March 1995)
head of government : Prime Minister Konstandinos SIMITIS (since 19
January 1996)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president on the recommendation of
the prime minister
elections: president elected by Chamber of Deputies for a five-year
term; election last held 10 March 1995 (next to be held by NA March
2000); prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Konstandinos STEPHANOPOULOS elected president;
percent of Chamber of Deputies vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Chamber of Deputies or Vouli ton
Ellinon (300 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
serve four-year terms)
elections: elections last held 22 September 1996 (next to be held by
NA September 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - PASOK 41.5%, ND 38.1%,
KKE 5.6%, Coalition of the Left and Progress 5.1%, DIKKI 4.4%,
Political Spring 2.9%; seats by party - PASOK 162, ND 108, KKE 11,
Coalition of the Left and Progress 10, DIKKI 9

Judicial branch: Supreme Judicial Court, judges appointed for life by
the president after consultation with a judicial council; Special
Supreme Tribunal, judges appointed for life by the president after
consultation with a judicial council

Political parties and leaders: New Democracy or ND (conservative)
[Konstandinos KARAMANLIS]; Panhellenic Socialist Movement or PASOK
[Konstandinos SIMITIS]; Communist Party or KKE [Aleka PAPARIGA];
Political Spring [Andonios SAMARAS]; Coalition of the Left and
Progress (Synaspismos) [Nikolaos KONSTANDOPOULOS]; Democratic Social
Movement or DIKKI [Dhimitrios TSOVOLAS]; Rainbow Coalition [Pavlos
VOSKOPOULOS]

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS, BSEC,
CCC, CE, CERN, EBRD, ECE, EIB, EU, FAO, G- 6, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MTCR, NACC, NAM
(guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNOMIG, UPU, WEU, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Loukas TSILAS
chancery : 2221 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 939-5800
FAX: [1] (202) 939-5824
consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, and San
Francisco
consulate(s) : Atlanta, Houston, and New Orleans

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Thomas M. T. NILES
embassy: 91 Vasilissis Sophias Boulevard, 10160 Athens
mailing address: PSC 108, APO AE 09842
telephone: [30] (1) 721-2951, 8401
FAX: [30] (1) 645-6282
consulate(s) general: Thessaloniki

Flag description: nine equal horizontal stripes of blue alternating
with white; there is a blue square in the upper hoist-side corner
bearing a white cross; the cross symbolizes Greek Orthodoxy, the
established religion of the country

Economy

Economy - overview: Greece has a mixed capitalist economy with the
public sector accounting for roughly half of GDP. Tourism is a major
source of foreign exchange, and agriculture is self-sufficient, except
for meat, dairy products, and animal feedstuffs. Macroeconomic
problems include mediocre GDP growth, the huge public sector,
substantial budget deficits, and 10% unemployment. The government's
hard drachma policy and public sector wage restraint are largely
responsible for the downward trend in inflation, now at the lowest
level in 22 years. Investment is likely to be the primary engine for
economic growth in 1997. Athens continues to rely heavily on EU aid,
which currently amounts to about 4% of GDP. Despite widespread
protests from unions and farmers, Prime Minister SIMITIS presented a
tough 1997 budget to help bring Greece closer to meeting the EU
criteria for participating in economic and monetary union. SIMITIS
faces strong opposition to further privatization and further
austerity. Plans to increase defense spending could undermine
SIMITIS's goal to curb government expenditures.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $106.9 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.2% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $10,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 11%
industry: 25%
services : 64% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 8.6% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 4.21 million
by occupation : services 52%, agriculture 23%, industry 25% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 10% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $33 billion (excluding privatization receipts)
expenditures: $45 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1996
est.)

Industries: tourism; food and tobacco processing, textiles; chemicals,
metal products; mining, petroleum

Industrial production growth rate: 1.8% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 8.61 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 41.5 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,466 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, corn, barley, sugar beets, olives,
tomatoes, wine, tobacco, potatoes; meat, dairy products

Exports:
total value: $5.9 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities : manufactured goods 53%, foodstuffs 34%, fuels 5% (1994)
partners: EU 60% (Germany 22%, Italy 14%, France 6%, UK 6%), US 3%
(1995)

Imports:
total value: $20.3 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: manufactured goods 72%, foodstuffs 15%, fuels 10% (1994)
partners : EU 70% (Italy 18%, Germany 16%, France 8%, UK 6%) US 4%
(1995)

Debt - external: $34.2 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 drachma (Dr) = 100 lepta

Exchange rates: drachmae (Dr) per US$1 - 251.55 (January 1997), 240.71
(1996), 231.66 (1995), 242.60 (1994), 229.26 (1993), 190.62 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Greece:Communications

Telephones: 5,571,293 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: adequate, modern networks reach all areas; microwave
radio relay carries most traffic; extensive open-wire network;
submarine cables to off-shore islands
domestic: microwave radio relay, open wire, and submarine cable
international: tropospheric scatter; 8 submarine cables; satellite
earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), 1
Eutelsat, and 1 Inmarsat (Indian Ocean Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 29, FM 17 (repeaters 20), shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 361 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 2.3 million (1993 est.)

@Greece:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,474 km
standard gauge: 1,565 km 1.435-m gauge (36 km electrified; 100 km
double track)
narrow gauge: 887 km 1.000-m gauge; 22 km 0.750-m gauge (a rack type
railway for steep grades)

Highways:
total : 116,440 km
paved: 106,775 km (including 420 km of expressways)
unpaved: 9,665 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 80 km; system consists of three coastal canals; including
the Corinth Canal (6 km) which crosses the Isthmus of Corinth
connecting the Gulf of Corinth with the Saronic Gulf and shortens the
sea voyage from the Adriatic to Piraievs (Piraeus) by 325 km; and
three unconnected rivers

Pipelines: crude oil 26 km; petroleum products 547 km

Ports and harbors: Alexandroupolis, Elevsis, Iraklion (Crete), Kavala,
Kerkira, Khalkis, Igoumenitsa, Lavrion, Patrai, Piraievs (Piraeus),
Thessaloniki, Volos

Merchant marine:
total: 984 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 27,571,920
GRT/49,674,832 DWT
ships by type: bulk 433, cargo 85, chemical tanker 22, combination
bulk 16, combination ore/oil 18, container 39, liquefied gas tanker 4,
multi-function large load carrier 1, oil tanker 239, passenger 15,
passenger-cargo 2, refrigerated cargo 6, roll-on/roll-off cargo 18,
short-sea passenger 82, specialized tanker 3, vehicle carrier 1
note: Greece owns an additional 1,883 ships (1,000 GRT or over)
totaling 67,631,159 DWT operating under the registries of The Bahamas,
Belize, Cayman Islands, Cyprus, Honduras, Liberia, Malta, Panama,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Singapore, Syria, Vanuatu (1996
est.)

Airports: 78 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 75
over 3,047 m: 5
2,438 to 3,047 m: 15
1,524 to 2,437 m: 16
914 to 1,523 m : 18
under 914 m: 21 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 3
914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Hellenic Army, Hellenic Navy, Hellenic Air Force,
National Guard, Police

Military manpower - military age: 21 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,677,826 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 2,050,740 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 80,102 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $4.9 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 4.6% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: complex maritime, air, and territorial
disputes with Turkey in Aegean Sea; Cyprus question with Turkey;
dispute with The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia over name; in
September 1995, Skopje and Athens signed an interim accord resolving
their dispute over symbols and certain constitutional provisions;
Athens also lifted its economic embargo on the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

Illicit drugs: a gateway to Europe for traffickers smuggling cannabis
and heroin from the Middle East and Southwest Asia to the West and
precursor chemicals to the East; some South American cocaine transits
or is consumed in Greece
______________________________________________________________________

GREENLAND

(part of the Danish realm)

@Greenland:Geography

Location: Northern North America, island between the Arctic Ocean and
the North Atlantic Ocean, northeast of Canada

Geographic coordinates: 72 00 N, 40 00 W

Map references: Arctic Region

Area:
total: 2,175,600 sq km
land : 2,175,600 sq km (341,600 sq km ice-free, 1,834,000 sq km
ice-covered) (est.)

Area - comparative: slightly more than three times the size of Texas

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 44,087 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 3 nm

Climate: arctic to subarctic; cool summers, cold winters

Terrain: flat to gradually sloping icecap covers all but a narrow,
mountainous, barren, rocky coast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point : Gunnbjorn 3,700 m

Natural resources: zinc, lead, iron ore, coal, molybdenum, gold,
platinum, uranium, fish, seals, whales

Land use:
arable land : 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 1%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 99% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: continuous permafrost over northern two-thirds of the
island

Environment - current issues: protection of the arctic environment;
preservation of their traditional way of life, including whaling; note
- Greenland participates actively in Inuit Circumpolar Conference
(ICC)

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Whaling (extended through Denmark)
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: dominates North Atlantic Ocean between North America
and Europe; sparse population confined to small settlements along
coast

@Greenland:People

Population: 58,768 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 27% (male 7,843; female 7,711)
15-64 years: 68% (male 21,931; female 18,237)
65 years and over : 5% (male 1,393; female 1,653) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.94% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 16.39 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.99 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.2 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.84 male(s)/female
total population: 1.13 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 22.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 68.84 years
male: 64.62 years
female: 73.08 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.19 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Greenlander(s)
adjective: Greenlandic

Ethnic groups: Greenlander 87% (Eskimos and Greenland-born whites),
Danish and others 13%

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran

Languages: Eskimo dialects, Danish, Greenlandic (an Inuit dialect)

Literacy: NA
note: similar to Denmark proper

@Greenland:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Greenland
local long form: none
local short form: Kalaallit Nunaat

Data code: GL

Dependency status: part of the Danish realm; self-governing overseas
administrative division

Government type: NA

National capital: Nuuk (Godthab)

Administrative divisions: 3 districts (landsdele); Nordgronland,
Ostgronland, Vestgronland

Independence: none (part of the Danish realm; self-governing overseas
administrative division)

National holiday: Birthday of the Queen, 16 April (1940)

Constitution: 5 June 1953 (Danish constitution)

Legal system: Danish

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen MARGRETHE II of Denmark (since 14 January 1972),
represented by High Commissioner Steen SPORE (since NA 1993)
head of government: Prime Minister Gunnar MARTENS (since NA 1995)
cabinet: Landsstyre is formed from the Parliament on the basis of the
strength of parties
elections: the queen is a constitutional monarch; high commissioner
appointed by the queen; prime minister is elected by the Parliament;
election last held NA 1991 (next to be held NA)
election results: Gunnar MARTENS elected prime minister; percent of
parliamentary vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Landsting (31 seats;
members are elected on the basis of proportional representation to
serve four-year terms)
elections: last held on 4 March 1995 (next to be held by 5 March 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - Siumut 38.4%, Inuit
Ataqatigiit 20.3%, Atassut Party 30.1%; seats by party - Siumut 12,
Atassut Party 10, Inuit Ataqatigiit 6, conservative splinter grouping
2, independent 1
note: 2 representatives were elected to the Danish Parliament or
Folketing on 21 September 1994 (next to be held by NA September 1998);
percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - Liberals 1, Social
Democrats 1; Greenlandic representatives are affiliated with Danish
political parties

Judicial branch: High Court or Landsret

Political parties and leaders: two-party ruling coalition; Siumut
(Forward Party, a moderate socialist party that advocates more
distinct Greenlandic identity and greater autonomy from Denmark) [Lars
Emil JOHANSEN, chairman]; Inuit Ataqatigiit or IA (Eskimo Brotherhood,
a Marxist-Leninist party that favors complete independence from
Denmark rather than home rule) [Josef MOTZFELDT]; Atassut Party
(Solidarity, a more conservative party that favors continuing close
relations with Denmark) [Daniel SKIFTE]; Akulliit Party [Bjarne
KREUTZMANN]; Issituup (Polar Party) [Nicolai HEINRICH]

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (self-governing overseas
administrative division of Denmark)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (self-governing overseas
administrative division of Denmark)

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red
with a large disk slightly to the hoist side of center - the top half
of the disk is red, the bottom half is white

Economy

Economy - overview: Greenland suffered negative economic growth in the
early 1990s, but since 1993 the economy has improved. Nonetheless,
prospects for substantial economic growth in the near future are poor.
The Greenland Home Rule Government (GHRG) has pursued a light fiscal
policy since the late 1980s which has helped create surpluses in the
public budget and low inflation. Since 1990, Greenland has registered
a foreign trade deficit following the closure of the last remaining
lead and zinc mine in 1989. Greenland today is critically dependent on
fishing and fish exports; the shrimp fishery is by far the largest
income earner. Despite resumption of several interesting hydrocarbon
and minerals exploration activities, it will take several years before
production can materialize. Tourism is the only sector offering any
near term potential and even this is limited due to a short season and
high costs. The public sector, including publicly owned enterprises
and the municipalities, plays the dominant role in Greenland's
economy. About half the government revenues come from grants from the
Danish Government, an important supplement of GDP.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $892 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $15,500 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry : NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.8% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 24,500 (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 10.5% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $706 million
expenditures: $697 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995)

Industries: fish processing (mainly shrimp), handicrafts, furs, small
shipyards

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 92,500 kW

Electricity - production: 274.4 million kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,691 kWh (1994-95)

Agriculture - products: forage crops, small garden vegetables; sheep,
fish

Exports:
total value: $363.4 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities : fish and fish products 95%
partners: Denmark 89%, Japan 5%, UK 5%

Imports:
total value: $421 million (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment 25%, manufactured goods
18%, food and live animals 11%, petroleum products 6%
partners : Denmark 7.5%, Iceland 3.8%, Japan 3.3%, Norway 3.1%, US
2.4%, Germany 2.4%, Sweden 1.8%

Debt - external: $243 million (1995)

Economic aid: substantial annual subsidy from Denmark - $427 million
(1995)

Currency: 1 Danish krone (DKr) = 100 oere

Exchange rates: Danish kroner (DKr) per US$1 - 6.117 (January 1997),
5.799 (1996), 5.602 (1995), 6.361 (1994), 6.484 (1993), 6.036 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Greenland:Communications

Telephones: 19,600 (1995 est.)

Telephone system: adequate domestic and international service provided
by cables and microwave radio relay; totally digitalized in 1995
domestic: microwave radio relay
international : 2 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth station -
1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: one publically-owned radio and television
station (nationwide) and some local radio and TV stations

Radios: 23,000 (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: one publicly-owned radio and television
station (nationwide) and some local radio and TV stations

Televisions: 12,000 (1991 est.)

@Greenland:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 150 km
paved: 60 km
unpaved: 90 km

Ports and harbors: Kangerluarsoruseq, Kangerlussuaq, Nanortalik,
Narsarsuaq, Nuuk (Godthaab), Saamiut, Sisimiut

Merchant marine:
total: 1 short-sea passenger (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,162
GRT/610 DWT (1995 est.)

Airports: 8 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 5
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military manpower - military age: 16 years of age

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: 494

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Denmark

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

GRENADA

@Grenada:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island between the Caribbean Sea and Atlantic
Ocean, north of Trinidad and Tobago

Geographic coordinates: 12 07 N, 61 40 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total : 340 sq km
land: 340 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: twice the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 121 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; tempered by northeast trade winds

Terrain: volcanic in origin with central mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point : Mount Saint Catherine 840 m

Natural resources: timber, tropical fruit, deepwater harbors

Land use:
arable land : 15%
permanent crops: 18%
permanent pastures: 3%
forests and woodland: 9%
other: 55% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: lies on edge of hurricane belt; hurricane season
lasts from June to November

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
Protection, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: the administration of the islands of the Grenadines
group is divided between Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Grenada

@Grenada:People

Population: 95,537 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 21,051; female 20,335)
15-64 years: 52% (male 26,473; female 23,181)
65 years and over: 5% (male 2,090; female 2,407) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.66% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 28.61 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.53 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -16.5 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.02 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.14 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.87 male(s)/female
total population: 1.08 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 11.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 71.13 years
male: 68.58 years
female: 73.72 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.71 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Grenadian(s)
adjective: Grenadian

Ethnic groups: black

Religions: Roman Catholic 53%, Anglican 13.8%, other Protestant sects
33.2%

Languages: English (official), French patois

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98%
male : 98%
female: 98% (1970 est.)

@Grenada:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Grenada

Data code: GJ

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Saint George's

Administrative divisions: 6 parishes and 1 dependency*; Carriacou and
Petit Martinique*, Saint Andrew, Saint David, Saint George, Saint
John, Saint Mark, Saint Patrick

Independence: 7 February 1974 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 7 February (1974)

Constitution: 19 December 1973

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General Daniel WILLIAMS (since 9 August 1996)
head of government: Prime Minister Keith MITCHELL (since 22 June 1995)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
the prime minister
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor general
appointed by the queen; prime minister appointed by the governor
general from among the members of the House of Assembly

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (a
13-member body, 10 appointed by the government and three by the leader
of the opposition) and the House of Representatives (15 seats; members
are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held on 20 June 1995 (next to be held by NA October
2000)
election results: House of Representatives - percent of vote by party
- NA; seats by party - NNP 8, NDC 5, GULP 2

Judicial branch: West Indies Associate States Supreme Court, an
associate judge resides in Grenada

Political parties and leaders: National Democratic Congress or NDC
[George BRIZAN]; Grenada United Labor Party or GULP [Sir Eric GAIRY];
The National Party or TNP [Ben JONES]; New National Party or NNP
[Keith MITCHELL]; Maurice Bishop Patriotic Movement or MBPM [Terrence
MARRYSHOW]; The Democratic Labor Party or DLP [Francis ALEXIS]

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CDB, ECLAC,
FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
Interpol, IOC, ISO (subscriber), ITU, LAES, NAM, OAS, OECS, OPANAL,
UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Denis G. ANTOINE
chancery: 1701 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 265-2561

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : the ambassador to Barbados is accredited to
Grenada; Charge d'Affaires Dennis CARTER
embassy: Point Salines, Saint George's
mailing address: P. O. Box 54, Saint George's, Grenada, West Indies
telephone : [1] (809) 444-1173 through 1178
FAX: [1] (809) 444-4820

Flag description: a rectangle divided diagonally into yellow triangles
(top and bottom) and green triangles (hoist side and outer side) with
a red border around the flag; there are seven yellow five-pointed
stars with three centered in the top red border, three centered in the
bottom red border, and one on a red disk superimposed at the center of
the flag; there is also a symbolic nutmeg pod on the hoist-side
triangle (Grenada is the world's second-largest producer of nutmeg,
after Indonesia); the seven stars represent the seven administrative
divisions

Economy

Economy - overview: The agriculturally based economy was hurt in 1996
by the emergence of the pink mealy bug which destroyed much of the
cocoa harvest. Bananas, a major foreign exchange earner, also suffered
due to falling prices, low production, and poor quality. Tourism, the
leading foreign exchange earner, continued to do well, as did
manufacturing. Construction boomed in 1996 due to concessions for low
and middle income mortgages. The government introduced a 5% tax on
electricity and telephones and doubled the general consumption tax,
which caused a small rise in the inflation rate. The tourist industry
faces stiff competition over the next few years.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $300 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,160 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 10.2%
industry: 40.3%
services: 49.5% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.6% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 36,000
by occupation: services 31%, agriculture 24%, construction 8%,
manufacturing 5%, other 32% (1985)

Unemployment rate: 20% (1 October 1996)

Budget:
revenues : $75.7 million (1996 est.)
expenditures: $126.7 million, including capital expenditures of $51
million (1996 est.)

Industries: food and beverages, textiles, light assembly operations,
tourism, construction

Industrial production growth rate: 1.8% (1992 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 17,300 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 88 million kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 794 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: bananas, cocoa, nutmeg, mace, citrus,
avocados, root crops, sugarcane, corn, vegetables

Exports:
total value: $24 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: bananas, cocoa, nutmeg, fruit and vegetables, clothing,
mace
partners : Caricom 32.3%, UK 20%, US 13%, Netherlands 8.8% (1991)

Imports:
total value: $128 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: food 25%, manufactured goods 22%, machinery 20%,
chemicals 10%, fuel 6% (1989)
partners: US 31.2%, Caricom 23.6%, UK 13.8%, Japan 7.1% (1991)

Debt - external: $97 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (fixed
rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Grenada:Communications

Telephones: 5,650 (1988 est.)

Telephone system: automatic, islandwide telephone system
domestic: interisland VHF and UHF radiotelephone links
international: new SHF radiotelephone links to Trinidad and Tobago and
Saint Vincent; VHF and UHF radio links to Trinidad

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 80,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1988 est.)

Televisions: 30,000 (1993 est.)

@Grenada:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 1,020 km
paved: 624 km
unpaved : 396 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Grenville, Saint George's

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Grenada Police Force, Coast Guard

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: small-scale cannabis cultivation; lesser transshipment
point for marijuana and cocaine to US
______________________________________________________________________

GUADELOUPE

(overseas department of France)

@Guadeloupe:Geography

Location: Caribbean, islands in the eastern Caribbean Sea, southeast
of Puerto Rico

Geographic coordinates: 16 15 N, 61 35 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 1,780 sq km
land: 1,706 sq km
water: 74 sq km
note: Guadeloupe is an archipelago of nine inhabited islands,
including Basse-Terre, Grande-Terre, Marie-Galante, La Desirade, Iles
des Saintes, St. Barthelemy, and part of St. Martin

Area - comparative: 10 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
total: 10.2 km
border countries: Netherlands Antilles (Sint Maarten) 10.2 km

Coastline: 306 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: subtropical tempered by trade winds; moderately high humidity

Terrain: Basse-Terre is volcanic in origin with interior mountains;
Grande-Terre is low limestone formation; most of the seven other
islands are volcanic in origin

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Soufriere 1,467 m

Natural resources: cultivable land, beaches and climate that foster
tourism

Land use:
arable land: 14%
permanent crops: 4%
permanent pastures: 14%
forests and woodland: 39%
other: 29% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 30 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hurricanes (June to October); La Soufriere is an
active volcano

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

@Guadeloupe:People

Population: 411,823 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 25% (male 52,974; female 51,051)
15-64 years: 66% (male 134,686; female 137,828)
65 years and over: 9% (male 14,948; female 20,336) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.13% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 17.09 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.6 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.16 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.74 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.6 years
male : 74.57 years
female: 80.77 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.86 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Guadeloupian(s)
adjective: Guadeloupe

Ethnic groups: black or mulatto 90%, white 5%, East Indian, Lebanese,
Chinese less than 5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%, Hindu and pagan African 4%, Protestant
sects 1%

Languages: French (official) 99%, Creole patois

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 90%
male: 90%
female: 90% (1982 est.)

@Guadeloupe:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Department of Guadeloupe
conventional short form: Guadeloupe
local long form: Departement de la Guadeloupe
local short form: Guadeloupe

Data code: GP

Dependency status: overseas department of France

Government type: NA

National capital: Basse-Terre

Administrative divisions: none (overseas department of France)

Independence: none (overseas department of France)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French legal system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President of France Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May
1995), represented by Prefect Michel DIEFENBACHER (since NA March
1995)
head of government: President of the General Council Dominique LARIFLA
(since NA); President of the Regional Council Lucette MICHAUX-CHEVRY
(since 22 March 1992)
cabinet : NA
elections: prefect appointed by the president of France on the advice
of the French Ministry of Interior; the presidents of the General and
Regional Councils are elected by the members of those councils
election results: NA

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council or Conseil General (43
seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms)
and the unicameral Regional Council or Conseil Regional(41 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms)
elections: General Council - last held 22 March 1992 (next to be held
by NA 1996); Regional Council - last held 31 January 1994 (next to be
held 16 March 1998)
election results : General Council - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - FRUI.G 13, RPR/DUD 13, PPDG 8, FGPS 3, PCG 3, UPLG 1,
PSG 1, independent 1; Regional Council - percent of vote by party -
RPR/FGPS-dissidents 48.30%, FGPS 17.09%, FRUI.G 7.44%, PPDG 8.90%,
UPLG 7.75% PCG 6.05%; seats by party - RPR/FGPS-dissidents 22,
FGPS/FRUI.G 9, PPDG 5, PCG 3, UPLG 2
note : Guadeloupe elects two representatives to the French Senate;
elections last held in September 1995 (next to be held NA September
2004); percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PPDG 1, FGPS 1;
Guadeloupe elects four representatives to the French National
Assembly; elections last held on 21 and 28 March 1993 (next to be held
25 May-1 June 1997 - special election); percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - FGPS 2, RPR 1, PCG 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel with jurisdiction
over Guadeloupe, French Guiana, and Martinique

Political parties and leaders: Rally for the Republic or RPR [Daniel
BEAUBRUN]; Communist Party of Guadeloupe or PCG [Christian Medard
CELESTE]; Socialist Party or FGPS [Georges LOUISOR]; Popular Union for
the Liberation of Guadeloupe or UPLG [Claude MAKOUKE]; FGPS Dissidents
or FRUI.G [Dominique LARIFLA]; Union for French Democracy or UDF
[Marcel ESDRAS]; Progressive Democratic Party or PPDG [Henri BANGOU]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Movement for Independent
Guadeloupe or MPGI; General Union of Guadeloupe Workers or UGTG;
General Federation of Guadeloupe Workers or CGT-G; Christian Movement
for the Liberation of Guadeloupe or KLPG

International organization participation: FZ, WCL, WFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas department of
France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas department of
France)

Flag description: three horizontal bands, a narrow green band (top), a
wide red band, and a narrow green band; the green bands are separated
from the red band by two narrow white stripes; a five-pointed gold
star is centered in the red band toward the hoist side; the flag of
France is used for official occasions

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy depends on agriculture, tourism, light
industry, and services. It is also dependent upon France for large
subsidies and imports. Tourism is a key industry, with most tourists
from the US. In addition, an increasingly large number of cruise ships
visit the islands. The traditionally important sugarcane crop is
slowly being replaced by other crops, such as bananas (which now
supply about 50% of export earnings), eggplant, and flowers. Other
vegetables and root crops are cultivated for local consumption,
although Guadeloupe is still dependent on imported food, which comes
mainly from France. Light industry consists mostly of sugar and rum
production. Most manufactured goods and fuel are imported.
Unemployment is especially high among the young.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $3.7 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $9,200 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 6%
industry: 9%
services: 85% (1993 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3.7% (1990)

Labor force:
total: 128,000
by occupation: agriculture 15%, industry 20%, services 65% (1993)

Unemployment rate: 31.3% (1995)

Budget:
revenues: $300 million
expenditures: $460 million, including capital expenditures of $90
million (1995)

Industries: construction, cement, rum, sugar, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: 950 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: bananas, sugarcane, tropical fruits and
vegetables; cattle, pigs, goats

Exports:
total value: $145 million (f.o.b., 1994)
commodities : bananas, sugar, rum
partners: France 70%, Martinique 17% (1991)

Imports:
total value: $1.6 billion (c.i.f., 1994)
commodities: foodstuffs, fuels, vehicles, clothing and other consumer
goods, construction materials
partners : France 60%, EC, US, Japan (1991)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA
note: substantial annual French subsidies

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.4169 (January 1997),
5.1155(1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520 (1994), 5.6632 (1993), 5.2938
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Guadeloupe:Communications

Telephones: 64,916 (1984 est.)

Telephone system: domestic facilities inadequate
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
microwave radio relay to Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, and Martinique

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 8 (private stations licensed to
broadcast FM 30), shortwave 0

Radios: 100,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 9

Televisions: 150,000 (1993 est.)

@Guadeloupe:Transportation

Railways:
total: NA km; privately owned, narrow-gauge plantation lines

Highways:
total : 2,082 km (national 329 km, regional 582 km, community/local
1171 km)
paved: 1,742 km
unpaved: 340 km (1985 est.)
note: in 1996 there were 3,200 km of roads

Ports and harbors: Basse-Terre, Gustavia (on St. Barthelemy), Marigot,
Pointe-a-Pitre

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 9 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 9
over 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m : 6 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: French Forces, Gendarmerie

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

GUAM

(territory of the US)

@Guam:Geography

Location: Oceania, island in the North Pacific Ocean, about
three-quarters of the way from Hawaii to the Philippines

Geographic coordinates: 13 28 N, 144 47 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 541.3 sq km
land: 541.3 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: three times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 125.5 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; generally warm and humid, moderated by
northeast trade winds; dry season from January to June, rainy season
from July to December; little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: volcanic origin, surrounded by coral reefs; relatively flat
coralline limestone plateau (source of most fresh water) with steep
coastal cliffs and narrow coastal plains in north, low-rising hills in
center, mountains in south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Lamlam 406 m

Natural resources: fishing (largely undeveloped), tourism (especially
from Japan)

Land use:
arable land: 11%
permanent crops: 11%
permanent pastures : 15%
forests and woodland: 18%
other: 45% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: frequent squalls during rainy season; relatively
rare, but potentially very destructive typhoons (especially in August)

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: largest and southernmost island in the Mariana
Islands archipelago; strategic location in western North Pacific Ocean

@Guam:People

Population: 160,595 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 2.5% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.35 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 3.86 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 3 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over : NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 15.17 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 74.29 years
male: 72.42 years
female: 76.13 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.16 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Guamanian(s)
adjective: Guamanian

Ethnic groups: Chamorro 47%, Filipino 25%, white 10%, Chinese,
Japanese, Korean, and other 18%

Religions: Roman Catholic 98%, other 2%

Languages: English, Chamorro, Japanese

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 99%
male: 99%
female: 99% (1990 est.)

@Guam:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Territory of Guam
conventional short form: Guam

Data code: GQ

Dependency status: organized, unincorporated territory of the US with
policy relations between Guam and the US under the jurisdiction of the
Office of Territorial and International Affairs, US Department of the
Interior

Government type: NA

National capital: Agana

Administrative divisions: none (territory of the US)

Independence: none (territory of the US)

National holiday: Guam Discovery Day (first Monday in March) (1521);
Liberation Day, 21 July (1944)

Constitution: Organic Act of 1 August 1950

Legal system: modeled on US; federal laws apply

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal; US citizens, but do not vote in
US presidential elections

Executive branch:
chief of state: President of the US William Jefferson CLINTON (since
20 January 1993); Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January
1993)
head of government: Governor Carl GUTIERREZ (since 8 November 1994)
and Lieutenant Governor Madeleine BORDALLO (since 8 November 1994)
cabinet: executive departments; heads appointed by the governor with
the consent of the Guam legislature
elections : governor and lieutenant governor elected on the same
ticket by popular vote and serve four-year terms; election last held 8
November 1994 (next to be held NA November 1998)
election results: Carl GUTIERREZ elected governor of Guam; percent of
vote - Carl GUTIERREZ (Democrat) 54.6%, Tommy TANAKA (Republican) NA%

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislature (21 seats; members are
elected by popular vote to serve two-year terms)
elections: last held 5 November 1996 (next to be held NA November
1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
Republican 11, Democratic 10
note: Guam elects one delegate to the US House of Representatives;
elections last held 5 November 1996 (next to be held NA November
1998); results - Robert UNDERWOOD was reelected as delegate; percent
of vote by party - NA; seats by party - Democrat 1

Judicial branch: Federal District Court, judge is appointed by the
president; Territorial Superior Court, judges appointed for eight-year
terms by the governor

Political parties and leaders: Republican Party (controls the
legislature); Democratic Party (party of the Governor)

International organization participation: ESCAP (associate), IOC, SPC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of the US)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of the US)

Flag description: territorial flag is dark blue with a narrow red
border on all four sides; centered is a red-bordered, pointed,
vertical ellipse containing a beach scene, outrigger canoe with sail,
and a palm tree with the word GUAM superimposed in bold red letters;
US flag is the national flag

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy depends mainly on US military spending
and on revenue generated by the tourism industry. Over the past 20
years, the tourist industry has grown rapidly, creating a construction
boom for new hotels and the expansion of older ones. More than one
million tourists visit Guam each year. Most food and industrial goods
are imported, with about 75% from the US. Guam faces the problem of
building up the civilian economic sector to offset the impact of
military downsizing.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $3 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $19,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services : NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4% (1992 est.)

Labor force:
total : 46,930 (1990)
by occupation: federal and territorial government 40%, private 60%
(trade 18%, services 15.6%, construction 13.8%, other 12.6%) (1990)

Unemployment rate: 2% (1992 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $525 million
expenditures: $395 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1991)

Industries: US military, tourism, construction, transshipment
services, concrete products, printing and publishing, food processing,
textiles

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 302,000 kW (1993)

Electricity - production: 750 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 4,566 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: fruits, copra, vegetables; eggs, pork,
poultry, beef

Exports:
total value : $34 million (f.o.b., 1984)
commodities: mostly transshipments of refined petroleum products,
construction materials, fish, food and beverage products
partners: US 25%, former Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands 63%,
other 12%

Imports:
total value: $493 million (c.i.f., 1984)
commodities: petroleum and petroleum products, food, manufactured
goods
partners: US 23%, Japan 19%, other 58%

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: although Guam receives no foreign aid, it does receive
large transfer payments from the general revenues of the US Federal
Treasury into which Guamanians pay no income or excise taxes; under
the provisions of a special law of Congress, the Guamanian Treasury,
rather than the US Treasury, receives federal income taxes paid by
military and civilian Federal employees stationed in Guam

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September

@Guam:Communications

Telephones: 74,317 (March 1997)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international : satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean);
submarine cables to US and Japan

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 3

Televisions: 75,000 (1993 est.)

@Guam:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 674 km (all-weather roads)
paved : NA km
unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Apra Harbor

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 4

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 4
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

GUATEMALA

@Guatemala:Geography

Location: Middle America, bordering the Caribbean Sea, between
Honduras and Belize and bordering the North Pacific Ocean, between El
Salvador and Mexico

Geographic coordinates: 15 30 N, 90 15 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 108,890 sq km
land: 108,430 sq km
water: 460 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Tennessee

Land boundaries:
total: 1,687 km
border countries: Belize 266 km, El Salvador 203 km, Honduras 256 km,
Mexico 962 km

Coastline: 400 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid in lowlands; cooler in highlands

Terrain: mostly mountains with narrow coastal plains and rolling
limestone plateau (Peten)

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Volcan Tajumulco 4,211 m

Natural resources: petroleum, nickel, rare woods, fish, chicle

Land use:
arable land : 12%
permanent crops: 5%
permanent pastures: 24%
forests and woodland: 54%
other : 5% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,250 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: numerous volcanoes in mountains, with occasional
violent earthquakes; Caribbean coast subject to hurricanes and other
tropical storms

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; water
pollution

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of
the Sea

Geography - note: no natural harbors on west coast

@Guatemala:People

Population: 11,685,695 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 2,571,885; female 2,465,902)
15-64 years: 53% (male 3,117,718; female 3,121,276)
65 years and over : 4% (male 192,334; female 216,580) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.73% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 36.45 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.13 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.04 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.89 male(s)/female
total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 49.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 65.64 years
male: 63.02 years
female : 68.39 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.89 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Guatemalan(s)
adjective: Guatemalan

Ethnic groups: Mestizo (mixed Amerindian-Spanish - in local Spanish
called Ladino) 56%, Amerindian or predominantly Amerindian 44%

Religions: Roman Catholic, Protestant, traditional Mayan

Languages: Spanish 60%, Amerindian languages 40% (23 Amerindian
languages, including Quiche, Cakchiquel, Kekchi)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 55.6%
male: 62.5%
female : 48.6% (1995 est.)

@Guatemala:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Guatemala
conventional short form: Guatemala
local long form: Republica de Guatemala
local short form: Guatemala

Data code: GT

Government type: republic

National capital: Guatemala

Administrative divisions: 22 departments (departamentos, singular -
departamento); Alta Verapaz, Baja Verapaz, Chimaltenango, Chiquimula,
El Progreso, Escuintla, Guatemala, Huehuetenango, Izabal, Jalapa,
Jutiapa, Peten, Quetzaltenango, Quiche, Retalhuleu, Sacatepequez, San
Marcos, Santa Rosa, Solola, Suchitepequez, Totonicapan, Zacapa

Independence: 15 September 1821 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 15 September (1821)

Constitution: 31 May 1985, effective 14 January 1986
note: suspended 25 May 1993 by President SERRANO; reinstated 5 June
1993 following ouster of president

Legal system: civil law system; judicial review of legislative acts;
has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Alvaro Enrique ARZU Irigoyen (since 14
January 1996); Vice President Luis Alberto FLORES Asturias (since 14
January 1996); note - the president is both the chief of state and
head of government
head of government: President Alvaro Enrique ARZU Irigoyen (since 14
January 1996); Vice President Luis Alberto FLORES Asturias (since 14
January 1996); note - the president is both the chief of state and
head of government
cabinet: Council of Ministers named by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
election last held 12 November 1995; runoff held 7 January 1996 (next
to be held NA November 2000)
election results : Alvaro Enrique ARZU Irigoyen elected president;
percent of vote - Alvaro Enrique ARZU Irigoyen (PAN) 51.2%, Jorge
PORTILLO Cabrera (FRG) 48.8%

Legislative branch: unicameral Congress of the Republic or Congreso de
la Republica (80 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms)
elections: last held on 12 November 1995 to select 80 new congressmen
(next to be held in November 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PAN
43, FRG 21, FDNG 6, DCG 4, UCN 3, UD 2, MLN 1
note: on 11 November 1993 the congress approved a procedure that
reduced its number from 116 seats to 80; the procedure provided for a
special election in mid-1994 to elect an interim congress of 80
members to serve until replaced in the November 1995 general election;
the plan was approved in a general referendum in January 1994 and the
special election was held on 14 August 1994

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justicia);
additionally the Court of Constitutionality is presided over by the
President of the Supreme Court, judges are elected for a five-year
term by Congress

Political parties and leaders: National Centrist Union or UCN [Juan
AYERDI Aguilar]; Christian Democratic Party or DCG [Alfonso CABRERA
Hidalgo]; National Advancement Party or PAN [Alvaro ARZU Irigoyen];
National Liberation Movement or MLN [Mario SANDOVAL Alarcon]; Social
Democratic Party or PSD [Sergio FLORES Cruz]; Revolutionary Party or
PR [Carlos CHAVARRIA Perez]; Guatemalan Republican Front or FRG
[Efrain RIOS Montt]; Democratic Union or UD [Jose CHEA Urruela]; New
Guatemalan Democratic Front or FDNG [Rafael ARRIAGA Martinez]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Coordinating Committee of
Agricultural, Commercial, Industrial, and Financial Associations or
CACIF; Mutual Support Group or GAM; Agrarian Owners Group or UNAGRO;
Committee for Campesino Unity or CUC; Alliance Against Impunity or
AAI; leftist movement of former guerrillas known as Guatemalan
National Revolutionary Union or URNG has four main factions -
Guerrilla Army of the Poor or EGP; Revolutionary Organization of the
People in Arms or ORPA; Rebel Armed Forces or FAR; Guatemalan Labor
Party or PGT/O; note - signed peace treaty with government on 29
December 1996; URNG formally disbanded 29-30 March 1997

International organization participation: BCIE, CACM, CCC, ECLAC, FAO,
G-24, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, LAES,
LAIA (observer), NAM, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Pedro Miguel LAMPORT Kelsall
chancery: 2220 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone : [1] (202) 745-4952 through 4954
FAX: [1] (202) 745-1908
consulate(s) general : Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New York,
and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Donald J. PLANTY (18 July 1996)
embassy: 7-01 Avenida la Reforma, Zone 10, Guatemala City
mailing address: APO AA 34024
telephone : (502) 331-1541
FAX: (502) 334-8477

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of light blue (hoist
side), white, and light blue with the coat of arms centered in the
white band; the coat of arms includes a green and red quetzal (the
national bird) and a scroll bearing the inscription LIBERTAD 15 DE
SEPTIEMBRE DE 1821 (the original date of independence from Spain) all
superimposed on a pair of crossed rifles and a pair of crossed swords
and framed by a wreath

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is based on family and corporate
agriculture, which accounts for 25% of GDP, employs about 60% of the
labor force, and supplies two-thirds of exports. Manufacturing and
construction, predominantly in private hands, account for about 20% of
GDP and 18% of the labor force. In both 1990 and 1991, the economy
grew by 3%, the fourth and fifth consecutive years of mild growth. In
1992 growth picked up to almost 5% as government policies favoring
competition and foreign trade and investment took stronger hold. In
1993-94, despite political unrest, this momentum continued, foreign
investment held up, and annual growth averaged 4%. Strong
international prices for Guatemala's traditional commodity exports
featured 4.9% growth in 1995; growth receded to 3% in 1996. Given the
markedly uneven distribution of land and income, the government faces
major obstacles in its program of economic modernization and the
reduction of poverty.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $39 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,460 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 25%
industry: 20%
services: 55%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 10.9% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 3.1 million (1995 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 58%, services 14%, manufacturing 14%,
commerce 7%, construction 4%, transport 2.6%, utilities 0.3%, mining
0.1% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 4.9%; underemployment 30%-40% (1994 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $1.25 billion (1995)
expenditures : $1.35 billion, including capital expenditures of $385
million (1995)

Industries: sugar, textiles and clothing, furniture, chemicals,
petroleum, metals, rubber, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 973,500 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 3.229 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 255 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: sugarcane, corn, bananas, coffee, beans,
cardamom; cattle, sheep, pigs, chickens

Exports:
total value: $1.81 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: coffee, sugar, bananas, cardamom, beef
partners: US 30%, El Salvador, Costa Rica, Germany, Honduras

Imports:
total value : $3.11 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: fuel and petroleum products, machinery, grain,
fertilizers, motor vehicles
partners: US 44%, Mexico, Venezuela, Japan, Germany

Debt - external: $3.1 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $274 million (1994)

Currency: 1 quetzal (Q) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: free market quetzales (Q) per US$1 - 6.0527 (January
1997), 6.0495 (1996), 5.8103 (1995), 5.7512 (1994), 5.6354 (1993),
5.1706 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Guatemala:Communications

Telephones: 210,000 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: fairly modern network centered in the city of
Guatemala
domestic: NA
international : connected to Central American Microwave System;
satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 91, FM 0, shortwave 15

Radios: 400,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 25

Televisions: 475,000 (1993 est.)

@Guatemala:Transportation

Railways:
total : 884 km (102 km privately owned)
narrow gauge: 884 km 0.914-m gauge (single track)

Highways:
total: 12,795 km
paved: 3,519 km (including 135 km of expressways)
unpaved : 9,276 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 260 km navigable year round; additional 730 km navigable
during high-water season

Pipelines: crude oil 275 km

Ports and harbors: Champerico, Puerto Barrios, Puerto Quetzal, San
Jose, Santo Tomas de Castilla

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 446 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 318
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m : 5
under 914 m: 309 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 128
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
914 to 1,523 m : 119 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 2,741,575 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,791,136 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 129,408 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $128.3 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 0.8% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: border with Belize in dispute; talks to
resolve the dispute are ongoing

Illicit drugs: transit country for cocaine shipments; illicit producer
of opium poppy and cannabis for the international drug trade; the
government has an active eradication program for cannabis and opium
poppy
______________________________________________________________________

GUERNSEY

(British crown dependency)

@Guernsey:Geography

Location: Western Europe, islands in the English Channel, northwest of
France

Geographic coordinates: 49 28 N, 2 35 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 194 sq km
land: 194 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Alderney, Guernsey, Herm, Sark, and some other smaller
islands

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 50 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone : 12 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: temperate with mild winters and cool summers; about 50% of
days are overcast

Terrain: mostly level with low hills in southwest

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location on Sark 114 m

Natural resources: cropland

Land use:
arable land : NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures : NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: large, deepwater harbor at Saint Peter Port

@Guernsey:People

Population: 63,731 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 18% (male 5,703; female 5,584)
15-64 years: 67% (male 20,883; female 21,702)
65 years and over : 15% (male 3,959; female 5,900) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.28% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 13.54 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.65 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 8.94 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.67 male(s)/female
total population: 0.92 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 8.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.38 years
male: 75.44 years
female: 81.43 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.62 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Channel Islander(s)
adjective: Channel Islander

Ethnic groups: UK and Norman-French descent

Religions: Anglican, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, Baptist,
Congregational, Methodist

Languages: English, French, Norman-French dialect spoken in country
districts

Literacy: NA

@Guernsey:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Bailiwick of Guernsey
conventional short form: Guernsey

Data code: GK

Dependency status: British crown dependency

Government type: NA

National capital: Saint Peter Port

Administrative divisions: none (British crown dependency)

Independence: none (British crown dependency)

National holiday: Liberation Day, 9 May (1945)

Constitution: unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and
practice

Legal system: English law and local statute; justice is administered
by the Royal Court

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952)
head of government: Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief
Vice-Admiral Sir John COWARD (since NA 1994) and Bailiff Mr. Graham
Martyn DOREY (since February 1992)
cabinet: Advisory and Finance Committee (other committees) appointed
by the Assembly of the States
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; lieutenant
governor appointed by the queen; bailiff appointed by the queen

Legislative branch: unicameral Assembly of the States (60 seats, 33
popularly elected; members serve six-year terms)
elections: last held 20 April 1994 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - all independents

Judicial branch: Royal Court

Political parties and leaders: none; all independents

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (British crown dependency)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (British crown dependency)

Flag description: white with the red cross of Saint George (patron
saint of England) extending to the edges of the flag

Economy

Economy - overview: Financial services account for about 55% of total
income. Tourism, manufacturing, and horticulture, mainly tomatoes and
cut flowers, have been declining. Bank profits (1992) registered a
record 26% growth. Fund management and insurance are the two other
major income generators.

GDP: $NA

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: $NA

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7% (1988)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: 3%-4% (1994 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $257.9 million
expenditures: $235.8 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1994 est.)

Industries: tourism, banking

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: tomatoes, greenhouse flowers, sweet peppers,
eggplant, other vegetables, fruit; Guernsey cattle

Exports: $NA
commodities: tomatoes, flowers and ferns, sweet peppers, eggplant,
other vegetables
partners: UK (regarded as internal trade)

Imports: $NA
commodities: coal, gasoline, and oil
partners: UK (regarded as internal trade)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid: none

Currency: 1 Guernsey (£G) pound = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Guernsey pounds (£G) per US$1 - 0.6023 (January 1997),
0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995), 0.6529 (1994), 0.6658 (1993), 0.5664
(1992); note - the Guernsey pound is at par with the British pound

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Guernsey:Communications

Telephones: 41,850 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : NA
international: 1 submarine cable

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: NA

@Guernsey:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: NA km
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Saint Peter Port, Saint Sampson

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

GUINEA

@Guinea:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean, between
Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone

Geographic coordinates: 11 00 N, 10 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 245,860 sq km
land : 245,860 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Oregon

Land boundaries:
total: 3,399 km
border countries: Guinea-Bissau 386 km, Cote d'Ivoire 610 km, Liberia
563 km, Mali 858 km, Senegal 330 km, Sierra Leone 652 km

Coastline: 320 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: generally hot and humid; monsoonal-type rainy season (June to
November) with southwesterly winds; dry season (December to May) with
northeasterly harmattan winds

Terrain: generally flat coastal plain, hilly to mountainous interior

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point : Mont Nimba 1,752 m

Natural resources: bauxite, iron ore, diamonds, gold, uranium,
hydropower, fish

Land use:
arable land : 2%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 22%
forests and woodland: 59%
other: 17% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 930 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dusty harmattan haze may reduce visibility
during dry season

Environment - current issues: deforestation; inadequate supplies of
potable water; desertification; soil contamination and erosion;
overfishing, overpopulation in forest region

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

@Guinea:People

Population: 7,405,375 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 44% (male 1,625,046; female 1,632,953)
15-64 years : 53% (male 1,928,853; female 2,019,180)
65 years and over: 3% (male 83,165; female 116,178) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.1% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 41.95 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 18.23 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -12.69 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)
note: in prior years Guinea received several hundred thousand refugees
from the civil wars in Liberia and Sierra Leone, some of whom are now
returning to their own countries

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.72 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 131.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 45.54 years
male: 43.15 years
female : 47.99 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.66 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Guinean(s)
adjective: Guinean

Ethnic groups: Peuhl 40%, Malinke 30%, Soussou 20%, smaller tribes 10%

Religions: Muslim 85%, Christian 8%, indigenous beliefs 7%

Languages: French (official), each tribe has its own language

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 35.9%
male: 49.9%
female: 21.9% (1995 est.)

@Guinea:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Guinea
conventional short form: Guinea
local long form: Republique de Guinee
local short form: Guinee
former: French Guinea

Data code: GV

Government type: republic

National capital: Conakry

Administrative divisions: 33 prefectures (prefectures, singular -
prefecture) and 1 national capital* (capitale d'etat); Beyla, Boffa,
Boke, Conakry*, Coyah, Dabola, Dalaba, Dinguiraye, Dubreka, Faranah,
Forecariah, Fria, Gaoual, Gueckedou, Kankan, Kerouane, Kindia,
Kissidougou, Koubia, Koundara, Kouroussa, Labe, Lelouma, Lola,
Macenta, Mali, Mamou, Mandiana, Nzerekore, Pita, Siguiri, Telimele,
Tougue, Yomou
note: the 33 prefectures may have been subsumed by four new
first-order administrative divisions called administrative regions
(regions administrative, singular - region administrative) named
Guinee-Forestiere, Guinee-Maritime, Haute-Guinee, and Moyenne-Guinee

Independence: 2 October 1958 (from France)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Second Republic, 3 April (1984)

Constitution: 23 December 1990 (Loi Fundamentale)

Legal system: based on French civil law system, customary law, and
decree; legal codes currently being revised; has not accepted
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Lansana CONTE (head of military government
since 5 April 1984, elected president 19 December 1993);
head of government : Prime Minister Sidia TOURE (since July 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
candidate must receive a majority of the votes cast to be elected
president; election last held 19 December 1993 (next to be held NA
December 1998); the prime minister was appointed by President CONTE
election results: Lansana CONTE' elected president; percent of vote -
Lansana CONTE' (PUP) 51.7%, Alpha CONDE' (RPG) 19.55%, Mamadou Boye
BA' (UNR) 13.37%, Siradiou DIALLO (PRP) 11.86%; note - the country's
first-ever multi-party elections for president

Legislative branch: unicameral People's National Assembly or Assemblee
Nationale Populaire (114 seats; members are elected by direct popular
vote to serve five-year terms)
elections : last held 11 June 1995 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PUP
71, RPG 19, PRP 9, UNR 9, UPG 2, PDG 1, UNP 1, PDG/RDA 1, other 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel

Political parties and leaders: political parties were legalized on 1
April 1992; of the more than 40 with legal status, the following won
seats in the legislature in the 11 June 1995 elections
pro-government : Party for Unity and Progress or PUP [Gen. Lansana
CONTE']
other: Rally for the Guinean People or RPG [Alpha CONDE]; Union for a
New Republic or UNR [Mamadou Boye BA']; Party for Renewal and Progress
or PRP [Siradiou DIALLO]; Union for Progress of Guinea or UPG
[Sec.-Gen. Jean-Marie DORE]; Democratic Party of Guinea or PDG-AST
[Ahmed Sekou TOURE]; National Union for the Prosperity of Guinea or
UNPG [Lt.Col. Facine TOURE]; Democratic Party of Guinea - African
Democratic Rally or PDG - RDA [El Hadj Ismael Mohamed Gassim GUSHEIN]

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA,
ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, MINURSO, NAM, OAU,
OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Mohamed Aly THIAM
chancery: 2112 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 483-9420
FAX: [1] (202) 483-8688

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Tibor P. NAGY, Jr. (5 July 1996)
embassy : Rue KA 038, Conakry
mailing address: B. P. 603, Conakry
telephone: [224] 41 15 20, 41 15 21, 41 15 23
FAX: [224] 41 15 22

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of red (hoist side),
yellow, and green; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia;
similar to the flag of Rwanda, which has a large black letter R
centered in the yellow band

Economy

Economy - overview: Although possessing major mineral, hydropower, and
agricultural resources, Guinea remains one of the poorest countries in
the world. The agricultural sector employs 80% of the work force.
Guinea possesses over 25% of the world's bauxite reserves and is the
second largest bauxite producer. The mining sector accounted for about
75% of exports in 1995. Long run improvements in government fiscal
arrangements, literacy, and the legal framework are needed if the
country is to move out of poverty. Except in the mining industry,
foreign investment remains minimal.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $7.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $950 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 24%
industry: 31%
services: 45% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5.1% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 2.4 million (1983)
by occupation: agriculture 80.0%, industry and commerce 11.0%,
services 5.4%, civil service 3.6%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $519 million
expenditures: $947 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: bauxite, gold, diamonds; alumina refining; light
manufacturing and agricultural processing industries

Industrial production growth rate: 3.2% (1994)

Electricity - capacity: 113,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 300 million kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 40 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, coffee, pineapples, palm kernels,
cassava (tapioca), bananas, sweet potatoes; cattle, sheep, goats;
timber

Exports:
total value: $725 million (1995 est.)
commodities: bauxite, alumina, diamonds, gold, coffee, fish,
agricultural products
partners : Belgium-Luxembourg 27%, US 15%, Ireland 10%, Spain 10%
(1994)

Imports:
total value: $775 million (1995 est.)
commodities: petroleum products, metals, machinery, transport
equipment, textiles, grain and other foodstuffs
partners: France 20%, Cote d'Ivoire 16%, US 7%, Belgium-Luxembourg 7%,
Hong Kong 6%, Germany 4% (1994)

Debt - external: $3 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Guinean franc (FG) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Guinean francs (FG) per US$1 - 1,004.0 (January 1997),
1,006.8 (November 1996), 991.4 (1995), 976.6 (1994), 955.5 (1993),
902.0 (1992)
note: the official exchange rate of the Guinean franc was set and
quoted weekly against the US dollar until end-October 1993; since 1
November 1994, the exchange rate is determined in the interbank market
for foreign exchange

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Guinea:Communications

Telephones: 18,000 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: poor to fair system of open-wire lines, small
radiotelephone communication stations, and new microwave radio relay
system
domestic : microwave radio relay and radiotelephone communication
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 257,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 65,000 (1993 est.)

@Guinea:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,086 km
standard gauge: 279 km 1.435-m gauge
narrow gauge: 807 km 1.000-m gauge (includes 662 km in common carrier
service from Kankan to Conakry)

Highways:
total: 30,270 km
paved: 4,964 km
unpaved: 25,306 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,295 km navigable by shallow-draft native craft

Ports and harbors: Boke, Conakry, Kamsar

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 14 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 6
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 8
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy (acts primarily as a coast guard), Air
Force, Republican Guard, Presidential Guard, paramilitary National
Gendarmerie, National Police Force (Surete National)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,684,999 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 850,053 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $50 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.6% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

GUINEA-BISSAU

@Guinea-Bissau:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean, between
Guinea and Senegal

Geographic coordinates: 12 00 N, 15 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 36,120 sq km
land: 28,000 sq km
water: 8,120 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than three times the size of
Connecticut

Land boundaries:
total: 724 km
border countries: Guinea 386 km, Senegal 338 km

Coastline: 350 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; generally hot and humid; monsoonal-type rainy
season (June to November) with southwesterly winds; dry season
(December to May) with northeasterly harmattan winds

Terrain: mostly low coastal plain rising to savanna in east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location in the northeast corner of the country
300 m

Natural resources: fish, timber, phosphates, bauxite, unexploited
deposits of petroleum

Land use:
arable land: 11%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures : 38%
forests and woodland: 38%
other: 12% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 17 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dusty harmattan haze may reduce visibility
during dry season; brush fires

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion;
overgrazing; overfishing

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

@Guinea-Bissau:People

Population: 1,178,584 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 251,873; female 250,950)
15-64 years: 54% (male 304,116; female 338,489)
65 years and over : 3% (male 15,771; female 17,385) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.33% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 39.17 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 15.85 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.9 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.91 male(s)/female
total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 113.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 48.71 years
male: 47.05 years
female: 50.42 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.26 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Guinea-Bissauan(s)
adjective: Guinea-Bissauan

Ethnic groups: African 99% (Balanta 30%, Fula 20%, Manjaca 14%,
Mandinga 13%, Papel 7%), European and mulatto less than 1%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 65%, Muslim 30%, Christian 5%

Languages: Portuguese (official), Criolo, African languages

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 54.9%
male : 68%
female: 42.5% (1995 est.)

@Guinea-Bissau:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Guinea-Bissau
conventional short form: Guinea-Bissau
local long form: Republica de Guine-Bissau
local short form: Guine-Bissau
former: Portuguese Guinea

Data code: PU

Government type: republic, multiparty since mid-1991, formerly highly
centralized

National capital: Bissau

Administrative divisions: 9 regions (regioes, singular - regiao);
Bafata, Biombo, Bissau, Bolama, Cacheu, Gabu, Oio, Quinara, Tombali

Independence: 10 September 1974 (from Portugal)

National holiday: Independence Day, 10 September (1974)

Constitution: 16 May 1984, amended 4 May 1991 (currently undergoing
revision to liberalize popular participation in the government)

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 15 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Joao Bernardo VIEIRA (initially assumed
power 14 November 1980)
head of government: Prime Minister Manuel da Costa SATURNINO (since 5
November 1994)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections : president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held NA August 1994 (next to be held NA 1999); prime
minister appointed by the president
election results: Joao Bernardo VIEIRA elected president; percent of
vote - Joao Bernardo VIEIRA 52%, Kumba YALLA 48%

Legislative branch: unicameral National People's Assembly or
Assembleia Nacional Popular (100 seats; members are popularly elected
to serve five-year terms)
elections : last held 3 July and 7 August 1994 (next to be held NA
1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - PAIGC 46.0%, RGB-MB
19.2%, PRS 10.3%, UM 12.8%, FLING 2.5%, PCD 5.3%, PUSD 2.9%, FCG 0.2%,
others 0.8%; seats by party - PAIGC 62, RGB 19, PRS 12, UM 6, FLING 1

Judicial branch: none; there is a Ministry of Justice in the Council
of Ministers

Political parties and leaders: African Party for the Independence of
Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde or PAIGC [President Joao Bernardo VIEIRA,
leader]; Front for the Liberation and Independence of Guinea or FLING
[Francois Kankoila MENDY]; Guinea-Bissau Resistance-Bah Fatah Movement
or RGB-MB [Domingos FERNANDES Gomes]; Guinea Civic Forum or FCG
[Antonieta Rosa GOMES]; Party for Democratic Convergence or PCD
[Vi'tor MANDINGA]; Social Renovation Party or PRS [Koumba YALLA,
leader]; Union for Change Coalition or UM [Joao da COSTA, Pres.];
United Social Democratic Party or PUSD [Vi'tor Sau'de MARIA]

International organization participation: ACCT (associate), ACP, AfDB,
ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM
(observer), ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UN Security Council (temporary),
UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Rufino Jose MENDES
chancery: 918 16th Street NW, Mezzanine Suite, Washington, DC 20006
telephone: [1] (202) 872-4222
FAX: [1] (202) 872-4226

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Peggy BLACKFORD
embassy : Bairro de Penha, Bissau
mailing address: C.P. 297, 1067 Codex, Bissau, Guinea-Bissau
telephone: [245] 252273, 252274, 252275, 252276
FAX: [245] 252282

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of yellow (top) and green
with a vertical red band on the hoist side; there is a black
five-pointed star centered in the red band; uses the popular
pan-African colors of Ethiopia

Economy

Economy - overview: Guinea-Bissau ranks among the poorest countries in
the world. Farming and fishing are the main economic activities.
Cashew nuts, peanuts, palm kernels, and fish are the primary exports.
Exploitation of known mineral deposits is unlikely at present because
of a weak infrastructure and the high cost of development. Although
Guinea-Bissau won an IMF Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility in
1996, recent political instability and overspending have undermined
the progress of economic reform and delayed disbursements of donor
aid.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $950 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 44%
industry: 8%
services: 48% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 45.4% (1995)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: agricultural products processing, beer, soft drinks

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 22,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 30 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 29 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, corn, beans, cassava (tapioca), cashew
nuts, peanuts, palm kernels, cotton; fishing and forest potential not
fully exploited

Exports:
total value: $33 million (f.o.b., 1994)
commodities: cashews 95%, fish, peanuts, palm kernels, sawn lumber
(1994)
partners: Spain 35%, India 30%, Thailand 10%, Italy 10% (1995)

Imports:
total value : $52.4 million (f.o.b., 1994)
commodities: foodstuffs, transport equipment, petroleum products,
machinery and equipment (1994)
partners: Thailand 27%, Portugal 23%, Japan 6%, Cote d'Ivoire 7%
(1995)

Debt - external: $816 million (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Guinea-Bissauan peso (PG) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Guinea-Bissauan pesos (PG) per US$1 - 33,910 (December
1996), 26,373 (1996), 18,073 (1995), 12,892 (1994), 10,082 (1993),
6,934 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Guinea-Bissau:Communications

Telephones: 3,000 (1988 est.)

Telephone system: poor system
domestic: combination of microwave radio relay, open-wire lines, and
radiotelephone communications
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 40,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: NA

@Guinea-Bissau:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 4,350 km
paved: 444 km
unpaved: 3,906 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: scattered stretches are important to coastal commerce

Ports and harbors: Bissau

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 16 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 12
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m : 8 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: People's Revolutionary Armed Force (FARP; includes
Army, Navy, and Air Force), paramilitary force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 268,000 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 152,948 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $9 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 4.5% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

GUYANA

@Guyana:Geography

Location: Northern South America, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
between Suriname and Venezuela

Geographic coordinates: 5 00 N, 59 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total: 214,970 sq km
land: 196,850 sq km
water : 18,120 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Idaho

Land boundaries:
total: 2,462 km
border countries: Brazil 1,119 km, Suriname 600 km, Venezuela 743 km

Coastline: 459 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf : 200 nm or to the outer edge of the continental
margin
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid, moderated by northeast trade winds; two
rainy seasons (May to mid-August, mid-November to mid-January)

Terrain: mostly rolling highlands; low coastal plain; savanna in south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Roraima 2,835 m

Natural resources: bauxite, gold, diamonds, hardwood timber, shrimp,
fish

Land use:
arable land : 2%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 6%
forests and woodland: 84%
other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,300 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flash floods are a constant threat during rainy
seasons

Environment - current issues: water pollution from sewage and
agricultural and industrial chemicals; deforestation

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of
the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Tropical Timber 94

@Guyana:People

Population: 706,116 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 32% (male 115,120; female 110,741)
15-64 years: 63% (male 225,199; female 222,793)
65 years and over : 5% (male 14,563; female 17,700) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.78% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 18.71 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.02 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -16.55 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.82 male(s)/female
total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 51.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 59.27 years
male : 56.93 years
female: 61.74 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.16 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Guyanese (singular and plural)
adjective: Guyanese

Ethnic groups: East Indian 51%, black and mixed 43%, Amerindian 4%,
white and Chinese 2%

Religions: Christian 57%, Hindu 33%, Muslim 9%, other 1%

Languages: English, Amerindian dialects

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over has ever attended school
total population: 98.1%
male: 98.6%
female: 97.5% (1995 est.)

@Guyana:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Co-operative Republic of Guyana
conventional short form: Guyana
former: British Guiana

Data code: GY

Government type: republic

National capital: Georgetown

Administrative divisions: 10 regions; Barima-Waini, Cuyuni-Mazaruni,
Demerara-Mahaica, East Berbice-Corentyne, Essequibo Islands-West
Demerara, Mahaica-Berbice, Pomeroon-Supenaam, Potaro-Siparuni, Upper
Demerara-Berbice, Upper Takutu-Upper Essequibo

Independence: 26 May 1966 (from UK)

National holiday: Republic Day, 23 February (1970)

Constitution: 6 October 1980

Legal system: based on English common law with certain admixtures of
Roman-Dutch law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Executive President Samuel HINDS (since March 1997);
replaced Cheddi JAGAN who died in office, March 1997
head of government: Prime Minister Janet JAGAN (since March 1997);
filled vacancy created when Samuel HINDS ascended to office of
Executive President following death of Cheddi JAGAN, March 1997
cabinet: Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president, responsible
to the legislature
elections: president elected by the majority party in the National
Assembly after legislative elections, which must be held within five
years; legislative elections last held 5 October 1992 (next to be held
NA 1997); prime minister appointed by the president

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (65 seats, 53
popularly elected; members serve five-year terms)
elections: last held on 5 October 1992 (next to be held by October
1997)
election results: percent of vote by party - PPP 53.4%, PNC 42.3%, WPA
2%, TUF 1.2%; seats by party - PPP 36, PNC 26, WPA 2, TUF 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Judicature

Political parties and leaders: People's Progressive Party (PPP),
People's National Congress (PNC), Hugh Desmond HOYTE; For a Good and
Green Guyana (GGG), Hamilton GREEN; Working People's Alliance (WPA),
Rupert ROOPNARINE; Democratic Labor Movement (DLM), Paul TENNASSEE;
People's Democratic Movement (PDM), Llewellyn JOHN; National
Democratic Front (NDF), Joseph BACCHUS; The United Force (TUF),
Manzoor NADIR; United Republican Party (URP), Leslie RAMSAMMY;
National Republican Party (NRP), Robert GANGADEEN; Guyana Labor Party
(GLP); Guyana Democratic Party (GDP), Asgar ALLY; Guyanese Organized
for Liberty and Democracy Party (GOLD), Anthony MEKDECI

Political pressure groups and leaders: Trades Union Congress (TUC);
Guyana Council of Indian Organizations (GCIO); Civil Liberties Action
Committee (CLAC)
note: the latter two organizations are small and active but not well
organized

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CCC, CDB,
ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ISO
(subscriber), ITU, LAES, NAM, OAS, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Dr. Ali Odeen ISHMAEL
chancery : 2490 Tracy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 265-6900, 6901
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Hugh SIMON
embassy: 99-100 Young and Duke Streets, Kingston, Georgetown
mailing address: P. O. Box 10507, Georgetown
telephone: [592] (2) 54900 through 54909, 57960 through 57969
FAX : [592] (2) 58497

Flag description: green with a red isosceles triangle (based on the
hoist side) superimposed on a long yellow arrowhead; there is a narrow
black border between the red and yellow, and a narrow white border
between the yellow and the green

Economy

Economy - overview: In 1996, Guyana, one of the poorest countries in
the Western Hemisphere, posted its fifth straight year of economic
growth of 5% or better, with the advance led by gold and bauxite
mining and by sugar. Favorable growth factors have included expansion
in the key agricultural and mining sectors, a more favorable
atmosphere for business initiative, a more realistic exchange rate, a
moderate inflation rate, and the continued support of international
organizations. Serious underlying economic problems will continue.
Electric power has been in short supply and constitutes a major
barrier to future gains in national output. The government must
persist in efforts to manage its sizable external debt and extend its
privatization program.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.8 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7.9% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,490 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 49%
industry: 28%
services: 33% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4.5% (1996 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: 12% (1992 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $209 million
expenditures: $303 million, including capital expenditures of $109
million (1995 est.)

Industries: bauxite, sugar, rice milling, timber, fishing (shrimp),
textiles, gold mining

Industrial production growth rate: 5.6% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 157,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 318 million kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 301 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: sugar, rice, wheat, vegetable oils; beef,
pork, poultry, dairy products; development potential exists for
fishing and forestry

Exports:
total value: $565 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : sugar, gold, bauxite/alumina, rice, shrimp, molasses
partners: Canada 33%, US 24%, UK 22% (1994 est.)

Imports:
total value: $589 million (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: manufactures, machinery, petroleum, food
partners : US 29%, Trinidad and Tobago 17%, Netherlands Antilles 17%,
UK 11%, (1994 est.)

Debt - external: $1.5 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Guyanese dollar (G$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Guyanese dollars (G$) per US$1 - 140.3 (February
1997), 141.1 (December 1996), 140.4 (1996), 142.0 (1995), 138.3
(1994), 126.7 (1993), 125.0 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Guyana:Communications

Telephones: 33,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: fair system for long-distance calling
domestic : microwave radio relay network for trunk lines
international: tropospheric scatter to Trinidad; satellite earth
station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 3, shortwave 1

Radios: 398,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 11 (1995 est.)

Televisions: 32,000 (1992 est.)

@Guyana:Transportation

Railways:
total: 88 km
standard gauge: 40 km 1.435-m gauge (dedicated to ore transport)
narrow gauge: 48 km 0.914-m gauge (dedicated to ore transport)

Highways:
total: 7,820 km
paved: 571 km
unpaved : 7,249 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 6,000 km total of navigable waterways; Berbice, Demerara,
and Essequibo Rivers are navigable by oceangoing vessels for 150 km,
100 km, and 80 km, respectively

Ports and harbors: Bartica, Georgetown, Linden, New Amsterdam, Parika

Merchant marine:
total : 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,317 GRT/2,558 DWT
(1996 est.)

Airports: 47 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 36
1,524 to 2,437 m : 3
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m : 32 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 11
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 9 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Guyana Defense Force (GDF; includes Ground Forces,
Coast Guard, and Air Corps), Guyana People's Militia (GPM), Guyana
National Service (GNS)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 198,350 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 150,105 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $7 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.7% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: all of the area west of the Essequibo River
claimed by Venezuela; Suriname claims area between New (Upper
Courantyne) and Courantyne/Kutari Rivers (all headwaters of the
Courantyne)

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for narcotics from South America -
primarily Venezuela - to the US and Europe; producer of cannabis
______________________________________________________________________

HAITI

@Haiti:Geography

Location: Caribbean, western one-third of the island of Hispaniola,
between the Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean, west of the
Dominican Republic

Geographic coordinates: 19 00 N, 72 25 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 27,750 sq km
land: 27,560 sq km
water: 190 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
total: 275 km
border countries : Dominican Republic 275 km

Coastline: 1,771 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf : to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; semiarid where mountains in east cut off trade
winds

Terrain: mostly rough and mountainous

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Chaine de la Selle 2,680 m

Natural resources: bauxite

Land use:
arable land: 20%
permanent crops: 13%
permanent pastures : 18%
forests and woodland: 5%
other: 44% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 750 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: lies in the middle of the hurricane belt and subject
to severe storms from June to October; occasional flooding and
earthquakes; periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: extensive deforestation (much of the
remaining forested land is being cleared for agriculture and use as
fuel); soil erosion; inadequate supplies of potable water

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the
Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation
signed, but not ratified: Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography - note: shares island of Hispaniola with Dominican Republic
(western one-third is Haiti, eastern two-thirds is the Dominican
Republic)

@Haiti:People

Population: 6,611,407 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 1,451,550; female 1,409,056)
15-64 years : 53% (male 1,668,670; female 1,811,957)
65 years and over: 4% (male 134,366; female 135,808) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.39% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 33.12 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 15.25 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -4.01 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.92 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.99 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 102.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 49.49 years
male : 47.45 years
female: 51.63 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.76 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Haitian(s)
adjective: Haitian

Ethnic groups: black 95%, mulatto plus white 5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 80% (of which an overwhelming majority also
practice Voodoo), Protestant 16% (Baptist 10%, Pentecostal 4%,
Adventist 1%, other 1%), none 1%, other 3% (1982)

Languages: French (official) 10%, Creole

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 45%
male: 48%
female: 42.2% (1995 est.)

@Haiti:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Haiti
conventional short form: Haiti
local long form: Republique d'Haiti
local short form: Haiti

Data code: HA

Government type: republic

National capital: Port-au-Prince

Administrative divisions: 9 departments, (departements, singular -
departement); Artibonite, Centre, Grand'Anse, Nord, Nord-Est,
Nord-Ouest, Ouest, Sud, Sud-Est

Independence: 1 January 1804 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 January (1804)

Constitution: approved March 1987, suspended June 1988, most articles
reinstated March 1989; in October 1991, government claimed to be
observing the constitution; return to constitutional rule, October
1994

Legal system: based on Roman civil law system; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Rene Garcia PREVAL (since 7 February 1996)
head of government: Prime Minister Rosny SMARTH (since March 1996)
cabinet : Cabinet; chosen by the prime minister in consultation with
the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 17 December 1995 (next to be held by December
2000); prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Rene Garcia PREVAL elected president; percent of
vote - Rene Garcia PREVAL 88%, Leon JEUNE 2.5%, Victor BENOIT 2.3%

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly or Assemblee Nationale
consists of the Senate (27 seats; members serve six-year terms;
one-third elected every two years) and the Chamber of Deputies (83
seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 25 June 1995 with reruns on 13 August
and runoffs on 17 September (election held for nine seats 6 April
1997; runoffs to be held 25 May 1997 were postponed); Chamber of
Deputies - last held 25 June 1995 with reruns on 13 August and runoffs
on 17 September (next to be held NA 1999; byelections for two vacant
seats were held 6 April 1997; runoffs to be held 25 May 1997 were
postponed)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - Lavalas Platform 17, FNDC 6, National Alliance for Democracy
and Progress 2, RDNP 1, independent 1; Chamber of Deputies - percent
of vote by party - NA; seats by party - Lavalas Platform 67, FNCD 2,
CONACOM 1, PANPRA 1, MRN 2, MKN 1, PROP 1, UPD 2, independents 4,
vacant 2

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal (Cour de Cassation)

Political parties and leaders: National Front for Change and Democracy
(FNCD), Evans PAUL and Turneb DELPE; National Cooperative Action
Movement (MKN), Volvick Remy JOSEPH; National Congress of Democratic
Movements (CONACOM), Victor BENOIT; Movement for the Installation of
Democracy in Haiti (MIDH), Marc BAZIN; National Progressive
Revolutionary Party (PANPRA), Serge GILLES; National Patriotic
Movement of November 28 (MNP-28), Dejean BELIZAIRE; National
Agricultural and Industrial Party (PAIN), Louis DEJOIE; Movement for
National Reconstruction (MRN), Rene THEODORE; Haitian Christian
Democratic Party (PDCH), Fritz PIERRE; Assembly of Progressive
National Democrats (RDNP), Leslie MANIGAT; National Labor Party (PNT),
Remy ZAMOR; Mobilization for National Development (MDN), Hubert DE
RONCERAY; Democratic Movement for the Liberation of Haiti (MODELH),
Francois LATORTUE; Popular Organizations Gathering Power (PROP), Simon
JEAN-POIX; Movement for the Organization of the Country (MOP), Gesner
COMEAU and Jean MOLIERE; Democratic Unity Confederation (KID), Evans
PAUL; National Lavalas Political Organization (OPL), Gerard
PIERRE-CHARLES; Open the Gate Party (PLB), Renaud BERNARDIN; Haitian
National Democratic Progressive Party (PNDPH), Turneb DELPE; Union of
Patriotic Democrats (UPD), Rockefeller GUERRE; Cooperative Action for
Economic Liberation (KLE), Leon JEUNE; Generation 2004, Claude
ROUMAIN; Alliance for the Liberation and Advancement of Haiti (ALAH),
Reynold GEORGES; Lavalas Political Platform or PPL (an alliance of OPL
and MOP) [Renaud BERNARDIN]; Haitian Democratic Party (PADEMH), Clark
PARENT; National Rally of Democratic Forces (RANFO), Jean Nazaire
THIDE, Marino ETIENNE; National Alliance for Democracy and Progress

Political pressure groups and leaders: Roman Catholic Church;
Confederation of Haitian Workers (CTH); Federation of Workers Trade
Unions (FOS); Autonomous Haitian Workers (CATH); National Popular
Assembly (APN); Papaye Peasants Movement (MPP)

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, Caricom
(observer), CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU,
LAES, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Jean CASIMIR
chancery: 2311 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 332-4090 through 4092
FAX: [1] (202) 745-7215
consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Miami, New York, and San Juan
(Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador William Lacy SWING
embassy : 5 Harry Truman Boulevard, Port-au-Prince
mailing address: P. O. Box 1761, Port-au-Prince
telephone: [509] 22-0354, 22-0368, 22-0200, 22-0612
FAX: [509] 23-1641

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and red
with a centered white rectangle bearing the coat of arms, which
contains a palm tree flanked by flags and two cannons above a scroll
bearing the motto L'UNION FAIT LA FORCE (Union Makes Strength)

Economy

Economy - overview: About 75% of the population lives in abject
poverty. Nearly 70% of all Haitians depend on the agriculture sector,
which consists mainly of small-scale subsistence farming and employs
about two-thirds of the economically active work force. The country
has experienced little or no job creation since President PREVAL took
office in February 1996. Failure to reach agreements with
international sponsors have denied Haiti badly needed budget and
development assistance. Meeting aid conditions in 1997 will be
especially challenging in the face of mounting popular criticism of
reforms.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $6.8 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 34.8%
industry: 23%
services: 42.2% (1991 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 18% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 2.3 million
by occupation: agriculture 66%, services 25%, industry 9%
note : shortage of skilled labor, unskilled labor abundant (1982)

Unemployment rate: 60% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $240 million (est.)
expenditures: $250 million including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY94/95 est.)

Industries: sugar refining, flour milling, textiles, cement, tourism,
light assembly industries based on imported parts

Industrial production growth rate: 2.5% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 216,500 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 379 million kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 33 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, mangoes, sugarcane, rice, corn,
sorghum; wood

Exports:
total value: $123 million (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: light manufactures 65%, coffee 19%, other agriculture 8%,
other 8%
partners: US 73.5%, EU 19.4% (1995)

Imports:
total value : $666 million (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: machines and manufactures 34%, food and beverages 22%,
petroleum products 14%, chemicals 10%, fats and oils 9%
partners: US 65.0%, EU 13.9% (1995)

Debt - external: $827 million (September 1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 gourde (G) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: gourdes (G) per US$1 (end of period) - 16.260 (January
1997), 15.093 (1996), 16.160 (1995), 12.947 (1994), 12.805 (1993),
10.953 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September

@Haiti:Communications

Telephones: 50,000 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: domestic facilities barely adequate, international
facilities slightly better
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 33, FM 0, shortwave 2

Radios: 320,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 32,000 (1992 est.)

@Haiti:Transportation

Railways:
total: 40 km (single track; privately owned industrial line) - closed
in early 1990's
narrow gauge : 40 km 0.760-m gauge

Highways:
total: 4,080 km
paved: 987 km
unpaved: 3,093 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: negligible; less than 100 km navigable

Ports and harbors: Cap-Haitien, Gonaives, Jacmel, Jeremie, Cayes,
Miragoane, Port-au-Prince, Port-de-Paix, Saint-Marc

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 11 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 7
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
under 914 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Haitian National Police (PNH)
note: the regular Haitian Army, Navy, and Air Force have been
demobilized but still exist on paper until/unless constitutionally
abolished

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,430,855 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 774,835 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 71,003 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA; note - mainly for police
and security activities

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims US-administered Navassa Island

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana en route
to the US and Europe
______________________________________________________________________

HEARD ISLAND AND MCDONALD ISLANDS
McDonald Islands]

(territory of Australia)

@Heard Island and McDonald Islands:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, islands in the Indian Ocean, about
two-thirds of the way from Madagascar to Antarctica

Geographic coordinates: 53 06 S, 72 31 E

Map references: Antarctic Region

Area:
total : 412 sq km
land: 412 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than 2 times the size of Washington,
DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 101.9 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: antarctic

Terrain: Heard Island - bleak and mountainous, with a quiescent
volcano; McDonald Islands - small and rocky

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Big Ben 2,745 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: Heard Island is dominated by a dormant volcano called
Big Ben

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: primarily used for research stations

@Heard Island and McDonald Islands:People

Population: uninhabited

@Heard Island and McDonald Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Territory of Heard Island and McDonald
Islands
conventional short form: Heard Island and McDonald Islands

Data code: HM

Dependency status: territory of Australia; administered by the
Ministry for Sport, Territories, and Local Government

National capital: none; administered from Canberra, Australia

Independence: none (territory of Australia)

Flag description: the flag of Australia is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Heard Island and McDonald Islands:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Australia

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

HOLY SEE (VATICAN CITY)

@Holy See (Vatican City):Geography

Location: Southern Europe, an enclave of Rome (Italy)

Geographic coordinates: 41 54 N, 12 27 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 0.44 sq km
land : 0.44 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.7 times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
total: 3.2 km
border countries: Italy 3.2 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; mild, rainy winters (September to mid-May) with
hot, dry summers (May to September)

Terrain: low hill

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : unnamed location 19 m
highest point: unnamed location 75 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100% (urban area)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified : Air Pollution, Environmental Modification

Geography - note: urban; landlocked; enclave of Rome, Italy; world's
smallest state; outside the Vatican City, 13 buildings in Rome and
Castel Gandolfo (the pope's summer residence) enjoy extraterritorial
rights

@Holy See (Vatican City):People

Population: 850 (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.15% (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: none
adjective: none

Ethnic groups: Italians, Swiss

Religions: Roman Catholic

Languages: Italian, Latin, various other languages

@Holy See (Vatican City):Government

Country name:
conventional long form: The Holy See (State of the Vatican City)
conventional short form: Holy See (Vatican City)
local long form: Santa Sede (Stato della Citta del Vaticano)
local short form: Santa Sede (Citta del Vaticano)

Data code: VT

Government type: monarchical-sacerdotal state

National capital: Vatican City

Independence: 11 February 1929 (from Italy)

National holiday: Installation Day of the Pope, 22 October (1978)
(John Paul II)
note: Pope John Paul II was elected on 16 October 1978

Constitution: Apostolic Constitution of 1967 (effective 1 March 1968)

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: limited to cardinals less than 80 years old

Executive branch:
chief of state : Pope JOHN PAUL II (Karol WOJTYLA; since 16 October
1978)
head of government: Secretary of State Archbishop Angelo Cardinal
SODANO (since NA 1991)
cabinet: Pontifical Commission appointed by Pope
elections: pope elected for life by the College of Cardinals; election
last held 16 October 1978 (next to be held after the death of the
current pope); secretary of state appointed by the pope
election results: Karol WOJTYLA elected pope

Legislative branch: unicameral Pontifical Commission

Judicial branch: none; normally handled by Italy

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: none (exclusive of influence
exercised by church officers)

International organization participation: IAEA, ICFTU, Intelsat, IOM
(observer), ITU, OAS (observer), OSCE, UN (observer), UNCTAD, UNHCR,
UPU, WIPO, WToO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Apostolic Pro-Nuncio Archbishop Agostino
CACCIAVILLAN
chancery : 3339 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 333-7121

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Raymond L. FLYNN
embassy: Villa Domiziana, Via Delle Terme Deciane 26, Rome 00153
mailing address: PSC 59, APO AE 09624
telephone : [39] (6) 46741
FAX: [39] (6) 5758346, 57300682

Flag description: two vertical bands of yellow (hoist side) and white
with the crossed keys of Saint Peter and the papal miter centered in
the white band

Economy

Economy - overview: This unique, noncommercial economy is supported
financially by contributions (known as Peter's Pence) from Roman
Catholics throughout the world, the sale of postage stamps and tourist
mementos, fees for admission to museums, and the sale of publications.
The incomes and living standards of lay workers are comparable to, or
somewhat better than, those of counterparts who work in the city of
Rome.

Labor force: NA
by occupation: dignitaries, priests, nuns, guards, and 3,000 lay
workers who live outside the Vatican

Budget:
revenues : $175.5 million
expenditures: $175 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1994)

Industries: printing and production of a small amount of mosaics and
staff uniforms; worldwide banking and financial activities

Electricity - capacity: 5,000 kW standby
note : electricity supplied by Italy

Electricity - production: NA kWh
note: electricity supplied by Italy

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Currency: 1 Vatican lira (VLit) = 100 centesimi

Exchange rates: Vatican lire (VLit) per US$1 - 1568.1 (January 1997),
1,542.9 (1996), 1,628.9 (1995), 1,612.4 (1994), 1,573.7 (1993),
1,232.4 (1992); note - the Vatican lira is at par with the Italian
lira which circulates freely

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Holy See (Vatican City):Communications

Telephones: 2,000

Telephone system: automatic exchange
domestic: tied into Italian system
international: uses Italian system

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: NA

@Holy See (Vatican City):Transportation

Railways:
total: 862 meters; note - connects to Italy's network at Rome's Saint
Peter's station
narrow gauge: 862 meters 1.435-m gauge

Highways: none; all city streets

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: none

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Italy; Swiss Papal
Guards are posted at entrances to Vatican City

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

HONDURAS

@Honduras:Geography

Location: Middle America, bordering the Caribbean Sea, between
Guatemala and Nicaragua and bordering the North Pacific Ocean, between
El Salvador and Nicaragua

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 86 30 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 112,090 sq km
land : 111,890 sq km
water: 200 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Tennessee

Land boundaries:
total: 1,520 km
border countries: Guatemala 256 km, El Salvador 342 km, Nicaragua 922
km

Coastline: 820 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: natural extension of territory or to 200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: subtropical in lowlands, temperate in mountains

Terrain: mostly mountains in interior, narrow coastal plains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Cerro Las Minas 2,870 m

Natural resources: timber, gold, silver, copper, lead, zinc, iron ore,
antimony, coal, fish

Land use:
arable land : 15%
permanent crops: 3%
permanent pastures: 14%
forests and woodland: 54%
other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 740 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent, but generally mild, earthquakes; damaging
hurricanes and floods along Caribbean coast

Environment - current issues: urban population expanding;
deforestation results from logging and the clearing of land for
agricultural purposes; further land degradation and soil erosion
hastened by uncontrolled development and improper land use practices
such as farming of marginal lands; mining activities polluting Lago de
Yojoa (the country's largest source of freshwater) with heavy metals
as well as several rivers and streams

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

@Honduras:People

Population: 5,751,384 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 42% (male 1,237,549; female 1,194,598)
15-64 years: 54% (male 1,549,400; female 1,574,075)
65 years and over: 4% (male 93,695; female 102,067) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.55% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 32.63 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.66 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.5 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.92 male(s)/female
total population : 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 40.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 68.81 years
male: 66.38 years
female: 71.37 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.26 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Honduran(s)
adjective: Honduran

Ethnic groups: mestizo (mixed Amerindian and European) 90%, Amerindian
7%, black 2%, white 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 97%, Protestant minority

Languages: Spanish, Amerindian dialects

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 72.7%
male : 72.6%
female: 72.7% (1995 est.)

@Honduras:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Honduras
conventional short form: Honduras
local long form: Republica de Honduras
local short form: Honduras

Data code: HO

Government type: republic

National capital: Tegucigalpa

Administrative divisions: 18 departments (departamentos, singular -
departamento) plus probable Central District (Tegucigalpa); Atlantida,
Choluteca, Colon, Comayagua, Copan, Cortes, El Paraiso, Francisco
Morazan, Gracias a Dios, Intibuca, Islas de la Bahia, La Paz, Lempira,
Ocotepeque, Olancho, Santa Barbara, Valle, Yoro

Independence: 15 September 1821 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 15 September (1821)

Constitution: 11 January 1982, effective 20 January 1982

Legal system: rooted in Roman and Spanish civil law; some influence of
English common law; accepts ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Carlos Roberto REINA Idiaquez (since 27
January 1994); First Vice President General (Ret.) Walter LOPEZ;
Second Vice President Juan DE LA CRUZ Avelar; Third Vice President
Guadeloupe JEREZANO; note - the president is both the chief of state
and head of government
head of government: President Carlos Roberto REINA Idiaquez (since 27
January 1994) First Vice President General (Ret.) Walter LOPEZ; Second
Vice President Juan DE LA CRUZ Avelar; Third Vice President Guadeloupe
JEREZANO; note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
cabinet: Cabinet
elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
election last held 28 November 1993 (next to be held NA November 1997)
election results: Carlos Roberto REINA Idiaquez elected president;
percent of vote - Carlos Roberto REINA Idiaquez (PLH) 53%, Oswaldo
RAMOS Soto (PNH) 41%, other 6%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Asamblea Nacional
(128 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year
terms)
elections : last held on 27 November 1993 (next to be held November
1997)
election results: percent of vote by party - PNH 53%, PLH 41%, PDCH
1.0%, PINU-SD 2.5%, other 2.5%; seats by party - PLH 71, PNH 55,
PINU-SD 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justica),
judges are elected for four-year terms by the National Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Liberal Party (PLH), Carlos FLORES
Facusse, president; National Party of Honduras (PNH), Oswaldo RAMOS
Soto, president; National Innovation and Unity Party (PINU), Olban
VALLADARES, president; Christian Democratic Party (PDCH), Efrain DIAZ
Arrivillaga, president

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Association of
Honduran Campesinos (ANACH); Honduran Council of Private Enterprise
(COHEP); Confederation of Honduran Workers (CTH); National Union of
Campesinos (UNC); General Workers Confederation (CGT); United
Federation of Honduran Workers (FUTH); Committee for the Defense of
Human Rights in Honduras (CODEH); Coordinating Committee of Popular
Organizations (CCOP)

International organization participation: BCIE, CACM, ECLAC, FAO,
G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer),
MINURSO, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIH, UPU,
WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Roberto FLORES Bermudez
chancery: 3007 Tilden Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 966-7702, 2604, 5008, 4596
FAX: [1] (202) 966-9751
consulate(s) general : Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
Orleans, New York, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)
consulate(s): Boston, Detroit, and Jacksonville

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador James Francis CREAGAN (29 July 1996)
embassy : Avenida La Paz, Apartado Postal No. 3453, Tegucigalpa
mailing address: American Embassy, APO AA 34022, Tegucigalpa
telephone: [504] 36-9320, 38-5114
FAX: [504] 36-9037

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white,
and blue with five blue five-pointed stars arranged in an X pattern
centered in the white band; the stars represent the members of the
former Federal Republic of Central America - Costa Rica, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua; similar to the flag of El
Salvador, which features a round emblem encircled by the words
REPUBLICA DE EL SALVADOR EN LA AMERICA CENTRAL centered in the white
band; also similar to the flag of Nicaragua, which features a triangle
encircled by the word REPUBLICA DE NICARAGUA on top and AMERICA
CENTRAL on the bottom, centered in the white band

Economy

Economy - overview: Honduras is one of the poorest countries in the
Western Hemisphere. Agriculture employs nearly two-thirds of the labor
force and produces two-thirds of exports. Productivity remains low.
Manufacturing, mining, and construction account for 30 % of GDP and
generate 20% of exports. Basic problems include rapid population
growth, high underemployment, inflation, a lack of basic services, a
large and inefficient public sector, and the dependence of the export
sector mostly on coffee and bananas, which are subject to sharp price
fluctuations.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $11.5 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 28%
industry: 30%
services: 42% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 25.4% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 1.3 million
by occupation: agriculture 62%, services 20%, manufacturing 9%,
construction 3%, other 6% (1985)

Unemployment rate: 15%; underemployed about 40% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $655 million
expenditures: $850 million, including capital expenditures of $150
million (1997 est.)

Industries: sugar, coffee, textiles, clothing, wood products

Industrial production growth rate: 10% (1992 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 605,900 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 2.742 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 361 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: bananas, coffee, citrus; beef; timber; shrimp;

Exports:
total value: $2.401 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: bananas, coffee, shrimp, lobster, minerals, meat, lumber
partners : US 65%, Germany 7%, Japan 7%, Spain 3%, Belgium 2%

Imports:
total value: $3.133 billion (c.i.f. 1996)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment, industrial raw
materials, chemical products, manufactured goods, fuel and oil,
foodstuffs
partners : US 50%, Guatemala 5%, Japan 5%, Mexico 3%, El Salvador 3%

Debt - external: $4.6 billion (1995)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 lempira (L) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: lempiras (L) per US$1 (end of period) - 13.0330
(January 1997), 12.8694 (1996), 10.3432 (1995), 9.4001 (1994), 7.2600
(1993), 5.8300 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Honduras:Communications

Telephones: 105,000 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: inadequate system
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
connected to Central American Microwave System

Radio broadcast stations: AM 176, FM 0, shortwave 7

Radios: 2.115 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 28

Televisions: 400,000 (1992 est.)

@Honduras:Transportation

Railways:
total: 595 km
narrow gauge: 190 km 1.067-m gauge; 128 km 1.057-m gauge; 277 km
0.914-m gauge
note: in 1993, there was a total of 988 km of track (1995)

Highways:
total: 15,100 km
paved: 3,050 km
unpaved: 12,050 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 465 km navigable by small craft

Ports and harbors: La Ceiba, Puerto Castilla, Puerto Cortes, San
Lorenzo, Tela, Puerto Lempira

Merchant marine:
total: 251 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 714,755 GRT/1,066,043
DWT
ships by type: bulk 28, cargo 153, chemical tanker 3, combination bulk
1, container 5, liquefied gas tanker 1, livestock carrier 3, oil
tanker 21, passenger 1, passenger-cargo 3, refrigerated cargo 22,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 8, short-sea passenger 1, vehicle carrier 1
note: a flag of convenience registry; Russia owns 8 ships, Vietnam 3,
North Korea 2, Greece 1, Japan 1, Singapore 1, Iran 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 107 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 88
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m : 5
under 914 m: 78 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 19
914 to 1,523 m: 19 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Marines), Air Force, Public
Security Forces (FUSEP)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,370,116 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 816,054 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 66,304 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $42.5 million (1997)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: about 1.5% (1997)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: land boundary dispute with El Salvador
mostly resolved by 11 September 1992 International Court of Justice
(ICJ) decision; with respect to the maritime boundary in the Golfo de
Fonseca, ICJ referred to an earlier agreement in this century and
advised that some tripartite resolution among El Salvador, Honduras,
and Nicaragua likely would be required; maritime boundary dispute with
Nicaragua

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for drugs and narcotics; illicit
producer of cannabis, cultivated on small plots and used principally
for local consumption
______________________________________________________________________

HONG KONG

(dependent territory of the UK)

@Hong Kong:Geography

Location: Eastern Asia, bordering the South China Sea and China

Geographic coordinates: 22 15 N, 114 10 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 1,092 sq km
land: 1,042 sq km
water: 50 sq km

Area - comparative: six times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
total: 30 km
border countries: China 30 km

Coastline: 733 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical monsoon; cool and humid in winter, hot and rainy
from spring through summer, warm and sunny in fall

Terrain: hilly to mountainous with steep slopes; lowlands in north

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: South China Sea 0 m
highest point: Tai Mo Shan 958 m

Natural resources: outstanding deepwater harbor, feldspar

Land use:
arable land: 6%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 1%
forests and woodland : 22%
other: 70% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons

Environment - current issues: air and water pollution from rapid
urbanization

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: more than 200 islands

@Hong Kong:People

Population: 6,547,189 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 19% (male 629,981; female 584,807)
15-64 years: 71% (male 2,319,009; female 2,348,794)
65 years and over: 10% (male 299,503; female 365,095) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.59% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 12.72 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.79 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 18.94 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.82 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.71 years
male: 75.98 years
female: 81.62 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.33 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Chinese
adjective: Chinese

Ethnic groups: Chinese 95%, other 5%

Religions: eclectic mixture of local religions 90%, Christian 10%

Languages: Chinese (Cantonese), English

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
total population : 92.2%
male: 96%
female: 88.2% (1996 est.)

@Hong Kong:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Hong Kong
abbreviation : HK

Data code: HK

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK; note - scheduled to
revert to China on 1 July 1997

Government type: NA

National capital: Victoria

Administrative divisions: none (dependent territory of the UK)

Independence: none (dependent territory of the UK; the UK signed an
agreement with China on 19 December 1984 to return Hong Kong to China
on 1 July 1997; in the joint declaration, China promises to respect
Hong Kong's existing social and economic systems and lifestyle)

National holiday: Liberation Day, 29 August (1945)

Constitution: the Letters Patent together with the Royal Instructions
form the written constitution of Hong Kong; new Basic Law approved in
March 1990 in preparation for scheduled reversion to China on 1 July
1997

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: direct election 18 years of age; universal for permanent
residents living in the territory of Hong Kong for the past seven
years; indirect election limited to about 100,000 professionals of
electoral college and functional constituencies

Executive branch:
chief of state : Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952)
head of government: Governor and President of the Executive Council
Christopher Francis PATTEN (since 9 July 1992); Chief Secretary Anson
CHAN Fang On-Sang (since 29 November 1993)
cabinet: Executive Council appointed by the governor
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor appointed
by the queen

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council (60 seats; 30
indirectly elected by functional constituencies, 20 elected by popular
vote, and 10 elected by election committee; members serve four-year
terms); note - the Legislative Council will be replaced by a
provisional legislature on 1 July 1997
elections: indirect and direct elections last held 17 September 1995;
note - elections for the first post-reversion Legislative Council are
scheduled to be held in 1998
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
Democratic Party 21, Liberal Party 10, Democratic Alliance for the
Betterment of Hong Kong 6, other parties and independents 23; note -
subsequent to the election, there has been a change in the
distribution of seats; the new distribution is as follows - Democratic
Party 19, Liberal Party 10, Democratic Alliance for the Betterment of
Hong Kong 6, other parties and independents 25

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party, Martin LEE, chairman;
Liberal Party, Allen LEE, chairman; Democratic Alliance for the
Betterment of Hong Kong, TSANG Yuk-shing, chairman; Hong Kong
Democratic Foundation, Dr. Patrick SHIU Kin-ying, chairman

Political pressure groups and leaders: Association for Democracy and
People's Livelihood (ADPL), Frederick FUNG Kin Kee, chairman; Liberal
Democratic Federation, HU Fa-kuang, chairman; Federation of Trade
Unions (pro-China), LEE Chark-tim, president; Hong Kong and Kowloon
Trade Union Council (pro-Taiwan); Confederation of Trade Unions
(pro-democracy), LEE Cheuk-yan, chairman; Hong Kong General Chamber of
Commerce; Chinese General Chamber of Commerce (pro-China); Federation
of Hong Kong Industries; Chinese Manufacturers' Association of Hong
Kong; Hong Kong Professional Teachers' Union, CHEUNG Man-kwong,
president; Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the Patriotic Democratic
Movement in China, Szeto WAH, chairman

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, BIS (pending
member), CCC, ESCAP (associate), ICFTU, IMO (associate), Interpol
(subbureau), IOC, ISO (correspondent), WCL, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Consul General Richard A. BOUCHER
consulate(s) general: 26 Garden Road, Hong Kong
mailing address: PSC 464, Box 30, FPO AP 96522-0002
telephone: [852] 2523-9011
FAX : [852] 2845-1598

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
quadrant with the Hong Kong coat of arms on a white disk centered on
the outer half of the flag; the coat of arms contains a shield
(bearing two junks below a crown) held by a lion (representing the UK)
and a dragon (representing China) with another lion above the shield
and a banner bearing the words HONG KONG below the shield
note: to be replaced on 1 July 1997 by a red flag with a stylized,
white, five-petal bauhinia flower in the center

Economy

Economy - overview: Hong Kong has a bustling free market economy with
few tariffs or nontariff barriers. Natural resources are limited, and
food and raw materials must be imported. Manufacturing and
construction account for about 18% of GDP. Goods and services exports
account for about 50% of GDP. Real GDP growth averaged a remarkable 8%
in 1987-88, slowed to 3.0% in 1989-90, and picked up to 4.2% in 1991,
5.0% in 1992, 5.2% in 1993, 5.5% in 1994, 4.8% in 1995, and 4.7% in
1996. A shortage of labor continues to put upward pressure on prices
and the cost of living. Prospects for 1997 remain bright so long as
major trading partners continue to be reasonably prosperous and so
long as investors feel China will support free market practices after
the takeover on 1 July 1997.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $163.6 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.7% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $26,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 0.2%
industry: 18.4%
services: 81.4% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 6.5% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 3.251 million (1996)
by occupation: wholesale and retail trade, restaurants, and hotels
34.4%, services 19.8%, manufacturing 14.2%, financing, insurance, and
real estate 12.4%, transport and communications 5.1%, construction
2.1%, other 12% (1994)

Unemployment rate: 3.1% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $19 billion
expenditures: $14.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $289
million (FY95/96 est.)

Industries: textiles, clothing, tourism, electronics, plastics, toys,
watches, clocks

Industrial production growth rate: -2.6% (1996)

Electricity - capacity: 10.32 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 25.14 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,716 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: fresh vegetables; poultry

Exports:
total value : $197.2 billion (including reexports; f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: clothing, textiles, yarn and fabric, footwear, electrical
appliances, watches and clocks, toys
partners: China 33%, US 22%, Japan 6%, Germany 4%, UK 3%, Singapore 3%
(1995)

Imports:
total value: $217.2 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, transport equipment, raw materials,
semimanufactures, petroleum; a large share is reexported
partners: China 36%, Japan 15%, Taiwan 9%, US 8%, Singapore 5%, South
Korea 5% (1995)

Debt - external: none (1996)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Hong Kong dollar (HK$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Hong Kong dollars (HK$) per US$ - 7.730 (1996), 7.800
(1995), 7.800 (1994), 7.800 (1993), 7.741 (1992); note - linked to the
US dollar at the rate of about 7.8 HK$ per 1 US$

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Hong Kong:Communications

Telephones: 3.31 million (1996)

Telephone system: modern facilities provide excellent domestic and
international services
domestic: microwave radio relay links and extensive fiber-optic
network
international: satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (1 Pacific Ocean
and 2 Indian Ocean); coaxial cable to Guangzhou, China; access to 5
international submarine cables providing connections to ASEAN member
nations, Japan, Taiwan, Australia, Middle East, and Western Europe

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: 3 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (British Broadcasting Corporation
repeater 1; British Forces Broadcasting Service repeater 1)

Televisions: 1.75 million (1992 est.)

@Hong Kong:Transportation

Railways:
total : 34 km
standard gauge: 34 km 1.435-m gauge (1996 est.)
note: also has 43 km of metro with 38 stations

Highways:
total: 1,717 km
paved : 1,717 km
unpaved: 0 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Hong Kong

Merchant marine:
total: 221 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 7,908,237 GRT/13,580,012
DWT
ships by type: bulk 124, cargo 31, combination bulk 4, combination
ore/oil 2, container 38, liquefied gas tanker 2, multifunction large
load carrier 2, oil tanker 11, refrigerated cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off
cargo 1, short-sea passenger 1, vehicle carrier 3
note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 15 countries
among which are UK 50, South Africa 12, Belgium 10, China 9, Japan 8,
Bermuda 5, US 5, Israel 4, Germany 3, and Switzerland 3; Hong Kong
owns an additional 498 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 18,810,794
DWT that operate under the registries of The Bahamas, Belize, Bermuda,
Cyprus, Liberia, Malta, Panama, Philippines, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, and Vanuatu

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)
note: new international airport under construction and will open in
1998

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 2
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Headquarters of British Forces, Army, Royal Navy,
Royal Air Force, Royal Hong Kong Auxiliary Air Force, Royal Hong Kong
Police Force

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,884,488 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,427,567 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 46,601 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $207 million (FY92/93); note -
this represents 65% of the total cost of defending the colony, the
remainder being paid by the UK

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 0.2% (FY92/93)

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK until 1 July
1997, when China will assume command

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: a hub for Southeast Asian heroin trade; transshipment
and money-laundering center; increasing indigenous amphetamine abuse
______________________________________________________________________

HOWLAND ISLAND

(territory of the US)

@Howland Island:Geography

Location: Oceania, island in the North Pacific Ocean, about one-half
of the way from Hawaii to Australia

Geographic coordinates: 0 48 N, 176 38 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 1.6 sq km
land : 1.6 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about three times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 6.4 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: equatorial; scant rainfall, constant wind, burning sun

Terrain: low-lying, nearly level, sandy, coral island surrounded by a
narrow fringing reef; depressed central area

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point : unnamed location 3 m

Natural resources: guano (deposits worked until late 1800s)

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 5%
other: 95%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: the narrow fringing reef surrounding the island can
be a maritime hazard

Environment - current issues: no natural fresh water resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: almost totally covered with grasses, prostrate
vines, and low-growing shrubs; small area of trees in the center;
primarily a nesting, roosting, and foraging habitat for seabirds,
shorebirds, and marine wildlife; feral cats

@Howland Island:People

Population: uninhabited
note: American civilians evacuated in 1942 after Japanese air and
naval attacks during World War II; occupied by US military during
World War II, but abandoned after the war; public entry is by
special-use permit only and generally restricted to scientists and
educators

@Howland Island:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Howland Island

Data code: HQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US; administered by
the Fish and Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior as
part of the National Wildlife Refuge System

National capital: none; administered from Washington, DC

Flag description: the flag of the US is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Howland Island:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only; note - there is one
boat landing area along the middle of the west coast

Airports: airstrip constructed in 1937 for scheduled refueling stop on
the round-the-world flight of Amelia Earhart and Fred Noonan - they
left Lae, New Guinea, for Howland Island, but were never seen again;
the airstrip is no longer serviceable

Transportation - note: Earhart Light is a day beacon near the middle
of the west coast that was partially destroyed during World War II,
but has since been rebuilt; named in memory of famed aviatrix Amelia
Earhart

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US; visited
annually by the US Coast Guard

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

HUNGARY

@Hungary:Geography

Location: Central Europe, northwest of Romania

Geographic coordinates: 47 00 N, 20 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 93,030 sq km
land: 92,340 sq km
water: 690 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Indiana

Land boundaries:
total: 2,009 km
border countries: Austria 366 km, Croatia 329 km, Romania 443 km,
Serbia and Montenegro 151 km (all with Serbia), Slovakia 515 km,
Slovenia 102 km, Ukraine 103 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; cold, cloudy, humid winters; warm summers

Terrain: mostly flat to rolling plains; hills and low mountains on the
Slovakian border

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Tisza River 78 m
highest point: Kekes 1,014 m

Natural resources: bauxite, coal, natural gas, fertile soils

Land use:
arable land: 51%
permanent crops : 2%
permanent pastures: 13%
forests and woodland: 19%
other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 2,060 sq km (1993 est.)

Environment - current issues: an early-1996 government study
identified 179 areas that suffer from air pollution, 54 areas with
polluted soil, and 32 areas with polluted underground water; the study
estimated clean-up costs at $350 million, but the 1996 government
budget allocated only about $7 million for this purpose

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: landlocked; strategic location astride main land
routes between Western Europe and Balkan Peninsula as well as between
Ukraine and Mediterranean basin

@Hungary:People

Population: 10,232,404 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 18% (male 924,864; female 881,728)
15-64 years: 68% (male 3,419,485; female 3,541,823)
65 years and over: 14% (male 549,091; female 915,413) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.25% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 10.73 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 13.67 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.47 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.6 male(s)/female
total population: 0.92 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 10 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 70.48 years
male : 66.06 years
female: 75.13 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.47 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Hungarian(s)
adjective: Hungarian

Ethnic groups: Hungarian 89.9%, Gypsy 4%, German 2.6%, Serb 2%, Slovak
0.8%, Romanian 0.7%

Religions: Roman Catholic 67.5%, Calvinist 20%, Lutheran 5%, atheist
and other 7.5%

Languages: Hungarian 98.2%, other 1.8%

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99%
male: 99%
female : 98% (1980 est.)

@Hungary:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Hungary
conventional short form: Hungary
local long form: Magyar Koztarsasag
local short form: Magyarorszag

Data code: HU

Government type: republic

National capital: Budapest

Administrative divisions: 19 counties (megyek, singular - megye), 20
urban counties* (singular - megyei varos), and 1 capital city**
(fovaros); Bacs-Kiskun, Baranya, Bekes, Bekescsaba*,
Borsod-Abauj-Zemplen, Budapest**, Csongrad, Debrecen*, Dunaujvaros*,
Eger*, Fejer, Gyor*, Gyor-Moson-Sopron, Hajdu-Bihar, Heves,
Hodmezovasarhely*, Jasz-Nagykun-Szolnok, Kaposvar*, Kecskemet*,
Komarom-Esztergom, Miskolc*, Nagykanizsa*, Nograd, Nyiregyhaza*,
Pecs*, Pest, Somogy, Sopron*, Szabolcs-Szatmar-Bereg, Szeged*,
Szekesfehervar*, Szolnok*, Szombathely*, Tatabanya*, Tolna, Vas,
Veszprem, Veszprem*, Zala, Zalaegerszeg*

Independence: 1001 (unification by King Stephen I)

National holiday: St. Stephen's Day (National Day), 20 August
(commemorates the coronation of King Stephen in 1000 AD)

Constitution: 18 August 1949, effective 20 August 1949, revised 19
April 1972; 18 October 1989 revision ensured legal rights for
individuals and constitutional checks on the authority of the prime
minister and also established the principle of parliamentary oversight

Legal system: in process of revision, moving toward rule of law based
on Western model

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Arpad GONCZ (since 3 August 1990; previously
interim president since 2 May 1990)
head of government : Prime Minister Gyula HORN (since 15 July 1994)
cabinet: Council of Ministers elected by the National Assembly on the
recommendation of the president
elections: president elected by the National Assembly for a four-year
term; election last held 19 June 1995 (next to be held NA 1999); prime
minister elected by the National Assembly on the recommendation of the
president
election results: Arpad GONCZ elected president; a total of 335 votes
were cast by the National Assembly, Arpad GONCZ received 259; Gyula
HORN elected prime minister; percent of legislative vote NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Orszaggyules (386
seats; members are elected by popular vote under a system of
proportional and direct representation to serve four-year terms)
elections : last held on 8 and 29 May 1994 (next to be held May 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - MSzP
209, SzDSz 70, MDF 37, FKgP 26, KDNP 22, FiDeSz 20, other 2

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, judges are elected by the
National Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Hungarian Democratic Forum or MDF
[Sandor LEZSAK, chairman]; Independent Smallholders or FKgP [Jozsef
TORGYAN, president]; Hungarian Socialist Party or MSzP [Gyula HORN,
president]; Christian Democratic People's Party or KDNP [Gyorgy GICZY,
president]; Federation of Young Democrats or FiDeSz [Viktor ORBAN,
chairman]; Alliance of Free Democrats or SzDSz [Gabor KUNCZE,
chairman]; Hungarian Democratic People's Party or MDNP [Ivan SZABO,
chairman]
note: the Hungarian Socialist (Communist) Workers' Party or MSzMP
renounced Communism and became the Hungarian Socialist Party or MSzP
in October 1989; there is still a small MMP (Communist Party); the
MDNP was formed in March 1996 by breakaway members of the Hungarian
Democratic Forum

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS, CCC,
CE, CEI, CERN, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, G- 9, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MTCR, NACC, NAM (guest), NSG, OAS (observer),
OECD, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR,
UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNOMIG, UNU, UPU, WEU (associate partner),
WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Gyorgy BANLAKI
chancery: 3910 Shoemaker Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 362-6730
FAX : [1] (202) 966-8135
consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Donald M. BLINKEN
embassy: V. Szabadsag Ter 12, Budapest
mailing address: American Embassy Budapest, Department of State,
Washington, DC 20521-5270
telephone : [36] (1) 267-4400, 269-9331
FAX: [36] (1) 269-9326

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and green

Economy

Economy - overview: Hungary probably had the most Western-oriented
economy in East Europe before the transition to a market system began
in 1990, and Budapest made good progress in the initial years of
transition. The reform process slowed in 1993-94, however, in part
because of the May 1994 elections and the resulting change in
government. By 1994 the privatization of state firms had ground to a
halt, while both the budget and current account deficits soared to
unsustainable levels - about 8% and 10% of GDP, respectively. The
situation improved sharply in 1995: an austerity program introduced in
March reduced both deficits; and a renewed privatization effort later
in the year resulted in more than $3 billion worth of sales of state
firms to foreign investors - money used mostly to reduce Hungary's
large foreign debt. Real GDP increased 2.9% in 1994 - following
several years of steep decline - and about 1.5% in 1995 and only 0.5%
in 1996. Unemployment reached 14% in early 1993 before gradually
falling back to 11% in 1996. Inflation has oscillated; it reached 40%
in mid-1991, dropped to 17% in early 1994, jumped back to 31% by
mid-1995, and settled at 20% in 1996. Prospects for 1997 and 1998 are
good compared with the situation earlier. Most forecasters expect 2%
to 3% GDP growth in 1997 and slightly higher growth in 1998. Inflation
and unemployment are edging down. With the government still committed
to reform, both the budget and current account deficits are at IMF
target levels - about 4% of GDP. Budapest also is making good progress
in restructuring the pension, health, tax, education, and other
systems as part of the effort to decrease the role of government. This
dramatic shift in economic policy was rewarded in 1996 by the IMF,
which finally signed the standby agreement Budapest had sought, and by
the OECD, which welcomed Hungary as a member.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $74.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 0.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $7,500 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 7.3%
industry : 31.9%
services: 60.8% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 20% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 6.2 million (1996)
by occupation: services 58.7%, industry 34.7%, agriculture 6.6 (1996
est.)

Unemployment rate: 11% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $10.2 billion
expenditures : $11 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995)

Industries: mining, metallurgy, construction materials, processed
foods, textiles, chemicals (especially pharmaceuticals), motor
vehicles

Industrial production growth rate: 2% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 6.98 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 31.63 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,200 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, corn, sunflower seed, potatoes, sugar
beets; pigs, cattle, poultry, dairy products

Exports:
total value: $14.2 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: raw materials 39.5%, consumer goods 25.0%, agriculture
and food products 21.8%, machinery and equipment 11.3%, fuels and
electricity 2.4% (1995)
partners : EU 63.3% (Germany 28.8%, Austria 10.0%), Eastern Europe
19.7%, Russia 10.7% (1995)

Imports:
total value : $16.8 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: raw materials 42.3%, consumer goods 20.9%, machinery and
equipment 20.1%, fuels and electricity 10.8%, agricultural and food
products 5.9% (1995)
partners: EU 61.6% (Germany 23.6%, Austria 11.9%), Eastern Europe
22.2%, Russia 14.7% (1995)

Debt - external: $27.5 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $136 million (1993)
note : assistance received from OECD countries and international
organizations, $3,700 million (1990-93)

Currency: 1 forint (Ft) = 100 filler

Exchange rates: forints per US$1 - 166.100 (January 1997), 152.647
(1996), 125.681 (1995),105.160 (1994), 91.933 (1993), 78.988 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Hungary:Communications

Telephones: 2.16 million (1 January 1996) - there are 21.1 per 100
inhabitants, 54.1 per 100 households; mobile telephone services are
used by 267,000 subscribers

Telephone system: 14,213 telex lines; automatic telephone network
based on microwave radio relay system; the average waiting time for
telephones is expected to drop to one year by the end of 1997 (down
from over 10 years in the early 1990's); note - the former state-owned
telecommunications firm MATAV - now privatized and managed by a
US/German consortium - has ambitious plans to upgrade the inadequate
system, including a contract with the German firm Siemens and the
Swedish firm Ericsson to provide 600,000 new phone lines during
1996-98
domestic : microwave radio relay
international: satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat and 1
Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 32, FM 15, shortwave 0

Radios: 6 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 41 (Russian repeaters 8)

Televisions: 4.38 million (1993 est.)

@Hungary:Transportation

Railways:
total: 7,619 km
broad gauge: 35 km 1.524-m gauge
standard gauge: 7,408 km 1.435-m gauge (2,216 km electrified; 1,236 km
double track)
narrow gauge : 176 km 0.760-m gauge (1995)
note: Hungry and Austria jointly manage the cross-border
standard-gauge railway between Gyor, Sopron, Ebenfurti, and Vasut, a
distance of about 100 km

Highways:
total: 158,633 km
paved: 69,957 km (including 378 km of expressways)
unpaved: 88,676 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,622 km (1988)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,204 km; natural gas 4,387 km (1991)

Ports and harbors: Budapest, Dunaujvaros

Merchant marine:
total: 11 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 51,076 GRT/67,498
DWT (1996 est.)

Airports: 78 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 14
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
under 914 m: 1 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 64
2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
1,524 to 2,437 m: 9
914 to 1,523 m: 14
under 914 m : 34 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Ground Forces, Air and Air Defense Forces, Border
Guard, Territorial Defense

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,631,781 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 2,099,109 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 78,828 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $550 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.5% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Gabcikovo Dam dispute with Slovakia

Illicit drugs: major transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin
and cannabis and transit point for South American cocaine destined for
Western Europe; limited producer of precursor chemicals, particularly
for amphetamines and methamphetamines
______________________________________________________________________

ICELAND

@Iceland:Geography

Location: Northern Europe, island between the Greenland Sea and the
North Atlantic Ocean, northwest of the UK

Geographic coordinates: 65 00 N, 18 00 W

Map references: Arctic Region

Area:
total: 103,000 sq km
land: 100,250 sq km
water: 2,750 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Kentucky

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 4,988 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; moderated by North Atlantic Current; mild, windy
winters; damp, cool summers

Terrain: mostly plateau interspersed with mountain peaks, icefields;
coast deeply indented by bays and fiords

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Hvannadalshnukur 2,119 m

Natural resources: fish, hydropower, geothermal power, diatomite

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 23%
forests and woodland: 1%
other: 76% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: earthquakes and volcanic activity

Environment - current issues: water pollution from fertilizer runoff;
inadequate wastewater treatment

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification, Marine Life
Conservation

Geography - note: strategic location between Greenland and Europe;
westernmost European country; more land covered by glaciers than in
all of continental Europe

@Iceland:People

Population: 269,697 (July 1997 est.)
note: population data estimates based on average growth rate may
differ slightly from official population data because of volatile
migration rates

Age structure:
0-14 years: 24% (male 32,931; female 31,390)
15-64 years: 64% (male 87,993; female 86,107)
65 years and over: 12% (male 14,107; female 17,169) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.47% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 15.35 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.93 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -3.73 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.82 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.73 years
male: 76.68 years
female: 80.9 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.05 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Icelander(s)
adjective: Icelandic

Ethnic groups: homogeneous mixture of descendants of Norwegians and
Celts

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran 96%, other Protestant and Roman
Catholic 3%, none 1% (1988)

Languages: Icelandic

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 100% (1976 est.)
male: NA%
female: NA%

@Iceland:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Iceland
conventional short form: Iceland
local long form : Lyoveldio Island
local short form: Island

Data code: IC

Government type: constitutional republic

National capital: Reykjavik

Administrative divisions: 23 counties (syslar, singular - sysla) and
14 independent towns* (kaupstadhir, singular - kaupstadhur); Akranes*,
Akureyri*, Arnessysla, Austur-Bardhastrandarsysla,
Austur-Hunavatnssysla, Austur-Skaftafellssysla, Borgarfjardharsysla,
Dalasysla, Eyjafjardharsysla, Gullbringusysla, Hafnarfjordhur*,
Husavik*, Isafjordhur*, Keflavik*, Kjosarsysla, Kopavogur*, Myrasysla,
Neskaupstadhur*, Nordhur-Isafjardharsysla, Nordhur-Mulasys-la,
Nordhur-Thingeyjarsysla, Olafsfjordhur*, Rangarvallasysla, Reykjavik*,
Saudharkrokur*, Seydhisfjordhur*, Siglufjordhur*, Skagafjardharsysla,
Snaefellsnes-og Hnappadalssysla, Strandasysla, Sudhur-Mulasysla,
Sudhur-Thingeyjarsysla, Vesttmannaeyjar*, Vestur-Bardhastrandarsysla,
Vestur-Hunavatnssysla, Vestur-Isafjardharsysla,
Vestur-Skaftafellssysla

Independence: 17 June 1944 (from Denmark)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Establishment of the Republic, 17
June (1944)

Constitution: 16 June 1944, effective 17 June 1944

Legal system: civil law system based on Danish law; does not accept
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Olafur Ragnar GRIMSSON (since 1 August 1996)
head of government: Prime Minister David ODDSSON (since 30 April 1991)
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
election last held 29 June 1996 (next to be held NA June 2000); prime
minister appointed by the president
election results : Olafur Ragnar GRIMSSON elected president; percent
of vote - 41.4%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Althing (63 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : last held on 8 April 1995 (next to be held by April 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - Independence Party 37.1%,
Progressive Party 23.3%, Social Democratic Party 11.4%, Socialists
14.3%, People's Movement 7.2%, Women's Party 4.9%; seats by party -
Independence 25, Progressive 15, Social Democratic 7, Socialists 9,
People's Movement 4, Women's Party 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Haestirettur, justices are appointed
for life by the president

Political parties and leaders: Independence Party (conservative) or IP
[David ODDSSON]; Progressive Party (liberal) or PP [Halldor
ASGRIMSSON]; Social Democratic Party or SDP [Sighvatur BJORGVINSSON];
People's Alliance (left socialist) or PA [Margret FRIMANNSDOTTIR];
Women's Party or WL [Kristin ASTGEIRSDOTTIR]; People's Movement
(centrist); National Awakening (People's Revival Party) or PR [Johanna
SIGURDARDOTTIR]

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS, CCC,
CE, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
ISO, ITU, MTCR, NACC, NATO, NC, NEA, NIB, OECD, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNU, UPU, WEU (associate), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Einar BENEDIKTSSON
chancery : Suite 1200, 1156 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005
telephone: [1] (202) 265-6653 through 6655
FAX: [1] (202) 265-6656
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Day Olin MOUNT (22 August 1996)
embassy: Laufasvegur 21, Reykjavik
mailing address : US Embassy, PSC 1003, Box 40, FPO AE 09728-0340
telephone: [354] 5629100
FAX: [354] 5629118

Flag description: blue with a red cross outlined in white that extends
to the edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to
the hoist side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

Economy

Economy - overview: Iceland's Scandinavian-type economy is basically
capitalistic, yet with an extensive welfare system, low unemployment,
and remarkably even distribution of income. The economy depends
heavily on the fishing industry, which provides 75% of export earnings
and employs 12% of the work force. In the absence of other natural
resources - except energy - Iceland's economy is vulnerable to
changing world fish prices. The economy remains sensitive to declining
fish stocks as well as to drops in world prices for its main exports:
fish and fish products, aluminum, and ferrosilicon. The center-right
government plans to continue its policies of reducing the budget and
current account deficits, limiting foreign borrowing, containing
inflation, revising agricultural and fishing policies, diversifying
the economy, and privatizing state-owned industries. The government
remains opposed to EU membership, primarily because of Icelanders'
concern about losing control over their fishing resources.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $5.3 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $19,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 9.6%
industry: 22.1%
services: 68.3% (1991)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.5% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 145,000 (1994)
by occupation: commerce, transportation, and services 60.0%,
manufacturing 12.5%, fishing and fish processing 11.8%, construction
10.8%, agriculture 4.0%, other 0.9% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 5% (1996)

Budget:
revenues: $1.9 billion
expenditures: $2.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $297
million (1994 est.)

Industries: fish processing; aluminum smelting, ferrosilicon
production, geothermal power; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 1.75% (1991 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 1.1 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 5 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 17,181 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: potatoes, turnips; cattle, sheep; fish catch
of about 1.1 million metric tons in 1992

Exports:
total value: $1.67 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: fish and fish products 75%, animal products, aluminum,
ferrosilicon, diatomite
partners: UK 19%, Germany 14%, US 12%, Japan 11%, Denmark 8%, France
7% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $1.62 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: machinery and transportation equipment, petroleum
products, foodstuffs, textiles
partners: Germany 11%, Norway 10%, UK 10%, Denmark 9%, US 8%, Sweden
7% (1995)

Debt - external: $2.5 billion (1993 est.)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Icelandic krona (IKr) = 100 aurar

Exchange rates: Icelandic kronur (IKr) per US$1 - 68.330 (January
1997), 66.500 (1996), 64.692 (1995), 69.944 (1994), 67.603 (1993),
57.546 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Iceland:Communications

Telephones: 143,600 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: adequate domestic service
domestic: the trunk network consists of coaxial and fiber-optic cables
and microwave radio relay links
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean),
1 Inmarsat (Atlantic and Indian Ocean Regions); note - Iceland shares
the Inmarsat earth station with the other Nordic countries (Denmark,
Finland, Norway, and Sweden)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 147 (transmitters and repeaters),
shortwave 0

Radios: 91,500 licensed (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 202 (transmitters and repeaters)

Televisions: 96,100 licensed (1993 est.)

@Iceland:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 12,378 km
paved: 3,070 km
unpaved : 9,308 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Akureyri, Hornafjordur, Isafjordhur, Keflavik,
Raufarhofn, Reykjavik, Seydhisfjordhur, Straumsvik, Vestmannaeyjar

Merchant marine:
total: 4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 17,041 GRT/21,531 DWT
ships by type: chemical tanker 1, container 1, oil tanker 1,
refrigerated cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 84 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 60
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 5
under 914 m: 50 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 24
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 21 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: no regular armed forces; Police, Coast Guard; note
- Iceland's defense is provided by the US-manned Icelandic Defense
Force (IDF) headquartered at Keflavik

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 70,833 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 62,601 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: none

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Rockall continental shelf dispute involving
Denmark, Ireland, and the UK (Ireland and the UK have signed a
boundary agreement in the Rockall area)
______________________________________________________________________

INDIA

@India:Geography

Location: Southern Asia, bordering the Arabian Sea and the Bay of
Bengal, between Burma and Pakistan

Geographic coordinates: 20 00 N, 77 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total: 3,287,590 sq km
land: 2,973,190 sq km
water: 314,400 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than one-third the size of the US

Land boundaries:
total: 14,103 km
border countries: Bangladesh 4,053 km, Bhutan 605 km, Burma 1,463 km,
China 3,380 km, Nepal 1,690 km, Pakistan 2,912 km

Coastline: 7,000 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: varies from tropical monsoon in south to temperate in north

Terrain: upland plain (Deccan Plateau) in south, flat to rolling plain
along the Ganges, deserts in west, Himalayas in north

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Kanchenjunga 8,598 m

Natural resources: coal (fourth-largest reserves in the world), iron
ore, manganese, mica, bauxite, titanium ore, chromite, natural gas,
diamonds, petroleum, limestone

Land use:
arable land: 56%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures : 4%
forests and woodland: 23%
other: 16% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 480,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: droughts, flash floods, severe thunderstorms common;
earthquakes

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion;
overgrazing; desertification; air pollution from industrial effluents
and vehicle emissions; water pollution from raw sewage and runoff of
agricultural pesticides; tap water is not potable throughout the
country; huge and rapidly growing population is overstraining natural
resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: dominates South Asian subcontinent; near important
Indian Ocean trade routes

@India:People

Population: 966,783,171 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 35% (male 173,420,822; female 163,433,648)
15-64 years: 61% (male 304,048,569; female 281,625,342)
65 years and over: 4% (male 22,536,104; female 21,718,686) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.72% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 26.19 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.87 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.08 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.04 male(s)/female
total population : 1.07 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 65.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 62.41 years
male: 61.68 years
female: 63.18 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.29 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Indian(s)
adjective: Indian

Ethnic groups: Indo-Aryan 72%, Dravidian 25%, Mongoloid and other 3%

Religions: Hindu 80%, Muslim 14%, Christian 2.4%, Sikh 2%, Buddhist
0.7%, Jains 0.5%, other 0.4%

Languages: English enjoys associate status but is the most important
language for national, political, and commercial communication, Hindi
the national language and primary tongue of 30% of the people, Bengali
(official), Telugu (official), Marathi (official), Tamil (official),
Urdu (official), Gujarati (official), Malayalam (official), Kannada
(official), Oriya (official), Punjabi (official), Assamese (official),
Kashmiri (official), Sindhi (official), Sanskrit (official),
Hindustani a popular variant of Hindu/Urdu, is spoken widely
throughout northern India
note : 24 languages each spoken by a million or more persons; numerous
other languages and dialects, for the most part mutually
unintelligible

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 52%
male: 65.5%
female: 37.7% (1995 est.)

@India:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of India
conventional short form: India

Data code: IN

Government type: federal republic

National capital: New Delhi

Administrative divisions: 25 states and 7 union territories*; Andaman
and Nicobar Islands*, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
Chandigarh*, Dadra and Nagar Haveli*, Daman and Diu*, Delhi*, Goa,
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachel Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka,
Kerala, Lakshadweep*, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Pondicherry*, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal

Independence: 15 August 1947 (from UK)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Proclamation of the Republic, 26
January (1950)

Constitution: 26 January 1950

Legal system: based on English common law; limited judicial review of
legislative acts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Shankar Dayal SHARMA (since 25 July 1992);
Vice President Kicheril Raman NARAYANAN (since 21 August 1992)
head of government: Prime Minister I.K. GUJRAL (since 21 April 1997)
cabinet : Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
recommendation of the prime minister
elections: president elected by an electoral college consisting of
elected members of both houses of Parliament and the legislatures of
the states for a five-year term; vice president elected by both houses
of Parliament; prime minister elected by parliamentary members of the
majority party following legislative elections
election results: Shankar Dayal SHARMA elected president; percent of
electoral college vote - NA; Kicheril Raman NARAYANAN elected vice
president; percent of Parliament vote - NA; I.K. GUJRAL elected prime
minister; percent of vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Sansad consists of the
Council of States or Rajya Sabha (a body consisting of not more than
250 members, up to 12 of which are appointed by the president, the
remainder are chosen by the elected members of the state and
territorial assemblies; members serve six-year terms) and the People's
Assembly or Lok Sabha (545 seats; 543 elected by popular vote, 2
appointed; members serve five-year terms)
elections: People's Assembly - last held 27 April through May 1996
(next to be held NA 2001)
election results : People's Assembly - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - BJP and allies 194, Congress I Party 140, Janata Dal
Party 44, CPI/M 32, Tamil Maanila Congress 20, Dravida Munnetra
Kazagham 17, SP 17, Teluga Desam (Naidu) 16, CPI 11, RSP 5, Asom Gana
Parishad 5, Congress (Tiwari) 4, AIFB 3, Muslim League 2, Madhya
Pradesh Vikas Congress 2, Karnataka Congress Party 1, independents and
other regional parties 30

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), A. B.
VAJPAYEE; Congress (I) Party, Sitaram KESRI, president; Janata Dal
Party, Laloo Prasad YADAV; Janata Dal (Ajit), Ajit SINGH; Communist
Party of India/Marxist (CPI/M), Harkishan Singh SURJEET; Tamil Maanila
Congress, G. K. MOOPANAR; Dravida Munnetra Kazagham (a regional party
in Tamil Nadu), M. KARUNANIDHI; Samajwadi Party (SP), Mulayam Singh
YADAV (president), Om Prakash CHAUTALA, Devi LAL; Telugu Desam (Naidu)
(a regional party in Andhra Pradesh), Chandrababu NAIDU; Communist
Party of India (CPI), Indrajit GUPTA; Revolutionary Socialist Party
(RSP), Tridip CHOWDHURY; Asom Gana Parishad, Prafulla Kumar MAHANTA;
Congress (Tiwari), Arjun SINGH and N.D. TIWARI; All India Forward Bloc
(AIFB), Prem Dutta PALIWAL (chairman), Chitta BASU (general
secretary); Muslim League, G. M. BANATWALA; Madhya Pradesh Vikas
Congress, Madhavro SCINDIA; Karnataka Congress Party, S. BANGARAPPA;
Shiv Sena, Bal THACKERAY; Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), Kanshi RAM;
Communist Party of India/Marxist-Leninist (CPI/ML), Vinod MISHRA;
Akali Dal factions representing Sikh religious community in the
Punjab; National Conference (NC; a regional party in Jammu and
Kashmir), Farooq ABDULLAH; Bihar Peoples Party, Lovely ANAND; Samata
Party (formerly Janata Dal members), George FERNANDES; Indian National
League, Suliaman SAIT; Kerala Congress (Mani faction), K. M. MANI
note: subsequent to the election, the following parties were dissolved
- Congress (Tiwari), Madhya Pradesh Vikas Congress, and Karnataka
Congress Party

Political pressure groups and leaders: various separatist groups
seeking greater communal and/or regional autonomy; numerous religious
or militant/chauvinistic organizations, including Adam Sena, Ananda
Marg, Vishwa Hindu Parishad, and Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB,
BIS (pending member), C, CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G- 6, G-15, G-19, G-24,
G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO,
ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), PCA, SAARC, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMIH, UNOMIL, UNU, UPU, WFTU,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Naresh CHANDRA
chancery: 2107 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008; note -
Embassy located at 2536 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 939-7000
FAX: [1] (202) 483-3972
consulate(s) general : Chicago, Houston, New York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Frank G. WISNER
embassy: Shanti Path, Chanakyapuri 110021, New Delhi
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone : [91] (11) 600651
FAX: [91] (11) 6872028
consulate(s) general: Bombay, Calcutta, Chennai (Madras), Mumbai

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of orange (top), white,
and green with a blue chakra (24-spoked wheel) centered in the white
band; similar to the flag of Niger, which has a small orange disk
centered in the white band

Economy

Economy - overview: India's economy is a mixture of traditional
village farming, modern agriculture, handicrafts, a wide range of
modern industries, and a multitude of support services. A large share
of the population, perhaps as much as 40%, remains too poor to afford
an adequate diet. The policy in the 1980s of fueling economic growth
through high government expenditure proved unsustainable, however, and
in the wake of an international payments crisis in 1991 India has been
transforming its semi-socialist, insular economy into a more open,
market-oriented economy. Production, trade, and investment reforms
since 1991 have provided new opportunities for Indian businesspersons
and an estimated 200 million plus middle class consumers. New Delhi
has stimulated exports, attracted foreign investment, and revived
confidence in India's economic prospects. GDP growth exceeded 6% in
1995 and in 1996. Most of the country's external fundamentals -
including the current account balance and reserves (now about $19
billion) - are healthy. Even so, the Indian Government needs to
restore the early momentum of reform, especially by continuing
reductions in the extensive remaining government regulations. The
government will also have to deal with rising government expenditures
and higher debt servicing which could create a debt trap by the turn
of the century. Even if a series of weak coalition governments come to
power in the next few years and are unable to push reforms
aggressively, parts of the economy that have already benefited from
deregulation will continue to grow. Moreover, the country can build on
other strengths, including its diverse industrial base, large
scientific and technical pool, its well-developed legal system, and
its large middle class.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.538 trillion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,600 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 30%
industry : 28%
services: 42% (1993/94)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 10.3% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 370 million (1995 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 65% or more, services 4%, manufacturing and
construction 3%, communications and transport 3%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $34 billion
expenditures: $52.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY95/96)

Industries: textiles, chemicals, food processing, steel,
transportation equipment, cement, mining, petroleum, machinery

Industrial production growth rate: 11.2% (1996)

Electricity - capacity: 83.288 million kW 1996)

Electricity - production: 380 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 419 kWh (1995)

Agriculture - products: rice, wheat, oilseed, cotton, jute, tea,
sugarcane, potatoes; cattle, water buffalo, sheep, goats, poultry;
fish catch of about 3 million metric tons ranks India among the
world's top 10 fishing nations

Exports:
total value : $30.5 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: clothing, gems and jewelry, engineering goods, chemicals,
leather manufactures, cotton yarn, and fabric
partners: US, Japan, Germany, UK, Hong Kong

Imports:
total value: $34.5 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: crude oil and petroleum products, machinery, gems,
fertilizer, chemicals
partners: US, Germany, Saudi Arabia, UK, Belgium, Japan

Debt - external: $97.9 billion (March 1995)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $1.237 billion (1993); US ODA bilateral commitments
$171 million; US Ex-Im bilateral commitments $680 million; Western
(non-US) countries, ODA bilateral commitments $2.48 billion; OPEC
bilateral aid $200 million; World Bank (IBRD) multilateral commitments
$2.8 billion; Asian Development Bank (AsDB) multilateral commitments
$760 million; International Finance Corporation (IFC) multilateral
commitments $200 million; other multilateral commitments $554 million
(1995-96)

Currency: 1 Indian rupee (Re) = 100 paise

Exchange rates: Indian rupees (Rs) per US$1 - 35.872 (January 1997),
35.433 (1996), 32.427 (1995), 31.374 (1994), 30.493 (1993), 25.918
(1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@India:Communications

Telephones: 9.8 million (1995)

Telephone system: probably the least adequate telephone system of any
of the industrializing countries; three of every four villages have no
telephone service; only 5% of India's villages have long-distance
service; poor telephone service significantly impedes commercial and
industrial growth and penalizes India in global markets; slow
improvement is taking place with the recent admission of private and
private-public investors, but demand for communication services is
also growing rapidly
domestic : local service is provided mostly by open wire and obsolete
electromechanical and manual switchboard systems; within the last 10
years a substantial amount of digital switch gear has been introduced
for local service; long-distance traffic is carried mostly by open
wire, coaxial cable, and low-capacity microwave radio relay; since
1985, however, significant trunk capacity has been added in the form
of fiber-optic cable and a domestic satellite system with over 100
earth stations
international : satellite earth stations - 8 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)
and 1 Inmarsat (Indian Ocean Region); submarine cables to Malaysia and
UAE

Radio broadcast stations: AM 96, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 70 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 274 (government controlled)

Televisions: 33 million (1992 est.)

@India:Transportation

Railways:
total: 62,462 km (11,793 km electrified; 12,617 km double track)
broad gauge: 37,824 km 1.676-m gauge
narrow gauge: 20,653 km 1.000-m gauge; 3,985 km 0.762-m and 0.610-m
gauge (1995 est.)

Highways:
total : 2,009,600 km
paved: 1,006,810 km
unpaved: 1,002,790 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 16,180 km; 3,631 km navigable by large vessels

Pipelines: crude oil 3,005 km; petroleum products 2,687 km; natural
gas 1,700 km (1995)

Ports and harbors: Calcutta, Chennai (Madras), Cochin, Jawaharal
Nehru, Kandla, Mumbai (Bombay), Vishakhapatnam

Merchant marine:
total : 306 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,832,647
GRT/11,376,028 DWT
ships by type: bulk 132, cargo 59, chemical tanker 8, combination bulk
3, combination ore/oil 3, container 11, liquefied gas tanker 8, oil
tanker 75, passenger-cargo 5, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1, short-sea
passenger 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 290 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 249
over 3,047 m: 12
2,438 to 3,047 m: 48
1,524 to 2,437 m : 59
914 to 1,523 m: 68
under 914 m: 62 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 41
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 37 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 15 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, various security or
paramilitary forces (includes Border Security Force, Assam Rifles, and
Coast Guard)

Military manpower - military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 258,172,895 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 151,693,072 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 10,465,427 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $8 billion (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.7% (FY95/96)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: boundaries with Bangladesh and China in
dispute; status of Kashmir with Pakistan; water-sharing problems with
downstream riparian Pakistan over the Indus (Wular Barrage);
Bangladesh and India signed a treaty 12 December 1996 to share water
from the Ganges

Illicit drugs: world's largest licit producer of opium for the
pharmaceutical trade, but an undetermined quantity of opium is
diverted to illicit international drug markets; major transit country
for illicit narcotics produced in neighboring countries; illicit
producer of hashish and methaqualone; produced 47 metric tons of
illicit opium in 1996
______________________________________________________________________

INDIAN OCEAN
[Map of Indian Ocean]

@Indian Ocean:Geography

Location: body of water between Africa, Antarctica, Asia, and
Australia

Geographic coordinates: 30 00 S, 80 00 E

Map references: World

Area:
total : 73.6 million sq km
note: includes Arabian Sea, Bass Straight, Bay of Bengal, Great
Australian Bight, Gulf of Oman, Persian Gulf, Red Sea, Strait of
Malacca, and other tributary water bodies

Area - comparative: slightly less than eight times the size of the US;
third-largest ocean (after the Pacific Ocean and Atlantic Ocean, but
larger than the Arctic Ocean)

Coastline: 66,526 km

Climate: northeast monsoon (December to April), southwest monsoon
(June to October); tropical cyclones occur during May/June and
October/November in the northern Indian Ocean and January/February in
the southern Indian Ocean

Terrain: surface dominated by counterclockwise gyre (broad, circular
system of currents) in the southern Indian Ocean; unique reversal of
surface currents in the northern Indian Ocean; low atmospheric
pressure over southwest Asia from hot, rising, summer air results in
the southwest monsoon and southwest-to-northeast winds and currents,
while high pressure over northern Asia from cold, falling, winter air
results in the northeast monsoon and northeast-to-southwest winds and
currents; ocean floor is dominated by the Mid-Indian Ocean Ridge and
subdivided by the Southeast Indian Ocean Ridge, Southwest Indian Ocean
Ridge, and Ninety East Ridge

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Java Trench -7,258 m
highest point: sea level 0 m

Natural resources: oil and gas fields, fish, shrimp, sand and gravel
aggregates, placer deposits, polymetallic nodules

Natural hazards: ships subject to superstructure icing in extreme
south near Antarctica from May to October

Environment - current issues: endangered marine species include the
dugong, seals, turtles, and whales; oil pollution in the Arabian Sea,
Persian Gulf, and Red Sea

Environment - international agreements:
party to : none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: major chokepoints include Bab el Mandeb, Strait of
Hormuz, Strait of Malacca, southern access to the Suez Canal, and the
Lombok Strait

@Indian Ocean:Government

Data code: none; the US Government has not approved a standard for
hydrographic codes - see the Cross-Reference List of Hydrographic
Codes appendix

Economy

Economy - overview: The Indian Ocean provides major sea routes
connecting the Middle East, Africa, and East Asia with Europe and the
Americas. It carries a particularly heavy traffic of petroleum and
petroleum products from the oilfields of the Persian Gulf and
Indonesia. Its fish are of great and growing importance to the
bordering countries for domestic consumption and export. Fishing
fleets from Russia, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan also exploit the Indian
Ocean, mainly for shrimp and tuna. Large reserves of hydrocarbons are
being tapped in the offshore areas of Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, and
western Australia. An estimated 40% of the world's offshore oil
production comes from the Indian Ocean. Beach sands rich in heavy
minerals and offshore placer deposits are actively exploited by
bordering countries, particularly India, South Africa, Indonesia, Sri
Lanka, and Thailand.

@Indian Ocean:Communications

Telephone system:
international : submarine cables from India to UAE and Malaysia and
from Sri Lanka to Djibouti and Indonesia

@Indian Ocean:Transportation

Ports and harbors: Calcutta (India), Colombo (Sri Lanka), Durban
(South Africa), Jakarta (Indonesia), Madras (India), Melbourne
(Australia), Mumbai (Bombay; India), Richard's Bay (South Africa)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: some maritime disputes (see littoral states)
______________________________________________________________________

INDONESIA

@Indonesia:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, archipelago between the Indian Ocean and
the Pacific Ocean

Geographic coordinates: 5 00 S, 120 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total : 1,919,440 sq km
land: 1,826,440 sq km
water: 93,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 2,602 km
border countries: Malaysia 1,782 km, Papua New Guinea 820 km

Coastline: 54,716 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; more moderate in highlands

Terrain: mostly coastal lowlands; larger islands have interior
mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Puncak Jaya 5,030 m

Natural resources: petroleum, tin, natural gas, nickel, timber,
bauxite, copper, fertile soils, coal, gold, silver

Land use:
arable land: 10%
permanent crops: 7%
permanent pastures: 7%
forests and woodland : 62%
other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 45,970 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional floods, severe droughts, tsunamis,
earthquakes

Environment - current issues: deforestation; water pollution from
industrial wastes, sewage; air pollution in urban areas

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: archipelago of 17,000 islands (6,000 inhabited);
straddles Equator; strategic location astride or along major sea lanes
from Indian Ocean to Pacific Ocean

@Indonesia:People

Population: 209,774,138 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 31% (male 33,313,149; female 32,367,905)
15-64 years: 65% (male 67,824,993; female 68,226,617)
65 years and over: 4% (male 3,557,886; female 4,483,588) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.51% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.39 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.3 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.79 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 61.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 62.06 years
male: 59.89 years
female: 64.34 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.66 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Indonesian(s)
adjective: Indonesian

Ethnic groups: Javanese 45%, Sundanese 14%, Madurese 7.5%, coastal
Malays 7.5%, other 26%

Religions: Muslim 87%, Protestant 6%, Roman Catholic 3%, Hindu 2%,
Buddhist 1%, other 1% (1985)

Languages: Bahasa Indonesia (official, modified form of Malay),
English, Dutch, local dialects, the most widely spoken of which is
Javanese

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 83.8%
male: 89.6%
female: 78% (1995 est.)

@Indonesia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Indonesia
conventional short form: Indonesia
local long form : Republik Indonesia
local short form: Indonesia
former: Netherlands East Indies; Dutch East Indies

Data code: ID

Government type: republic

National capital: Jakarta

Administrative divisions: 24 provinces (propinsi-propinsi, singular -
propinsi), 2 special regions* (daerah-daerah istimewa, singular -
daerah istimewa), and 1 special capital city district** (daerah khusus
ibukota); Aceh*, Bali, Bengkulu, Irian Jaya, Jakarta Raya**, Jambi,
Jawa Barat, Jawa Tengah, Jawa Timur, Kalimantan Barat, Kalimantan
Selatan, Kalimantan Tengah, Kalimantan Timur, Lampung, Maluku, Nusa
Tenggara Barat, Nusa Tenggara Timur, Riau, Sulawesi Selatan, Sulawesi
Tengah, Sulawesi Tenggara, Sulawesi Utara, Sumatera Barat, Sumatera
Selatan, Sumatera Utara, Timor Timur, Yogyakarta*

Independence: 17 August 1945 (proclaimed independence; on 27 December
1949, Indonesia became legally independent from the Netherlands)

National holiday: Independence Day, 17 August (1945)

Constitution: August 1945, abrogated by Federal Constitution of 1949
and Provisional Constitution of 1950, restored 5 July 1959

Legal system: based on Roman-Dutch law, substantially modified by
indigenous concepts and by new criminal procedures code; has not
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 17 years of age; universal and married persons regardless of
age

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Gen. (Ret.) SOEHARTO (since 27 March 1968)
and Vice President Gen. (Ret.) Try SUTRISNO (since 11 March 1993);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Gen. (Ret.) SOEHARTO (since 27 March
1968) and Vice President Gen. (Ret.) Try SUTRISNO (since 11 March
1993); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
cabinet: Cabinet
elections: president and vice president elected by consensus by the
People's Consultative Assembly for five-year terms; election last held
11 March 1993 (next to be held NA March 1998)
election results : Gen. (Ret.) SOEHARTO elected president by consensus
by the People's Consultative Assembly; Gen. (Ret.) Try SUTRISNO
elected vice president by consensus by the People's Consultative
Assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Representatives or Dewan
Perwakilan Rakyat (DPR) (500 seats; 400 elected by popular vote, 100
are appointed military representatives; members serve five-year terms;
note - beginning with the elections in May 1997, the composition of
the DPR will change to 425 elected representatives and 75 appointed
representatives)
elections: last held 8 June 1992 (next scheduled for 29 May 1997)
election results: percent of vote by party - Golkar 68%, PPP 17%, PDI
15%; seats by party - Golkar 282, PPP 62, PDI 56
note: the People's Consultative Assembly (Majelis Permusyawaratan
Rakyat or MPR) includes the DPR plus 500 indirectly selected members;
it meets every five years to elect the president and vice president
and to approve the broad outlines of national policy

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Mahkamah Agung), the judges are
appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: Golkar (de facto ruling political party
based on functional groups), HARMOKO, general chairman; Indonesia
Democracy Party (PDI - federation of former Nationalist and Christian
Parties), SOERJADI, chairman; Development Unity Party (PPP, federation
of former Islamic parties), Ismail Hasan METAREUM, chairman

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, CCC, CP,
ESCAP, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, Mekong Group, NAM, OIC, OPEC,
UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNOMIG, UNPREDEP,
UNTAES, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Arifin Mohamad SIREGAR
chancery: 2020 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 775-5200
FAX: [1] (202) 775-5365
consulate(s) general : Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, San
Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador J. Stapleton ROY
embassy: Medan Merdeka Selatan 5, Jakarta
mailing address: Unit 8129, Box 1, APO AP 96520
telephone : [62] (21) 344-2211
FAX: [62] (21) 386-2259
consulate(s) general: Surabaya

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and white;
similar to the flag of Monaco, which is shorter; also similar to the
flag of Poland, which is white (top) and red

Economy

Economy - overview: Indonesia's sound macroeconomic management,
combined with an emphasis on rapid deregulation and encouragement of
private investment resulted in real GDP growth in 1991-96 averaging
about 7%. This was impressive, but not sufficient to cut
underemployment while absorbing the 2.3 million workers annually
entering the labor force. Foreign investment has boosted manufacturing
output and exports in recent years. The economy's growth is driven by
continuing expansion of nonoil exports. Plantation crops - rubber and
palm oil - and textiles and plywood are being encouraged for both
export and job generation. Industrial output is based on diverse
natural resources, including crude oil, natural gas, timber, metals,
and coal. Japan remains Indonesia's most important customer and
supplier of aid. Growth in 1996 was led by industry, transport, and
tourism. Strong growth should continue in 1997 assuming no sharp rise
in political uncertainty.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $779.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,770 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 17%
industry: 42%
services: 41% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 67 million
by occupation: agriculture 55%, manufacturing 10%, construction 4%,
transport and communications 3%, other 28% (1985 est.)

Unemployment rate: 3% official rate; underemployment 40% (1994 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $41.5 billion
expenditures: $41.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $16
billion (FY97/98 est.)

Industries: petroleum and natural gas, textiles, mining, cement,
chemical fertilizers, plywood, food, rubber; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 13.9% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 16.27 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 58.31 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 276 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, cassava (tapioca), peanuts, rubber,
cocoa, coffee, palm oil, copra, other tropical products; poultry,
beef, pork, eggs

Exports:
total value: $49.8 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: manufactures 51.9%, fuels 26.4%, foodstuffs 12.7%, raw
materials 9.0%
partners: Japan 27.1%, US 13.9%, Singapore 8.3%, South Korea 6.4%,
Taiwan 3.9%, China 3.8%, Hong Kong 3.6% (1995)

Imports:
total value : $42.9 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: manufactures 75.3%, raw materials 9.0%, foodstuffs 7.8%,
fuels 7.7%
partners: Japan 22.7%, US 11.7%, Germany 6.9%, South Korea 6.0%,
Singapore 5.8%, Australia 5.0%, Taiwan 4.5% (1995)

Debt - external: $110 billion (yearend 1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $5.5 billion (FY97/98 est.)

Currency: Indonesian rupiah (Rp)

Exchange rates: Indonesian rupiahs (Rp) per US$1 - 2,393.0 (January
1997), 2,342.3 (1996), 2,248.6 (1995), 2,160.8 (1994), 2,087.1 (1993),
2,029.9 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Indonesia:Communications

Telephones: 1,276,600 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: domestic service fair, international service good
domestic: interisland microwave system and HF radio police net;
domestic satellite communications system
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
and 1 Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 618, FM 38, shortwave 0

Radios: 28.1 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 9

Televisions: 11.5 million (1992 est.)

@Indonesia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 6,458 km
narrow gauge: 5,961 km 1.067-m gauge (101 km electrified; 101 km
double track); 497 km 0.750-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total : 378,000 km
paved: 171,990 km
unpaved: 206,010 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 21,579 km total; Sumatra 5,471 km, Java and Madura 820 km,
Kalimantan 10,460 km, Celebes 241 km, Irian Jaya 4,587 km

Pipelines: crude oil 2,505 km; petroleum products 456 km; natural gas
1,703 km (1989)

Ports and harbors: Cilacap, Cirebon, Jakarta, Kupang, Palembang,
Semarang, Surabaya, Ujungpandang

Merchant marine:
total: 465 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,185,353 GRT/3,191,792
DWT
ships by type: bulk 30, cargo 267, chemical tanker 8, container 9,
liquefied gas tanker 5, livestock carrier 1, oil tanker 102, passenger
6, passenger-cargo 12, roll-on/roll-off cargo 8, short-sea passenger
6, specialized tanker 7, vehicle carrier 4 (1996 est.)

Airports: 413 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 386
over 3,047 m: 4
2,438 to 3,047 m: 10
1,524 to 2,437 m: 36
914 to 1,523 m: 39
under 914 m : 297 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 27
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 23 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Police

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 58,556,503 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 34,439,340 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 2,295,832 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $3.3 billion (FY97/98)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.3% (FY97/98)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: sovereignty over Timor Timur (East Timor
Province) disputed with Portugal and not recognized by the UN; two
islands in dispute with Malaysia

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis largely for domestic use;
possible growing role as transshipment point for Golden Triangle
heroin
______________________________________________________________________

IRAN

@Iran:Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf,
and the Caspian Sea, between Iraq and Pakistan

Geographic coordinates: 32 00 N, 53 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 1.648 million sq km
land: 1.636 million sq km
water: 12,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Alaska

Land boundaries:
total: 5,440 km
border countries: Afghanistan 936 km, Armenia 35 km, Azerbaijan-proper
432 km, Azerbaijan-Naxcivan exclave 179 km, Iraq 1,458 km, Pakistan
909 km, Turkey 499 km, Turkmenistan 992 km

Coastline: 2,440 km
note: Iran also borders the Caspian Sea (740 km)

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: natural prolongation
exclusive economic zone: bilateral agreements, or median lines in the
Persian Gulf
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: mostly arid or semiarid, subtropical along Caspian coast

Terrain: rugged, mountainous rim; high, central basin with deserts,
mountains; small, discontinuous plains along both coasts

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caspian Sea -28 m
highest point : Qolleh-ye Damavand 5,671 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, coal, chromium, copper,
iron ore, lead, manganese, zinc, sulfur

Land use:
arable land : 10%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures : 27%
forests and woodland: 7%
other: 55% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 94,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts, floods; dust storms, sandstorms;
earthquakes along the Western border

Environment - current issues: air pollution, especially in urban
areas, from vehicle emissions, refinery operations, and industrial
effluents; deforestation; overgrazing; desertification; oil pollution
in the Persian Gulf; inadequate supplies of potable water

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Desertification, Environmental
Modification, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation

@Iran:People

Population: 67,540,002 (July 1997 est.)
note: includes 917,078 non-nationals (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 44% (male 15,292,783; female 14,423,911)
15-64 years : 52% (male 17,880,617; female 17,254,711)
65 years and over: 4% (male 1,378,395; female 1,309,585) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 2.12% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 32.51 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.39 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -4.89 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.05 male(s)/female
total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 50.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 67.82 years
male: 66.47 years
female: 69.23 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.52 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Iranian(s)
adjective: Iranian

Ethnic groups: Persian 51%, Azerbaijani 24%, Gilaki and Mazandarani
8%, Kurd 7%, Arab 3%, Lur 2%, Baloch 2%, Turkmen 2%, other 1%

Religions: Shi'a Muslim 89%, Sunni Muslim 10%, Zoroastrian, Jewish,
Christian, and Baha'i 1%

Languages: Persian and Persian dialects 58%, Turkic and Turkic
dialects 26%, Kurdish 9%, Luri 2%, Balochi 1%, Arabic 1%, Turkish 1%,
other 2%

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 72.1%
male: 78.4%
female: 65.8% (1994 est.)

@Iran:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Islamic Republic of Iran
conventional short form: Iran
local long form: Jomhuri-ye Eslami-ye Iran
local short form : Iran

Data code: IR

Government type: theocratic republic

National capital: Tehran

Administrative divisions: 25 provinces (ostanha, singular - ostan);
Ardabil, Azarbayjan-e Gharbi, Azarbayjan-e Sharqi, Bushehr, Chahar
Mahall va Bakhtiari, Esfahan, Fars, Gilan, Hamadan, Hormozgan, Ilam,
Kerman, Kermanshahan, Khorasan, Khuzestan, Kohkiluyeh va Buyer Ahmadi,
Kordestan, Lorestan, Markazi, Mazandaran, Semnan, Sistan va
Baluchestan, Tehran, Yazd, Zanjan
note: there may be two new provinces named Qom and Qazvin

Independence: 1 April 1979 (Islamic Republic of Iran proclaimed)

National holiday: Islamic Republic Day, 1 April (1979)

Constitution: 2-3 December 1979; revised 1989 to expand powers of the
presidency and eliminate the prime ministership

Legal system: the Constitution codifies Islamic principles of
government

Suffrage: 15 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: supreme leader (rahbar-e moazam) and functional chief
of state - Leader of the Islamic Revolution Ayatollah Ali
Hoseini-KHAMENEI (since 4 June 1989)
head of government: President Ali Akbar HASHEMI-RAFSANJANI (since 3
August 1989); First Vice President Hasan Ebrahim HABIBI (since NA
August 1989)
cabinet: Council of Ministers selected by the president with
legislative approval
elections: supreme leader appointed for life by the Council of
Experts; president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
election last held 11 June 1993 (next to be held 23 May 1997)
election results: Ali Akbar HASHEMI-RAFSANJANI elected president;
percent of vote - Ali Akbar HASHEMI-RAFSANJANI 63%

Legislative branch: unicameral Islamic Consultative Assembly or
Majles-e-Shura-ye-Eslami (270 seats; members elected by popular vote
to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 8 March and 19 April 1996 (next to be held NA
March 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Iran has no political parties; the most
important political "groupings" are - Tehran Militant Clergy
Association, Secretary General Ayatollah Mohammad EMAMI-KASHANI;
Militant Clerics Association, Mehdi MAHDAVI-KARUBI and Mohammad Asqar
MUSAVI-KHOINIHA; Servants of Reconstruction (G-6), Mohammad
HASHEMI-RAFSANJANI, Hosein MARASHI

Political pressure groups and leaders: groups that generally support
the Islamic Republic include Ansar-e Hizballah, Mojahedin of the
Islamic Revolution, Muslim Students Following the Line of the Imam,
and the Islamic Coalition Association; opposition groups include the
Liberation Movement of Iran and the Nation of Iran party; armed
political groups that have been almost completely repressed by the
government include Mojahedin-e Khalq Organization (MEK), People's
Fedayeen, Democratic Party of Iranian Kurdistan; the Society for the
Defense of Freedom

International organization participation: CCC, CP, ECO, ESCAP, FAO,
G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM
(observer), ISO, ITU, NAM, OIC, OPEC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; note - Iran has an
Interests Section in the Pakistani Embassy, headed by Faramarz
FATH-NEJAD; address: Iranian Interests Section, Pakistani Embassy,
2209 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007; telephone: [1] (202)
965-4990

Diplomatic representation from the US: none; note - protecting power
in Iran is Switzerland

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white,
and red; the national emblem (a stylized representation of the word
Allah) in red is centered in the white band; ALLAH AKBAR (God is
Great) in white Arabic script is repeated 11 times along the bottom
edge of the green band and 11 times along the top edge of the red band

Economy

Economy - overview: Iran's economy is a mixture of central planning,
state ownership of oil and other large enterprises, village
agriculture, and small-scale private trading and service ventures.
Under President RAFSANJANI, the government adopted a number of market
reforms to reduce the state's role in the economy, but most of these
changes have moved slowly or have been reversed because of political
opposition. In the early 1990s, Iran experienced a financial crisis
caused by an import surge that began in 1989 and general financial
mismanagement. In 1993-1994, Iran rescheduled $15 billion in debt,
with the bulk of payments due in 1996-97. The strong oil market in
1996 has helped ease financial pressures, however, and Tehran has so
far made timely debt service payments. In 1996, Iran's oil earnings -
which account for 85% of total export revenues - climbed 20% from the
previous year. Iran's financial situation will remain tight through
the end of the decade, and continued timely debt service payments will
depend, in part, on persistent strong oil prices during the next few
years.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $343.5 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,200 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 21%
industry : 37%
services: 42% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 23% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 15.4 million
by occupation: agriculture 33%, manufacturing 21% (1988 est.)
note: shortage of skilled labor; 1.38% of the population in the 15-64
age group is non-national (July 1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: over 30% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: petroleum, petrochemicals, textiles, cement and other
construction materials, food processing (particularly sugar refining
and vegetable oil production), metal fabricating, armaments

Industrial production growth rate: 4.3% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 25.12 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 74.76 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,137 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, rice, other grains, sugar beets,
fruits, nuts, cotton; dairy products, wool; caviar

Exports:
total value : $21.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: petroleum 85%, carpets, fruits, nuts, hides, iron, steel
partners: Japan, Italy, France, Netherlands, Belgium/Luxembourg,
Spain, and Germany

Imports:
total value: $13.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : machinery, military supplies, metal works, foodstuffs,
pharmaceuticals, technical services, refined oil products
partners: Germany, Japan, Italy, UK, UAE, Russia, France

Debt - external: $30 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $40 million (1993)

Currency: 10 Iranian rials (IR) = 1 toman; note - domestic figures are
generally referred to in terms of the toman

Exchange rates: Iranian rials (IR) per US$1 - 1,755.12 (January 1997),
1,750.76 (1996), 1,747.93 (1995), 1,748.75 (1994), 1,267.77 (1993),
65.55 (1992); black market rate: 4,600 rials per US$1 (March 1997);
note - as of May 1995, the "official rate" of 1,750 rials per US$1 is
used for imports of essential goods and services and for oil exports,
whereas the "official export rate" of 3,000 rials per US$1 is used for
non-oil exports and imports not covered by the official rate

Fiscal year: 21 March - 20 March

@Iran:Communications

Telephones: 3.02 million (1992 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: microwave radio relay extends throughout country; system
centered in Tehran
international: satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (2 Atlantic Ocean
and 1 Indian Ocean) and 1 Inmarsat (Indian Ocean Region); HF radio and
microwave radio relay to Turkey, Pakistan, Syria, Kuwait, Tajikistan,
and Uzbekistan; submarine fiber-optic cable to UAE

Radio broadcast stations: AM 77, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 14.3 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 28

Televisions: 3.9 million (1992 est.)

@Iran:Transportation

Railways:
total: 7,286 km
broad gauge: 94 km 1.676-m gauge
standard gauge: 7,192 km 1.435-m gauge (146 km electrified) (1996
est.)

Highways:
total : 158,000 km
paved: 93,378 km (including 460 km of expressways)
unpaved: 64,622 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 904 km; the Shatt al Arab is usually navigable by maritime
traffic for about 130 km; channel has been dredged to 3 m and is in
use

Pipelines: crude oil 5,900 km; petroleum products 3,900 km; natural
gas 4,550 km

Ports and harbors: Abadan (largely destroyed in fighting during
1980-88 war), Ahvaz, Bandar Beheshti, Bandar-e 'Abbas, Bandar-e
Anzali, Bandar-e Bushehr, Bandar-e Khomeyni, Bandar-e Mah Shahr,
Bandar-e Torkeman, Jazireh-ye Khark, Jazireh-ye Lavan, Jazireh-ye
Sirri, Khorramshahr (limited operation since November 1992), Now Shahr

Merchant marine:
total: 132 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,436,384 GRT/6,095,124
DWT
ships by type: bulk 47, cargo 36, chemical tanker 4, combination bulk
2, container 1, liquefied gas tanker 1, multifunction large-load
carrier 6, oil tanker 22, refrigerated cargo 3, roll-on/roll-off cargo
9, short-sea passenger 1
note: Iran owns an additional 3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
141,992 DWT that operate under the registry of Cyprus (1996 est.)

Airports: 227 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 115
over 3,047 m: 32
2,438 to 3,047 m: 11
1,524 to 2,437 m : 29
914 to 1,523 m: 18
under 914 m: 25 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 112
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
914 to 1,523 m : 98 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 12 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Islamic Republic of Iran regular forces (includes
Ground Forces, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces), Revolutionary Guards
(includes Ground, Air, Navy, Qods, and Basij-mobilization-forces), Law
Enforcement Forces

Military manpower - military age: 21 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 15,700,662 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 9,332,944 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 650,804 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: according to official Iranian
data, Iran budgeted 8,283.9 billion rials for defense in 1997; note -
conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using current
exchange rates could produce misleading results

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Iran and Iraq restored diplomatic relations
in 1990 but are still trying to work out written agreements settling
outstanding disputes from their eight-year war concerning border
demarcation, prisoners-of-war, and freedom of navigation and
sovereignty over the Shatt al-Arab waterway; Iran occupies two islands
in the Persian Gulf claimed by the UAE: Lesser Tunb (called Tunb as
Sughra in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Kuchek in Persian by
Iran) and Greater Tunb (called Tunb al Kubra in Arabic by UAE and
Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Bozorg in Persian by Iran); it jointly administers
with the UAE an island in the Persian Gulf claimed by the UAE (called
Abu Musa in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Abu Musa in Persian by Iran)
- over which Iran has taken steps to exert unilateral control since
1992, including access restrictions and a military build-up on the
island; the UAE has garnered significant diplomatic support in the
region in protesting these Iranian actions; Caspian Sea boundaries are
not yet determined among Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakstan, Russia, and
Turkmenistan

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of opium poppy for the domestic and
international drug trade; net opiate importer but also a key
transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin to Europe
______________________________________________________________________

IRAQ

@Iraq:Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Persian Gulf, between Iran and
Kuwait

Geographic coordinates: 33 00 N, 44 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 437,072 sq km
land: 432,162 sq km
water : 4,910 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Idaho

Land boundaries:
total: 3,631 km
border countries : Iran 1,458 km, Jordan 181 km, Kuwait 242 km, Saudi
Arabia 814 km, Syria 605 km, Turkey 331 km

Coastline: 58 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: not specified
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly desert; mild to cool winters with dry, hot, cloudless
summers; northern mountainous regions along Iranian and Turkish
borders experience cold winters with occasionally heavy snows which
melt in early spring, sometimes causing extensive flooding in central
and southern Iraq

Terrain: mostly broad plains; reedy marshes along Iranian border in
south; mountains along borders with Iran and Turkey

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
highest point: Gundah Zhur 3,608 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, phosphates, sulfur

Land use:
arable land: 12%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 9%
forests and woodland : 0%
other: 79% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 25,500 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust storms, sandstorms, floods

Environment - current issues: government water control projects have
drained most of the inhabited marsh areas east of An Nasiriyah by
drying up or diverting the feeder streams and rivers; a once sizable
population of Shi'a Muslims, who have inhabited these areas for
thousands of years, has been displaced; furthermore, the destruction
of the natural habitat poses serious threats to the area's wildlife
populations; inadequate supplies of potable water; development of
Tigris-Euphrates Rivers system contingent upon agreements with
upstream riparian Turkey; air and water pollution; soil degradation
(salinization) and erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban
signed, but not ratified : Environmental Modification

@Iraq:People

Population: 22,219,289 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 47% (male 5,353,088; female 5,181,960)
15-64 years: 50% (male 5,565,926; female 5,442,949)
65 years and over: 3% (male 314,705; female 360,661) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.62% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 42.52 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.33 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.87 male(s)/female
total population : 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 57.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 67.38 years
male: 66.31 years
female: 68.5 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.26 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Iraqi(s)
adjective: Iraqi

Ethnic groups: Arab 75%-80%, Kurdish 15%-20%, Turkoman, Assyrian or
other 5%

Religions: Muslim 97% (Shi'a 60%-65%, Sunni 32%-37%), Christian or
other 3%

Languages: Arabic, Kurdish (official in Kurdish regions), Assyrian,
Armenian

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 58%
male: 70.7%
female : 45% (1995 est.)

@Iraq:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Iraq
conventional short form: Iraq
local long form: Al Jumhuriyah al Iraqiyah
local short form: Al Iraq

Data code: IZ

Government type: republic

National capital: Baghdad

Administrative divisions: 18 provinces (muhafazat, singular -
muhafazah); Al Anbar, Al Basrah, Al Muthanna, Al Qadisiyah, An Najaf,
Arbil, As Sulaymaniyah, At Ta'mim, Babil, Baghdad, Dahuk, Dhi Qar,
Diyala, Karbala', Maysan, Ninawa, Salah ad Din, Wasit

Independence: 3 October 1932 (from League of Nations mandate under
British administration)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Revolution, 17 July (1968)

Constitution: 22 September 1968, effective 16 July 1970 (provisional
Constitution); new constitution drafted in 1990 but not adopted

Legal system: based on Islamic law in special religious courts, civil
law system elsewhere; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President SADDAM Husayn (since 16 July 1979); Vice
President Taha Muhyi al-Din MARUF (since 21 April 1974); Vice
President Taha Yasin RAMADAN (since 23 March 1991)
head of government: Prime Minister SADDAM Husayn (since NA May 1994);
Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Mikhail AZIZ (since NA 1979); Deputy Prime
Minister Taha Yasin RAMADAN (since NA); Deputy Prime Minister Muhammad
Hamza al-ZUBAYDI (since NA)
cabinet: Council of Ministers
note: there is also a Revolutionary Command Council; Chairman SADDAM
Husayn, Vice Chairman Izzat IBRAHIM al-Duri
elections: president and vice presidents elected by a two-thirds
majority of the Revolutionary Command Council; election last held 17
October 1995 (next to be held NA)
election results: SADDAM Husayn reelected president; percent of
Revolutionary Command Council vote - 99%; Taha Muhyi al-Din MARUF and
Taha Yasin RAMADAN elected vice presidents; percent of Revolutionary
Command Council vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Majlis al-Watani
(250 seats; 30 appointed by SADDAM Husayn to represent the three
northern provinces of Dahuk, Arbil, and As Sulaymaniyah; 220 elected
by popular vote; members serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 24 March 1996 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - NA

Judicial branch: Court of Cassation

Political parties and leaders: Ba'th Party, SADDAM Husayn, central
party leader

Political pressure groups and leaders: political parties and activity
severely restricted; opposition to regime from disaffected members of
the Ba'th Party, Army officers, tribes, and Shi'a religious and ethnic
Kurdish dissidents; the Green Party (government-controlled)

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACC, AFESD, AL, AMF,
CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-19, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPEC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; note - Iraq has an Interest
Section in the Algerian Embassy headed by Dr. Khairi O. T. AL ZUBAIDI;
address: Iraqi Interests Section, Algerian Embassy, 1801 P Street NW,
Washington, DC 20036; telephone: [1] (202) 483-7500; FAX: [1] (202)
462-5066

Diplomatic representation from the US: none; note - the US has an
Interests Section in the Polish Embassy in Baghdad, which is in the
Masbah Quarter (opposite the Foreign Ministry Club); address: P. O.
Box 2447 Alwiyah, Baghdad; telephone: [964] (1) 719-6138, 719-6139,
718-1840, 719-3791; FAX: [964] (1) 718-9297

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and black with three green five-pointed stars in a horizontal line
centered in the white band; the phrase ALLAHU AKBAR (God is Great) in
green Arabic script - Allahu to the right of the middle star and Akbar
to the left of the middle star - was added in January 1991 during the
Persian Gulf crisis; similar to the flag of Syria that has two stars
but no script and the flag of Yemen that has a plain white band; also
similar to the flag of Egypt that has a symbolic eagle centered in the
white band

Economy

Economy - overview: The Ba'thist regime engages in extensive central
planning and management of industrial production and foreign trade
while leaving some small-scale industry and services and most
agriculture to private enterprise. The economy has been dominated by
the oil sector, which has traditionally provided about 95% of foreign
exchange earnings. In the 1980s, financial problems caused by massive
expenditures in the eight-year war with Iran and damage to oil export
facilities by Iran, led the government to implement austerity measures
and to borrow heavily and later reschedule foreign debt payments; Iraq
suffered economic losses of at least $100 billion from the war. After
the end of hostilities in 1988, oil exports gradually increased with
the construction of new pipelines and restoration of damaged
facilities. Agricultural development remained hampered by labor
shortages, salinization, and dislocations caused by previous land
reform and collectivization programs. The industrial sector, although
accorded high priority by the government, also was under financial
constraints. Iraq's seizure of Kuwait in August 1990, subsequent
international economic embargoes, and military action by an
international coalition beginning in January 1991 drastically changed
the economic picture. Industrial and transportation facilities, which
suffered severe damage, have been partially restored. Oil exports are
at 25% of the prewar level following the implementation of UN Security
Council Resolution 986 in December 1996. Shortages of spare parts
continue. The UN-sponsored economic embargo has reduced exports and
imports and has contributed to the sharp rise in prices. The Iraqi
Government has been unwilling to abide by UN resolutions so that the
economic embargo could be removed. The government's policies of
supporting large military and internal security forces and of
allocating resources to key supporters of the regime have exacerbated
shortages. In accord with a UN resolution Iraq agreed to an
oil-for-food deal in 1996, under which it would export $2 billion
worth of oil in exchange for badly needed food and medicine. The first
oil was pumped in December 1996, and the first supplies of food and
medicine should arrive in March 1997. Per capita output for 1995-96
and living standards are well below the 1989-90 level, but any
estimates have a wide range of error.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $42 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 0% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 4.4 million (1989)
by occupation: services 48%, agriculture 30%, industry 22%
note : severe labor shortage; expatriate labor force was about
1,600,000 (July 1990); since then, it has declined substantially

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: petroleum, chemicals, textiles, construction materials,
food processing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 6.83 million kW (1996)

Electricity - production: 31.8 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,362 kWh (1996 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, barley, rice, vegetables, dates, other
fruit, cotton; cattle, sheep

Exports: $NA
commodities: crude oil
partners: Jordan, Turkey (1996)

Imports: $NA
commodities: manufactures, food
partners: France, Turkey, Jordan, Vietnam, Australia (1996)

Debt - external: very heavy relative to GDP but amount unknown (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Iraqi dinar (ID) = 1,000 fils

Exchange rates: Iraqi dinars (ID) per US$1 - 0.3109 (fixed official
rate since 1982); black market rate - Iraqi dinars (ID) per US$1 -
1,200 (May 1997), 3,000 (December 1995); subject to wide fluctuations

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Iraq:Communications

Telephones: 632,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: reconstitution of damaged telecommunication
facilities began after the Gulf war; most damaged facilities have been
rebuilt
domestic: the network consists of coaxial cables and microwave radio
relay links
international : satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic
Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean Region) and
1 Arabsat (inoperative); coaxial cable and microwave radio relay to
Jordan, Kuwait, Syria, and Turkey; Kuwait line is probably
nonoperational

Radio broadcast stations: AM 16, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 4.02 million (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 13

Televisions: 1 million (1992 est.)

@Iraq:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,032 km
standard gauge: 2,032 km 1.435-m gauge

Highways:
total: 46,500 km
paved: 39,990 km
unpaved: 6,510 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,015 km; Shatt al Arab is usually navigable by maritime
traffic for about 130 km; channel has been dredged to 3 meters and is
in use; Tigris and Euphrates Rivers have navigable sections for
shallow-draft watercraft; Shatt al Basrah canal was navigable by
shallow-draft craft before closing in 1991 because of the Persian Gulf
war

Pipelines: crude oil 4,350 km; petroleum products 725 km; natural gas
1,360 km

Ports and harbors: Umm Qasr, Khawr az Zubayr, and Al Basrah have
limited functionality

Merchant marine:
total: 35 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 791,485 GRT/1,428,307 DWT
ships by type: cargo 14, oil tanker 16, passenger 1, passenger-cargo
1, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 (1996 est.)

Airports: 101 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 85
over 3,047 m: 21
2,438 to 3,047 m: 33
1,524 to 2,437 m: 9
914 to 1,523 m: 6
under 914 m: 16 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 16
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m : 8 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Republican Guard and Special Republican
Guard, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense Force, Border Guard Force,
Internal Security Forces

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 5,039,332 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 2,825,888 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 246,404 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Iran and Iraq restored diplomatic relations
in 1990 but are still trying to work out written agreements settling
outstanding disputes from their eight-year war concerning border
demarcation, prisoners-of-war, and freedom of navigation and
sovereignty over the Shatt al Arab waterway; in November 1994, Iraq
formally accepted the UN-demarcated border with Kuwait which had been
spelled out in Security Council Resolutions 687 (1991), 773 (1993),
and 883 (1993); this formally ends earlier claims to Kuwait and to
Bubiyan and Warbah islands; dispute over water development plans by
Turkey for the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers
______________________________________________________________________

IRELAND

@Ireland:Geography

Location: Western Europe, occupying five-sixths of the island of
Ireland in the North Atlantic Ocean, west of Great Britain

Geographic coordinates: 53 00 N, 8 00 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 70,280 sq km
land: 68,890 sq km
water : 1,390 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
total: 360 km
border countries: UK 360 km

Coastline: 1,448 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf : not specified
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate maritime; modified by North Atlantic Current; mild
winters, cool summers; consistently humid; overcast about half the
time

Terrain: mostly level to rolling interior plain surrounded by rugged
hills and low mountains; sea cliffs on west coast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Carrauntoohill 1,041 m

Natural resources: zinc, lead, natural gas, petroleum, barite, copper,
gypsum, limestone, dolomite, peat, silver

Land use:
arable land: 13%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 68%
forests and woodland : 5%
other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: water pollution, especially of lakes,
from agricultural runoff

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of
the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Desertification,
Endangered Species, Marine Life Conservation, Tropical Timber 94

Geography - note: strategic location on major air and sea routes
between North America and northern Europe; over 40% of the population
resides within 60 miles of Dublin

@Ireland:People

Population: 3,606,952 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 23% (male 415,747; female 393,181)
15-64 years: 66% (male 1,203,792; female 1,185,935)
65 years and over: 11% (male 173,566; female 234,731) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.33% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 13.43 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.6 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.49 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.74 male(s)/female
total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 75.98 years
male: 73.24 years
female: 78.89 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.83 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Irishman(men), Irishwoman(men), Irish (collective plural)
adjective: Irish

Ethnic groups: Celtic, English

Religions: Roman Catholic 93%, Anglican 3%, none 1%, unknown 2%, other
1% (1981)

Languages: Irish (Gaelic), spoken mainly in areas located along the
western seaboard, English is the language generally used

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98% (1981 est.)
male: NA%
female: NA%

@Ireland:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Ireland

Data code: EI

Government type: republic

National capital: Dublin

Administrative divisions: 26 counties; Carlow, Cavan, Clare, Cork,
Donegal, Dublin, Galway, Kerry, Kildare, Kilkenny, Laois, Leitrim,
Limerick, Longford, Louth, Mayo, Meath, Monaghan, Offaly, Roscommon,
Sligo, Tipperary, Waterford, Westmeath, Wexford, Wicklow

Independence: 6 December 1921 (from UK)

National holiday: Saint Patrick's Day, 17 March

Constitution: 29 December 1937; adopted 1 July 1937 by plebiscite

Legal system: based on English common law, substantially modified by
indigenous concepts; judicial review of legislative acts in Supreme
Court; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Mary Bourke ROBINSON (since 9 November 1990)
head of government: Prime Minister John BRUTON (since 15 December
1994)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president with previous nomination
by the prime minister and approval of the House of Representatives
elections : president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
election last held 9 November 1990 (next to be held NA November 1997);
prime minister nominated by the House of Representatives and appointed
by the president
election results: Mary Bourke ROBINSON elected president; percent of
vote - Mary Bourke ROBINSON 52.8%, Brian LENIHAN 47.2%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Oireachtas consists of the
Senate or Seanad Eireann (60 seats, 49 elected by the universities and
from candidates put forward by five vocational panels, 11 are
nominated by the prime minister; members serve five-year terms) and
the House of Representatives or Dail Eireann (166 seats; members are
elected by direct popular vote and proportional representation to
serve five-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held NA February 1992 (next to be held NA
February 1997); House of Representatives - last held 25 November 1992
(next to be held NA November 1997)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - Fianna Fail 26, Fine Gael 16, Labor 9, Progressive Democrats
2, Democratic Left 1, independents 6; House of Representatives -
percent of vote by party - Fianna Fail 39.1%, Fine Gael 24.5%, Labor
Party 19.3%, Progressive Democrats 4.7%, Democratic Left 2.8%, Sinn
Fein 1.6%, Workers' Party 0.7%, independents 5.9%; seats by party -
Fianna Fail 68, Fine Gael 45, Labor Party 33, Progressive Democrats
10, Democratic Left 4, Greens 1, independents 5

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed by the president on
the advice of the government (prime minister and cabinet)

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Left [Proinsias DE ROSSA];
Fianna Fail [Bertie AHERN]; Labor Party [Richard SPRING]; Fine Gael
[John BRUTON]; Communist Party of Ireland [Michael O'RIORDAN]; Sinn
Fein [Gerry ADAMS]; Progressive Democrats [Mary HARNEY]; The Workers'
Party [Marion DONNELLY]; Green Alliance [Bronwen MAHER]
note: Prime Minister BRUTON heads a three-party coalition consisting
of the Fine Gael, the Labor Party, and the Democratic Left

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS, CCC,
CE, EBRD, ECE, EIB, ESA, EU, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM,
IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MTCR, NEA, NSG, OECD, OSCE, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOP,
UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UNTSO, UPU, WEU (observer), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Dermot A. GALLAGHER (will return to
Dublin in July)
chancery: 2234 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 462-3939
FAX : [1] (202) 232-5993
consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, New York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Jean Kennedy SMITH
embassy: 42 Elgin Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin
mailing address : use embassy street address
telephone: [353] (1) 6688777
FAX: [353] (1) 6689946

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side),
white, and orange; similar to the flag of Cote d'Ivoire, which is
shorter and has the colors reversed - orange (hoist side), white, and
green; also similar to the flag of Italy, which is shorter and has
colors of green (hoist side), white, and red

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is small and trade dependent.
Agriculture, once the most important sector, is now dwarfed by
industry, which accounts for 38% of GDP, about 80% of exports, and
employs 26% of the labor force. Although exports remain the primary
engine for Ireland's robust growth, the economy is also benefiting
from a rise in consumer spending and recovery in both construction and
business investment. Since the 1980s, inflation has fallen sharply and
chronic trade deficits have been transformed into annual surpluses.
Unemployment remains a serious problem, however, and job creation is
the main focus of government policy. To ease unemployment, Dublin
aggressively courts foreign investors and recently created a new
industrial development agency to aid small indigenous firms.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $59.9 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $16,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 8.9%
industry: 38.6%
services: 52.5% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.8% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1.474 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: services 62.3%, manufacturing and construction 26.0%,
agriculture, forestry, and fishing 10.6%, utilities 1.1% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 11.9% (April 1996)

Budget:
revenues : $22.6 billion
expenditures: $23.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $4.3
billion (1995)

Industries: food products, brewing, textiles, clothing, chemicals,
pharmaceuticals, machinery, transportation equipment, glass and
crystal

Industrial production growth rate: 8.9% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 3.62 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 17.9 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 4,343 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: turnips, barley, potatoes, sugar beets, wheat;
meat and dairy products

Exports:
total value: $43.4 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: chemicals, data processing equipment, industrial
machinery, live animals, animal products
partners: EU 70% (UK 26%, Germany 14%, France 9%), US 6%

Imports:
total value: $32.7 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities : food, animal feed, data processing equipment, petroleum
and petroleum products, machinery, textiles, clothing
partners: EU 58% (UK 37%, Germany 7%, France 4%), US 17%

Debt - external: $17.5 billion (1995)

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $81 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Irish pound (£Ir) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Irish pounds (£Ir) per US$1 - 0.6123 (January 1997),
0.6248 (1996), 0.6235 (1995), 0.6676 (1994), 0.6816 (1993), 0.5864
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Ireland:Communications

Telephones: 900,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: modern digital system using cable and microwave
radio relay
domestic: microwave radio relay
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 45, shortwave 0

Radios: 2.2 million (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 86 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 1.025 million (1990 est.)

@Ireland:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,947 km
broad gauge: 1,947 km 1.600-m gauge (37 km electrified; 485 km double
track) (1996)

Highways:
total: 92,430 km
paved : 86,884 km (including 70 km of expressways)
unpaved: 5,546 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: limited for commercial traffic

Pipelines: natural gas 225 km

Ports and harbors: Arklow, Cork, Drogheda, Dublin, Foynes, Galway,
Limerick, New Ross, Waterford

Merchant marine:
total : 39 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 130,029 GRT/148,516 DWT
ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 27, chemical tanker 2, container 5, oil
tanker 1, short-sea passenger 3 (1996 est.)

Airports: 40 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 37
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 3
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m: 29 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army (includes Naval Service and Air Corps),
National Police (Garda Siochana)

Military manpower - military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 959,807 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 778,234 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 36,560 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $618 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.3% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Northern Ireland question with the UK;
Rockall continental shelf dispute involving Denmark, Iceland, and the
UK (Ireland and the UK have signed a boundary agreement in the Rockall
area)

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for and consumer of hashish from
North Africa to the UK and Netherlands and of European-produced
synthetic drugs; transshipment point for heroin and cocaine
______________________________________________________________________

ISRAEL

(also see separate Gaza Strip and West Bank entries)

Introduction

Current issues: The territories occupied by Israel since the 1967 war
are not included in the data below, unless otherwise noted. In keeping
with the framework established at the Madrid Conference in October
1991, bilateral negotiations are being conducted between Israel and
Palestinian representatives, and Israel and Syria, to achieve a
permanent settlement between them. On 25 April 1982, Israel withdrew
from the Sinai pursuant to the 1979 Israel-Egypt Peace treaty.
Outstanding territorial and other disputes with Jordan were resolved
in the 26 October 1994 Israel-Jordan Treaty of Peace.

@Israel:Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between Egypt
and Lebanon

Geographic coordinates: 31 30 N, 34 45 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 20,770 sq km
land: 20,330 sq km
water : 440 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries:
total: 1,006 km
border countries: Egypt 255 km, Gaza Strip 51 km, Jordan 238 km,
Lebanon 79 km, Syria 76 km, West Bank 307 km

Coastline: 273 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf : to depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; hot and dry in southern and eastern desert areas

Terrain: Negev desert in the south; low coastal plain; central
mountains; Jordan Rift Valley

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Dead Sea -408 m
highest point: Har Meron 1,208 m

Natural resources: copper, phosphates, bromide, potash, clay, sand,
sulfur, asphalt, manganese, small amounts of natural gas and crude oil

Land use:
arable land: 17%
permanent crops: 4%
permanent pastures: 7%
forests and woodland : 6%
other: 66% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: sandstorms may occur during spring and summer

Environment - current issues: limited arable land and natural fresh
water resources pose serious constraints; desertification; air
pollution from industrial and vehicle emissions; groundwater pollution
from industrial and domestic waste, chemical fertilizers, and
pesticides

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Ship Pollution
signed, but not ratified : Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: there are 203 Israeli settlements and civilian land
use sites in the West Bank, 42 in the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights,
24 in the Gaza Strip, and 26 in East Jerusalem (August 1996 est.)

@Israel:People

Population: 5,534,672 (July 1997 est.)
note: includes 136,000 Israeli settlers in the West Bank, 15,000 in
the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights, 5,000 in the Gaza Strip, and
156,000 in East Jerusalem (August 1996 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 28% (male 803,792; female 766,224)
15-64 years : 62% (male 1,711,668; female 1,708,700)
65 years and over: 10% (male 234,902; female 309,386) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.01% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 20.16 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.22 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 6.12 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 8.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.21 years
male : 76.34 years
female: 80.18 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.74 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Israeli(s)
adjective: Israeli

Ethnic groups: Jewish 82% (Israel-born 50%,
Europe/Americas/Oceania-born 20%, Africa-born 7%, Asia-born 5%),
non-Jewish 18% (mostly Arab) (1993 est.)

Religions: Judaism 82%, Islam 14% (mostly Sunni Muslim), Christian 2%,
Druze and other 2%

Languages: Hebrew (official), Arabic used officially for Arab
minority, English most commonly used foreign language

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 95%
male: 97%
female : 93% (1992 est.)

@Israel:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: State of Israel
conventional short form: Israel
local long form: Medinat Yisra'el
local short form: Yisra'el

Data code: IS

Government type: republic

National capital: Jerusalem
note: Israel proclaimed Jerusalem as its capital in 1950, but the US,
like nearly all other countries, maintains its Embassy in Tel Aviv

Administrative divisions: 6 districts (mehozot, singular - mehoz);
Central, Haifa, Jerusalem, Northern, Southern, Tel Aviv

Independence: 14 May 1948 (from League of Nations mandate under
British administration)

National holiday: Independence Day, 14 May 1948 (Israel declared
independence on 14 May 1948, but the Jewish calendar is lunar and the
holiday may occur in April or May)

Constitution: no formal constitution; some of the functions of a
constitution are filled by the Declaration of Establishment (1948),
the basic laws of the parliament (Knesset), and the Israeli
citizenship law

Legal system: mixture of English common law, British Mandate
regulations, and, in personal matters, Jewish, Christian, and Muslim
legal systems; in December 1985, Israel informed the UN Secretariat
that it would no longer accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Ezer WEIZMAN (since 13 May 1993)
head of government : Prime Minister Binyamin NETANYAHU (since 18 June
1996)
cabinet: Cabinet selected from and approved by the Knesset
elections: president elected by the Knesset for a five-year term;
election last held 24 March 1993 (next to be held NA March 1998);
prime minister elected by popular vote for a four-year term; election
last held 29 May 1996 (next to be held NA 2000); note - in March 1992,
the Knesset approved legislation, effective in 1996, which allowed for
the direct election of the prime minister; under the new law, each
voter casts two ballots - one for the direct election of the prime
minister and one for the party in the Knesset; the candidate that
receives the largest percentage of the popular vote then works to form
a coalition with other parties to achieve a parliamentary majority of
61 seats; finally, the candidate must submit his or her cabinet to the
Knesset for approval and this must be done within 45 days of the
election; in contrast to the old system, under the new law, the prime
minister's party need not be the single-largest party in the Knesset
election results: Ezer WEIZMAN elected president; percent of Knesset
vote - NA; Binyamin NETANYAHU elected prime minister; percent of vote
- Binyamin NETANYAHU 50.4%, Shimon PERES 49.5%

Legislative branch: unicameral Knesset or parliament (120 seats;
members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 29 May 1996 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
Labor Party 34, Likud Party 32, SHAS 10, MERETZ 9, National Religious
Party 9, Yisra'el Ba'Aliya 7, Hadash-Balad 5, Third Way 4, United Arab
List 4, United Jewish Torah 4, Moledet 2; note - Likud, Tzomet, and
Gesher candidates ran on a joint list

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders:
government coalition: Likud Party, Prime Minister Binyamin NETANYAHU;
Tzomet, Rafael EITAN; Gesher, David LEVI; SHAS, Arieh DERI; National
Religious Party, Zevulun HAMMER; Yisra'el Ba'Aliya, Natan SHARANSKY;
United Jewish Torah, Meir PORUSH; Third Way, Avigdor KAHALANI;
Moledet, Rehavam ZEEVI
opposition: Labor Party, Shimon PERES; MERETZ, Yossi SARID; United
Arab List, Abd al-Malik DAHAMSHAH; Hadash-Balad, Hashim MAHAMID

Political pressure groups and leaders: Gush Emunim, Israeli
nationalists advocating Jewish settlement on the West Bank and Gaza
Strip; Peace Now supports territorial concessions in the West Bank and
is critical of government's Lebanon policy

International organization participation: AG (observer), BSEC
(observer), CCC, CE (observer), CERN (observer), EBRD, ECE, FAO, IADB,
IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, OAS (observer), OSCE
(partner), PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Eliahu BEN-ELISSAR
chancery: 3514 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 364-5500
FAX: [1] (202) 364-5610
consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles,
Miami, New York, Philadelphia, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Martin S. INDYK
embassy: 71 Hayarkon Street, Tel Aviv
mailing address: PSC 98, Box 100, APO AE 09830
telephone : [972] (3) 519-7575
FAX: [972] (3) 517-3227
consulate(s) general: Jerusalem; note - an independent US mission,
established in 1928, whose members are not accredited to a foreign
government

Flag description: white with a blue hexagram (six-pointed linear star)
known as the Magen David (Shield of David) centered between two equal
horizontal blue bands near the top and bottom edges of the flag

Economy

Economy - overview: Israel has a market economy with substantial
government participation. It depends on imports of crude oil, grains,
raw materials, and military equipment. Despite limited natural
resources, Israel has intensively developed its agricultural and
industrial sectors over the past 20 years. Manufacturing and
construction employ about 29% of Israeli workers, agriculture,
forestry, and fishing 3.5%, and services the rest. Israel is largely
self-sufficient in food production except for grains. Diamonds,
high-technology equipment, and agricultural products (fruits and
vegetables) are leading exports. Israel usually posts sizable current
account deficits, which are covered by large transfer payments from
abroad and by foreign loans. Roughly half of the government's external
debt is owed to the US, which is its major source of economic and
military aid. To earn needed foreign exchange, Israel has been
targeting high-technology niches in international markets, such as
medical scanning equipment. The influx of Jewish immigrants from the
former USSR, which topped 750,000 during the period 1989-96, initially
increased unemployment, intensified housing problems, and strained the
government budget. At the same time, the immigrants bring to the
economy valuable scientific and professional expertise.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $85.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.6% (1996)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $16,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 3.5%
industry: 22%
services: 74.5%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 11.3% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 2.2 million (1996)
by occupation : public services 29.3%, manufacturing 22.1%,
construction 6.5%, commerce 13.9%, finance and business 10.4%,
personal and other services 7.4%, transport, storage, and
communications 6.3%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing 3.5%, other
0.6% (1992)

Unemployment rate: 6.5% (1996)

Budget:
revenues: $41 billion
expenditures: $53 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996)

Industries: food processing, diamond cutting and polishing, textiles
and apparel, chemicals, metal products, military equipment, transport
equipment, electrical equipment, potash mining, high-technology
electronics, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 8% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 6.92 million kW (1995 est.)

Electricity - production: 30.4 billion kWh (1995 est.)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 4,738 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: citrus and other fruits, vegetables, cotton;
beef, poultry, dairy products

Exports:
total value: $20.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities : machinery and equipment, cut diamonds, chemicals,
textiles and apparel, agricultural products, metals
partners: US, EU, Japan

Imports:
total value: $28.3 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities : military equipment, investment goods, rough diamonds,
oil, other productive inputs, consumer goods
partners: EU, US, Japan

Debt - external: $25.7 billion (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient : total receipts $12.14 billion of which $11.38 billion from
the US (1990-93)

Currency: 1 new Israeli shekel (NIS) = 100 new agorot

Exchange rates: new Israeli shekels (NIS) per US$1 - 3.2761 (January
1997), 3.2882 (1996), 3.0113 (1995), 3.0111 (1994), 2.8301 (1993),
2.4591 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year (since 1 January 1992)

@Israel:Communications

Telephones: 2.425 million (1990 est.)

Telephone system: most highly developed system in the Middle East
although not the largest
domestic : good system of coaxial cable and microwave radio relay
international: 3 submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 3
Intelsat (2 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 45, shortwave 0

Radios: 2.25 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 20

Televisions: 1.5 million (1993 est.)

@Israel:Transportation

Railways:
total: 526 km
standard gauge: 526 km 1.435-m gauge

Highways:
total: 14,700 km
paved: 14,700 km (including 56 km of expressways)
unpaved: 0 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 708 km; petroleum products 290 km; natural gas 89
km

Ports and harbors: Ashdod, Ashqelon, Elat (Eilat), Hadera, Haifa, Tel
Aviv-Yafo

Merchant marine:
total: 26 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 659,505 GRT/778,780 DWT
ships by type: cargo 2, container 23, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1996
est.)

Airports: 50 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 45
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
1,524 to 2,437 m : 7
914 to 1,523 m: 8
under 914 m: 22 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 5
1,524 to 2,437 m : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Israel Defense Forces (includes ground, naval, and
air components), Pioneer Fighting Youth (Nahal), Frontier Guard, Chen
(women); note - historically there have been no separate Israeli
military services

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,420,066
females age 15-49 : 1,391,042 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,162,745 (1997 est.)
females: 1,134,610 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 50,744
females : 48,519 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $9.2 billion (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: about 9.8% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: West Bank and Gaza Strip are Israeli
occupied with current status subject to the Israeli-Palestinian
Interim Agreement - permanent status to be determined through further
negotiation; Golan Heights is Israeli occupied; Israeli troops in
southern Lebanon since June 1982

Illicit drugs: increasingly concerned about cocaine and heroin abuse
and trafficking
______________________________________________________________________

ITALY

@Italy:Geography

Location: Southern Europe, a peninsula extending into the central
Mediterranean Sea, northeast of Tunisia

Geographic coordinates: 42 50 N, 12 50 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 301,230 sq km
land : 294,020 sq km
water: 7,210 sq km
note: includes Sardinia and Sicily

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Arizona

Land boundaries:
total: 1,932.2 km
border countries: Austria 430 km, France 488 km, Holy See (Vatican
City) 3.2 km, San Marino 39 km, Slovenia 232 km, Switzerland 740 km

Coastline: 7,600 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: predominantly Mediterranean; Alpine in far north; hot, dry in
south

Terrain: mostly rugged and mountainous; some plains, coastal lowlands

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Mediterranean Sea 0 m
highest point: Mont Blanc 4,807 m

Natural resources: mercury, potash, marble, sulfur, dwindling natural
gas and crude oil reserves, fish, coal

Land use:
arable land: 31%
permanent crops: 10%
permanent pastures: 15%
forests and woodland: 23%
other : 21% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 27,100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: regional risks include landslides, mudflows,
avalanches, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, flooding; land subsidence
in Venice

Environment - current issues: air pollution from industrial emissions
such as sulfur dioxide; coastal and inland rivers polluted from
industrial and agricultural effluents; acid rain damaging lakes;
inadequate industrial waste treatment and disposal facilities

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands,
Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Desertification,
Tropical Timber 94

Geography - note: strategic location dominating central Mediterranean
as well as southern sea and air approaches to Western Europe

@Italy:People

Population: 56,830,508 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 15% (male 4,234,767; female 3,997,589)
15-64 years: 68% (male 19,314,674; female 19,442,196)
65 years and over: 17% (male 4,028,659; female 5,812,623) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: -0.08% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 8.96 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.07 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.27 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.69 male(s)/female
total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.25 years
male: 75.13 years
female: 81.58 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.16 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Italian(s)
adjective: Italian

Ethnic groups: Italian (includes small clusters of German-, French-,
and Slovene-Italians in the north and Albanian-Italians and
Greek-Italians in the south)

Religions: Roman Catholic 98%, other 2%

Languages: Italian, German (parts of Trentino-Alto Adige region are
predominantly German speaking), French (small French-speaking minority
in Valle d'Aosta region), Slovene (Slovene-speaking minority in the
Trieste-Gorizia area)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 97%
male: 98%
female: 96% (1990 est.)

@Italy:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Italian Republic
conventional short form: Italy
local long form: Repubblica Italiana
local short form : Italia
former: Kingdom of Italy

Data code: IT

Government type: republic

National capital: Rome

Administrative divisions: 20 regions (regioni, singular - regione);
Abruzzi, Basilicata, Calabria, Campania, Emilia-Romagna,
Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Lazio, Liguria, Lombardia, Marche, Molise,
Piemonte, Puglia, Sardegna, Sicilia, Toscana, Trentino-Alto Adige,
Umbria, Valle d'Aosta, Veneto

Independence: 17 March 1861 (Kingdom of Italy proclaimed)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Republic, 2 June (1946)

Constitution: 1 January 1948

Legal system: based on civil law system, with ecclesiastical law
influence; appeals treated as trials de novo; judicial review under
certain conditions in Constitutional Court; has not accepted
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal (except in senatorial elections,
where minimum age is 25)

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Oscar Luigi SCALFARO (since 28 May 1992)
head of government : Prime Minister (referred to in Italy as the
president of the Council of Ministers) Romano PRODI (since 18 May
1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers nominated by the prime minister and
approved by the president
elections: president elected by an electoral college consisting of
both houses of Parliament and 58 regional representatives for a
seven-year term; election last held 25 May 1992 (next to be held NA
1999); prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Oscar Luigi SCALFARO elected president; percent of
electoral college vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Parlamento consists of the
Senate or Senato della Repubblica (326 seats, 315 popularly elected of
which 232 are directly elected and 83 by regional proportional
representation, 11 appointed senators-for-life; members serve
five-year terms) and the Chamber of Deputies or Camera dei Deputati
(630 seats; 475 are directly elected, 155 by regional proportional
representation; members serve five-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 21 April 1996 (next to be held by NA
April 2001); Chamber of Deputies - last held 21 April 1996 (next to be
held by NA April 2001)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - Olive Tree 157, Freedom Alliance 116, Northern League 27,
Refounded Communists 10, regional lists 3, Social Movement-Tricolor
Flames 1, Panella Reformers 1; Chamber of Deputies - percent of vote
by party - NA; seats by party - Olive Tree 284, Freedom Alliance 246,
Northern League 59, Refounded Communists 35, Southern Tyrol List 3,
Autonomous List 2, other 1

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court or Corte Costituzionale,
composed of 15 judges (one-third appointed by the president, one-third
elected by Parliament, one-third elected by the ordinary and
administrative supreme courts)

Political parties and leaders:
Olive Tree (Ulivo): Democratic Party of the Left or PDS [Massimo
D'ALEMA]; Greens (Verdi) [Carlo RIPA DI MEANA]; Italian Renewal or RI
[Lamberto DINI]; Italian Popular Party or PPI [Franco MARINI - elected
12 January 1997]
Freedom Pole: Forza Italia or FI [Silvio BERLUSCONI]; National
Alliance or AN [Gianfranco FINI]; Christian Democratic Center or CCD
[Pierferdinando CASINI]; Christian Democratic Union or CDU [Rocco
BUTTIGLIONE]
other: Northern League or NL [Umberto BOSSI]; Communism Refoundation
or RC [Fausto BERTINOTTI]; Italian Social Movement-Tricolor Flame or
MSI-Fiamma Tricolore [Pino RAUTI]; Pannella-Sgarbi's List (Lista
Pannella-Sgarbi) [Marco PANNELLA]; Italian Socialists or SI [Enrico
BOSELLI]; Autonomous List (a group of minor parties); Southern Tyrols
List or SVP (German speakers)

Political pressure groups and leaders: the Roman Catholic Church;
three major trade union confederations (Confederazione Generale
Italiana del Lavoro or CGIL which is PDS-dominated, Confederazione
Italiana dei Sindacati Lavoratori or CISL which is centrist, and
Unione Italiana del Lavoro or UIL which is center-right); Italian
manufacturers and merchants associations (Confindustria,
Confcommercio); organized farm groups (Confcoltivatori,
Confagricoltura)

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB,
Australia Group, BIS, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE, CE (observer), CEI,
CERN, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, EIB, ESA, EU, FAO, G- 7, G-10, IADB, IAEA,
IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAIA
(observer), MINURSO, MTCR, NACC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS
(observer), OECD, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMOGIP, UNTSO, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Ferdinando SALLEO
chancery: 1601 Fuller Street NW, Washington, DC 20009 and 2700 16th
Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 328-5500
FAX: [1] (202) 483-2187
consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Houston, Miami, New York, Los
Angeles, Philadelphia, San Francisco
consulate(s): Detroit and New Orleans

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Reginald BARTHOLOMEW
embassy : Via Veneto 119/A, 00187-Rome
mailing address: PSC 59, Box 100, APO AE 09624
telephone: [39] (6) 46741
FAX: [39] (6) 488-2672
consulate(s) general : Florence, Milan, Naples

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side),
white, and red; similar to the flag of Ireland, which is longer and is
green (hoist side), white, and orange; also similar to the flag of the
Cote d'Ivoire, which has the colors reversed - orange (hoist side),
white, and green

Economy

Economy - overview: Since World War II, the Italian economy has
changed from one based on agriculture into a ranking industrial
economy, with approximately the same total and per capita output as
France and the UK. This basically capitalistic economy is still
divided into a developed industrial north, dominated by private
companies, and a less developed agricultural south, with large public
enterprises. Most raw materials needed by industry and over 75% of
energy requirements must be imported. In the second half of 1992, Rome
became unsettled by the prospect of not qualifying to participate in
EU plans for economic and monetary union later in the decade; thus, it
finally began to address its huge fiscal imbalances. Subsequently, the
government has adopted fairly stringent budgets, abandoned its
inflationary wage indexation system, and started to scale back its
generous social welfare programs, including pension and health care
benefits. In November 1996 the lire rejoined the European monetary
system, which it had left in September 1992 when under extreme
pressure in currency markets. Italy in early 1997 faces the problem of
restructuring its economy to meet Maastricht criteria for inclusion in
the EMU, together with other problems of refurbishing a tottering
communications system, curbing industrial pollution, and adjusting to
new EU and global competitive forces.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.12 trillion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 0.8% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $19,600 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 3.3%
industry : 33%
services: 63.7% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 22.851 million
by occupation: services 61%, industry 32%, agriculture 7% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 12% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $416 billion
expenditures : $506 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: tourism, machinery, iron and steel, chemicals, food
processing, textiles, motor vehicles, clothing, footwear, ceramics

Industrial production growth rate: 0.5% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 57.19 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 241.6 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 4,238 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: fruits, vegetables, grapes, potatoes, sugar
beets, soybeans, grain, olives; meat and dairy products; fish catch of
525,000 metric tons in 1990

Exports:
total value: $250 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: metals, textiles and clothing, production machinery,
motor vehicles, transportation equipment, chemicals
partners : EU 53.4%, US 7.8%, OPEC 3.8%

Imports:
total value: $205 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities : industrial machinery, chemicals, transport equipment,
petroleum, metals, food, agricultural products
partners: EU 56.3%, OPEC 5.3%, US 4.6%

Debt - external: $45 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $3.043 billion (1993)

Currency: 1 Italian lira (Lit) = 100 centesimi

Exchange rates: Italian lire (Lit) per US$1 - 1,568.1 (January 1997),
1,542.9 (1996), 1,628.9 (1995), 1,612.4 (1994), 1,573.7 (1993),
1,232.4 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Italy:Communications

Telephones: 25.6 million (1996 est.)

Telephone system: modern, well-developed, fast; fully automated
telephone, telex, and data services
domestic: high-capacity cable and microwave radio relay trunks
international: satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (with a total of
5 antennas - 3 for Atlantic Ocean and 2 for Indian Ocean), 1 Inmarsat
(Atlantic Ocean Region), and NA Eutelsat; 21 submarine cables

Radio broadcast stations: AM 135, FM 28 (repeaters 1,840), shortwave 0

Radios: 45.7 million (1996 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 83 (repeaters 1,000)

Televisions: 17 million (1996 est.)

@Italy:Transportation

Railways:
total : 18,961 km
standard gauge: 17,981 km 1.435-m gauge; Italian Railways (FS)
operates 16,118 km of the total standard gauge routes (10,560 km
electrified)
narrow gauge: 113 km 1.000-m gauge (113 km electrified); 867 km
0.950-m gauge (144 km electrified)

Highways:
total: 305,388 km
paved: 305,388 km (including 6,301 km of expressways)
unpaved: 0 km (1991 est.)

Waterways: 2,400 km for various types of commercial traffic, although
of limited overall value

Pipelines: crude oil 1,703 km; petroleum products 2,148 km; natural
gas 19,400 km

Ports and harbors: Ancona, Augusta (Sicily), Bari, Cagliari
(Sardinia), Catania (Sicily), Gaeta, Genoa, La Spezia, Livorno,
Naples, Oristano (Sardinia), Palermo (Sicily), Piombino, Porto Torres
(Sardinia), Ravenna, Savona, Trieste, Venice

Merchant marine:
total : 396 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,503,637 GRT/7,794,505
DWT
ships by type: bulk 36, cargo 50, chemical tanker 39, combination
ore/oil 2, container 17, liquefied gas tanker 36, multifunction
large-load carrier 1, oil tanker 106, passenger 7, roll-on/roll-off
cargo 54, short-sea passenger 30, specialized tanker 11, vehicle
carrier 7 (1996 est.)

Airports: 132 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 112
over 3,047 m : 5
2,438 to 3,047 m: 34
1,524 to 2,437 m: 15
914 to 1,523 m: 24
under 914 m: 34 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 20
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 18 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Carabinieri

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 14,356,666 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 12,423,178 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 339,255 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $20.4 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.9% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Italy is negotiating with Slovenia over
property and minority rights issues dating from World War II; Croatia
and Italy have not resolved a bilateral issue dating from WWII over
property and ethnic minority rights

Illicit drugs: important gateway for and consumer of Latin American
cocaine and Southwest Asian heroin entering the European market
______________________________________________________________________

JAMAICA

@Jamaica:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, south of Cuba

Geographic coordinates: 18 15 N, 77 30 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 10,990 sq km
land: 10,830 sq km
water: 160 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,022 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; temperate interior

Terrain: mostly mountains with narrow, discontinuous coastal plain

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point : Blue Mountain Peak 2,256 m

Natural resources: bauxite, gypsum, limestone

Land use:
arable land : 14%
permanent crops: 6%
permanent pastures: 24%
forests and woodland: 17%
other: 39% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 350 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hurricanes (especially July to November)

Environment - current issues: deforestation; coastal waters polluted
by industrial waste, sewage, and oil spills; damage to coral reefs;
air pollution in Kingston results from vehicle emissions

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Marine
Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: strategic location between Cayman Trench and Jamaica
Channel, the main sea lanes for Panama Canal

@Jamaica:People

Population: 2,615,582 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 32% (male 428,831; female 409,959)
15-64 years: 61% (male 793,609; female 806,031)
65 years and over: 7% (male 78,453; female 98,699) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.75% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 21.56 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.5 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -8.51 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.8 male(s)/female
total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 15 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 75.12 years
male : 72.8 years
female: 77.56 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.39 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Jamaican(s)
adjective: Jamaican

Ethnic groups: black 76.3%, Afro-European 15.1%, East Indian and
Afro-East Indian 3%, white 3.2%, Chinese and Afro-Chinese 1.2%, other
1.2%

Religions: Protestant 55.9% (Church of God 18.4%, Baptist 10%,
Anglican 7.1%, Seventh-Day Adventist 6.9%, Pentecostal 5.2%, Methodist
3.1%, United Church 2.7%, other 2.5%), Roman Catholic 5%, other,
including some spiritual cults 39.1% (1982)

Languages: English, Creole

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
total population: 85%
male: 80.8%
female: 89.1% (1995 est.)

@Jamaica:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Jamaica

Data code: JM

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Kingston

Administrative divisions: 14 parishes; Clarendon, Hanover, Kingston,
Manchester, Portland, Saint Andrew, Saint Ann, Saint Catherine, Saint
Elizabeth, Saint James, Saint Mary, Saint Thomas, Trelawny,
Westmoreland

Independence: 6 August 1962 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day (first Monday in August) (1962)

Constitution: 6 August 1962

Legal system: based on English common law; has not accepted compulsory
ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General Sir Howard Felix COOKE (since 1 August
1991)
head of government: Prime Minister Percival James PATTERSON (since 30
March 1992) and Deputy Prime Minister Seymour MULLINGS (since NA 1993)
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
the prime minister
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor general
appointed by the queen on the recommendation of the prime minister;
prime minister and deputy prime minister appointed by the governor
general

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (a
21-member body appointed by the governor general on the
recommendations of the prime minister and the leader of the
opposition; ruling party 13 seats, opposition 8 seats) and the House
of Representatives (60 seats; members are elected by popular vote to
serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 30 March 1993 (next to be held by March 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PNP
52, JLP 8; note - the establishment of a major third party, the
National Democratic Movement (NDM) in 1995 led to a realignment of
seats - PNP 51, JLP 7, NDM 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed by the governor
general on advice of the prime minister

Political parties and leaders: People's National Party (PNP), P. J.
PATTERSON; Jamaica Labor Party (JLP), Edward SEAGA; National
Democratic Movement (NDM), Bruce GOLDING

Political pressure groups and leaders: Rastafarians (black
religious/racial cultists, pan-Africanists); New Beginnings Movement
(NBM)

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CCC, CDB,
ECLAC, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, LAES, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNIDO, UNITAR, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Richard Leighton BERNAL
chancery: 1520 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 452-0660
FAX : [1] (202) 452-0081
consulate(s) general: Miami and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador J. Gary COOPER
embassy: Jamaica Mutual Life Center, 2 Oxford Road, 3rd floor,
Kingston
mailing address : use embassy street address
telephone: [1] (876) 929-4850 through 4859
FAX: [1] (876) 926-6743

Flag description: diagonal yellow cross divides the flag into four
triangles - green (top and bottom) and black (hoist side and outer
side)

Economy

Economy - overview: Key sectors in this island economy are bauxite
(alumina and bauxite account for more than half of exports) and
tourism. Since assuming office in 1992, Prime Minister PATTERSON has
consolidated the market-oriented reforms initiated by his predecessor,
Michael MANLEY, to make Jamaica a regional leader in economic reform.
PATTERSON has eliminated most price controls, streamlined tax
schedules, and privatized government enterprises. Tight monetary and
fiscal policies under an IMF program have helped slow inflation and
stabilize the exchange rate, but, as a result, economic growth has
slowed down and unemployment remains high. Jamaica's medium-term
prospects depend largely on its ability to continue to attract foreign
capital and to limit speculation against the Jamaican dollar.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $8.4 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 0.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,260 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 8.1%
industry: 36.2%
services: 55.7% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 17% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1,062,100
by occupation: services 41%, agriculture 22.5%, industry 19%,
unemployed 17.5% (1989)

Unemployment rate: 15.4% (1994 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $1.45 billion
expenditures: $2 billion, including capital expenditures of $732
million (FY95/96 est.)

Industries: bauxite, tourism, textiles, food processing, light
manufactures

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 848,400 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 5.829 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,014 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: sugarcane, bananas, coffee, citrus, potatoes,
vegetables; poultry, goats, milk

Exports:
total value: $1.4 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: alumina, bauxite, sugar, bananas, rum
partners: US 47%, UK 11%, Canada 9%, Norway 7%, France 4% (1993)

Imports:
total value: $2.8 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment, construction
materials, fuel, food, chemicals
partners: US 54%, Japan 4.0%, Mexico 6%, UK 4%, Venezuela 3% (1993)

Debt - external: $4.2 billion (1995)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $239 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Jamaican dollar (J$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Jamaican dollars (J$) per US$1 - 34.952 (December
1996), 37.120 (1996), 35.142 (1995), 33.086 (1994), 24.949 (1993),
22.960 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Jamaica:Communications

Telephones: 212,257 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: fully automatic domestic telephone network
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
3 coaxial submarine cables

Radio broadcast stations: AM 10, FM 17, shortwave 0

Radios: 1.04 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 8

Televisions: 330,000 (1992 est.)

@Jamaica:Transportation

Railways:
total: 272 km
standard gauge: 272 km 1.435-m gauge; note - 207 km belonging to the
Jamaica Railway Corporation which were in common carrier service are
no longer operational; the remaining track is privately owned and used
to transport bauxite

Highways:
total: 18,600 km
paved: 13,132 km
unpaved : 5,468 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: petroleum products 10 km

Ports and harbors: Alligator Pond, Discovery Bay, Kingston, Montego
Bay, Ocho Rios, Port Antonio, Rocky Point

Merchant marine:
total: 2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,435 GRT/6,105 DWT
ships by type: oil tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 26 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 25
2,438 to 3,047 m : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m: 20 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Jamaica Defense Force (includes Ground Forces,
Coast Guard and Air Wing), Jamaica Constabulary Force

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 691,799 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 488,569 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 25,532 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $30 million (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine from Central and South
America to North America and Europe; illicit cultivation of cannabis;
government has an active cannabis eradication program
______________________________________________________________________

JAN MAYEN

(territory of Norway)

@Jan Mayen:Geography

Location: Northern Europe, island between the Greenland Sea and the
Norwegian Sea, northeast of Iceland

Geographic coordinates: 71 00 N, 8 00 W

Map references: Arctic Region

Area:
total: 373 sq km
land: 373 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Washington,
DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 124.1 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 10 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 4 nm

Climate: arctic maritime with frequent storms and persistent fog

Terrain: volcanic island, partly covered by glaciers

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Norwegian Sea 0 m
highest point: Haakon VII Toppen/Beerenberg 2,277 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: dominated by the volcano Beerenberg; volcanic
activity resumed in 1970

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: barren volcanic island with some moss and grass

@Jan Mayen:People

Population: no permanent inhabitants
note: there are personnel who operate the Long Range Navigation
(Loran) C base and the weather and coastal services radio station

@Jan Mayen:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Jan Mayen

Data code: JN

Dependency status: territory of Norway; administered from Oslo,
Norway, through a governor (sysselmann) resident in Longyearbyen
(Svalbard); however, authority has been delegated to a station
commander of the Norwegian Defense Communication Service

Flag description: the flag of Norway is used

Economy

Economy - overview: Jan Mayen is a volcanic island with no exploitable
natural resources. Economic activity is limited to providing services
for employees of Norway's radio and meteorological stations located on
the island.

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

@Jan Mayen:Communications

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA
note: radio and meteorological station

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

@Jan Mayen:Transportation

Highways:
total: NA km
paved : NA km
unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Norway

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

JAPAN

@Japan:Geography

Location: Eastern Asia, island chain between the North Pacific Ocean
and the Sea of Japan, east of the Korean Peninsula

Geographic coordinates: 36 00 N, 138 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total: 377,835 sq km
land: 374,744 sq km
water: 3,091 sq km
note: includes Bonin Islands (Ogasawara-gunto), Daito-shoto,
Minami-jima, Okinotori-shima, Ryukyu Islands (Nansei-shoto), and
Volcano Islands (Kazan-retto)

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than California

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 29,751 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm; 3 nm in the international straits - La Perouse
or Soya, Tsugaru, Osumi, and Eastern and Western Channels of the Korea
or Tsushima Strait

Climate: varies from tropical in south to cool temperate in north

Terrain: mostly rugged and mountainous

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Hachiro-gata -4 m
highest point: Fujiyama 3,776 m

Natural resources: negligible mineral resources, fish

Land use:
arable land : 11%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 2%
forests and woodland: 67%
other : 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 27,820 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: many dormant and some active volcanoes; about 1,500
seismic occurrences (mostly tremors) every year; tsunamis

Environment - current issues: air pollution from power plant emissions
results in acid rain; acidification of lakes and reservoirs degrading
water quality and threatening aquatic life; Japan's appetite for fish
and tropical timber is contributing to the depletion of these
resources in Asia and elsewhere

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
Desertification

Geography - note: strategic location in northeast Asia

@Japan:People

Population: 125,732,794 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 15% (male 9,931,114; female 9,464,940)
15-64 years: 69% (male 43,577,219; female 43,250,874)
65 years and over: 16% (male 8,089,200; female 11,419,447) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.23% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 10.01 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.39 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.37 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 80.45 years
male: 77.4 years
female: 83.65 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.44 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Japanese (singular and plural)
adjective: Japanese

Ethnic groups: Japanese 99.4%, other 0.6% (mostly Korean)

Religions: observe both Shinto and Buddhist 84%, other 16% (including
Christian 0.7%)

Languages: Japanese

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99% (1970 est.)
male: NA%
female: NA%

@Japan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Japan

Data code: JA

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: Tokyo

Administrative divisions: 47 prefectures; Aichi, Akita, Aomori, Chiba,
Ehime, Fukui, Fukuoka, Fukushima, Gifu, Gumma, Hiroshima, Hokkaido,
Hyogo, Ibaraki, Ishikawa, Iwate, Kagawa, Kagoshima, Kanagawa, Kochi,
Kumamoto, Kyoto, Mie, Miyagi, Miyazaki, Nagano, Nagasaki, Nara,
Niigata, Oita, Okayama, Okinawa, Osaka, Saga, Saitama, Shiga, Shimane,
Shizuoka, Tochigi, Tokushima, Tokyo, Tottori, Toyama, Wakayama,
Yamagata, Yamaguchi, Yamanashi

Independence: 660 BC (traditional founding by Emperor Jimmu)

National holiday: Birthday of the Emperor, 23 December (1933)

Constitution: 3 May 1947

Legal system: modeled after European civil law system with
English-American influence; judicial review of legislative acts in the
Supreme Court; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Emperor AKIHITO (since 7 January 1989)
head of government: Prime Minister Ryutaro HASHIMOTO (since 11 January
1996); note - an acting prime minister - determined upon a rotational
basis - serves when Prime Minister HASHIMOTO is out of the country
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the prime minister
elections: none; the emperor is a constitutional monarch; the Diet
designates the prime minister; the constitution requires that the
prime minister must command a parliamentary majority, therefore,
following legislative elections, the leader of the majority party or
leader of a majority coalition in the House of Representatives usually
becomes prime minister

Legislative branch: bicameral Diet or Kokkai consists of the House of
Councillors or Sangi-in (252 seats; one-half of the members elected
every three years - 76 seats of which are elected from the 47
multi-seat prefectural districts and 50 of which are elected from a
single nationwide list with voters casting ballots by party; members
elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms) and the House of
Representatives or Shugi-in (500 seats - 200 of which are elected from
11 regional blocks on a proportional representation basis and 300 of
which are elected from 300 single-seat districts; members elected by
popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: House of Councillors - last held 23 July 1995 (next to be
held NA July 1998); House of Representatives - last held 20 October
1996 (next to be held by October 2000)
election results : House of Councillors - percent of vote by party -
NA; seats by party - LDP 110, NFP 56, SDP 38, JCP 14, Sakigake 3,
others 19, independents 12; note - the distribution of seats as of
March 1997 is as follows - LDP 112, NFP 61, SDP 23, JCP 14, Sakigake
3, others 39; House of Representatives - percent of vote by party -
NA; seats by party - LDP 240, NFP 142, DPJ 52, JCP 26, SDP 15, Sun
Party 10, others and independents 15; note - the distribution of seats
as of March 1997 is as follows - LDP 241, NFP 141, DPJ 52, JCP 26, SDP
15, Sun Party 10, others and independents 15

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chief justice is appointed by the
emperor after designation by the cabinet, all other justices are
appointed by the cabinet

Political parties and leaders: Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), Ryutaro
HASHIMOTO, president, Koichi KATO, secretary general; Social
Democratic Party (SDP), Takako DOI, chairman, Shigeru ITO, secretary
general; Sakigake (Harbinger), Akiko DOMOTO, acting chairman, Hiroyuki
SONODA, secretary general; New Frontier Party or NFP (Shinshinto),
Ichiro OZAWA, president, Takeo NISHIOKA, secretary general; Democratic
Party of Japan (DPJ), coleaders Yukio HATOYAMA and Naoto KAN; Japan
Communist Party (JCP), Tetsuzo FUWA, chairman, Kazuo SHII, secretary
general; Sun Party, Tsutomu HATA, chairman, Eijiro HATA, secretary
general
note: DPJ was formed in September 1996 by former members of SDP and
Sakigake; Sun Party was formed in December 1996 by former members of
NFP

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), APEC,
AsDB, Australia Group, BIS, CCC, CE (observer), CP, EBRD, ESCAP, FAO,
G- 2, G- 5, G- 7, G- 8, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NEA, NSG, OAS
(observer), OECD, OSCE (partner), PCA, UN, UN Security Council
(temporary), UNCTAD, UNDOF, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNRWA, UNU,
UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Kunihiko SAITO
chancery : 2520 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 939-6700
FAX: [1] (202) 328-2187
consulate(s) general: Agana (Guam), Anchorage, Atlanta, Boston,
Chicago, Detroit, Honolulu, Houston, Kansas City (Missouri), Los
Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, Portland (Oregon), San
Francisco, and Seattle
consulate(s): Saipan (Northern Mariana Islands)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant)
embassy: 10-5, Akasaka 1-chome, Minato-ku (107), Tokyo
mailing address : Unit 45004, Box 258, APO AP 96337-0001
telephone: [81] (3) 3224-5000
FAX: [81] (3) 3505-1862
consulate(s) general: Naha (Okinawa), Osaka-Kobe, Sapporo
consulate(s) : Fukuoka, Nagoya

Flag description: white with a large red disk (representing the sun
without rays) in the center

Economy

Economy - overview: Government-industry cooperation, a strong work
ethic, mastery of high technology, and a comparatively small defense
allocation (roughly 1% of GDP) have helped Japan advance with
extraordinary rapidity to the rank of second most powerful economy in
the world. One notable characteristic of the economy is the working
together of manufacturers, suppliers, and distributors in closely knit
groups called keiretsu. A second basic feature has been the guarantee
of lifetime employment for a substantial portion of the urban labor
force; this guarantee is slowly eroding. Industry, the most important
sector of the economy, is heavily dependent on imported raw materials
and fuels. The much smaller agricultural sector is highly subsidized
and protected, with crop yields among the highest in the world.
Usually self-sufficient in rice, Japan must import about 50% of its
requirements of other grain and fodder crops. Japan maintains one of
the world's largest fishing fleets and accounts for nearly 15% of the
global catch. For three decades overall real economic growth had been
spectacular: a 10% average in the 1960s, a 5% average in the 1970s,
and a 4% average in the 1980s. Growth slowed considerably in 1992-95
largely because of the aftereffects of overinvestment during the late
1980s and contractionary domestic policies intended to wring
speculative excesses from the stock and real estate markets. Growth
picked up in 1996, largely a reflection of stimulative fiscal and
monetary policies as well as low rates of inflation and social
disorder. As a result of the expansionary fiscal policies and
declining tax revenues due to the recession, Japan currently has one
of the largest budget deficits as a percent of GDP among the
industrialized countries. The crowding of habitable land area and the
aging of the population are two other major long-run problems.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $2.85 trillion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.6% (1996)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $22,700 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 2%
industry : 41.5%
services: 56.5% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 0.3% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 67.23 million (March 1997)
by occupation: trade and services 50%, manufacturing, mining, and
construction 33%, utilities and communication 7%, agriculture,
forestry, and fishing 6%, government 3% (1994)

Unemployment rate: 3.4% (1996)

Budget:
revenues: $528 billion
expenditures: $673 billion, including capital expenditures (public
works only) of about $75 billion (FY97/98 est.)

Industries: among world's largest and technologically advanced
producers of steel and nonferrous metallurgy, heavy electrical
equipment, construction and mining equipment, motor vehicles and
parts, electronic and telecommunication equipment, machine tools,
automated production systems, locomotives and railroad rolling stock,
ships, chemicals; textiles, processed foods

Industrial production growth rate: 2.4% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 199.88 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 992.5 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 6,895 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, sugar beets, vegetables, fruit; pork,
poultry, dairy products, eggs; world's largest fish catch of 10
million metric tons in 1991

Exports:
total value: $385 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : manufactures 96% (including machinery 50%, motor
vehicles 19%, consumer electronics 3%)
partners : Southeast Asia 37%, US 27%, Western Europe 15%, China 5%

Imports:
total value: $329 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: manufactures 54%, foodstuffs and raw materials 28%,
fossil fuels 16%
partners: Southeast Asia 24%, US 22%, Western Europe 15%, China 12%

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $14.7 billion (1995 est.)
note: ODA and OOF commitments (1970-94), $174 billion

Currency: yen (¥)

Exchange rates: yen (¥) per US$1 - 118.02 (January 1997), 108.78
(1996), 94.06 (1995), 102.21 (1994), 111.20 (1993), 126.65 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Japan:Communications

Telephones: 64 million (1987 est.)

Telephone system: excellent domestic and international service
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth stations - 5 Intelsat (4 Pacific Ocean
and 1 Indian Ocean), 1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean Region), and 1
Inmarsat (Pacific and Indian Ocean Regions); submarine cables to
China, Philippines, Russia, and US (via Guam)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 318, FM 58, shortwave 0

Radios: 97 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 12,350 (1 kW or greater 196)

Televisions: 100 million (1993 est.)

@Japan:Transportation

Railways:
total: 23,670.7 km
standard gauge : 2,893.1 km 1.435-m gauge (entirely electrified)
narrow gauge: 89.8 km 1.372-m gauge (89.8 km electrified); 20,656.8 km
1.067-m gauge (10,383.6 km electrified); 31 km 0.762-m gauge (3.6 km
electrified) (1994)

Highways:
total: 1,144,360 km
paved : 846,826 km (including 5,860 km of expressways)
unpaved: 297,534 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: about 1,770 km; seagoing craft ply all coastal inland seas

Pipelines: crude oil 84 km; petroleum products 322 km; natural gas
1,800 km

Ports and harbors: Akita, Amagasaki, Chiba, Hachinohe, Hakodate,
Higashi-Harima, Himeji, Hiroshima, Kawasaki, Kinuura, Kobe, Kushiro,
Mizushima, Moji, Nagoya, Osaka, Sakai, Sakaide, Shimizu, Tokyo,
Tomakomai

Merchant marine:
total: 773 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 15,026,322
GRT/21,941,516 DWT
ships by type: bulk 178, cargo 56, chemical tanker 7, combination bulk
6, combination ore/oil 6, container 38, liquefied gas tanker 39, oil
tanker 254, passenger 8, passenger-cargo 2, refrigerated cargo 38,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 43, short-sea passenger 23, specialized tanker
2, vehicle carrier 73
note: Japan owns an additional 1,579 ships (1,000 GRT or over)
totaling 54,474,380 DWT operating under the registries of The Bahamas,
Burma, Cayman Islands, Hong Kong, Honduras, South Korea, Kuwait,
Liberia, Malta, Malaysia, Panama, Philippines, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Singapore, Thailand, US, and Vanuatu (1996 est.)

Airports: 164 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 162
over 3,047 m: 6
2,438 to 3,047 m: 32
1,524 to 2,437 m: 35
914 to 1,523 m: 29
under 914 m: 60 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 12 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Japan Ground Self-Defense Force (Army), Japan
Maritime Self-Defense Force (Navy), Japan Air Self-Defense Force (Air
Force)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 31,549,081 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 27,107,305 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 835,296 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $48.5 billion (FY96/97)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1% (FY96/97)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: islands of Etorofu, Kunashiri, Shikotan, and
the Habomai group occupied by the Soviet Union in 1945, now
administered by Russia, claimed by Japan; Liancourt Rocks disputed
with South Korea; Senkaku-shoto (Senkaku Islands) claimed by China and
Taiwan
______________________________________________________________________

JARVIS ISLAND

(territory of the US)

@Jarvis Island:Geography

Location: Oceania, island in the South Pacific Ocean, about one-half
of the way from Hawaii to the Cook Islands

Geographic coordinates: 0 22 S, 160 03 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total : 4.5 sq km
land: 4.5 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about eight times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 8 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; scant rainfall, constant wind, burning sun

Terrain: sandy, coral island surrounded by a narrow fringing reef

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 23 m

Natural resources: guano (deposits worked until late 1800s)

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: the narrow fringing reef surrounding the island can
be a maritime hazard

Environment - current issues: no natural fresh water resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified : NA

Geography - note: sparse bunch grass, prostrate vines, and low-growing
shrubs; primarily a nesting, roosting, and foraging habitat for
seabirds, shorebirds, and marine wildlife; feral cats

@Jarvis Island:People

Population: uninhabited
note: Millersville settlement on western side of island occasionally
used as a weather station from 1935 until World War II, when it was
abandoned; reoccupied in 1957 during the International Geophysical
Year by scientists who left in 1958; public entry is by special-use
permit only and generally restricted to scientists and educators

@Jarvis Island:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Jarvis Island

Data code: DQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US; administered by
the Fish and Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior as
part of the National Wildlife Refuge System

National capital: none; administered from Washington, DC

Flag description: the flag of the US is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Jarvis Island:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only; note - there is one
boat landing area in the middle of the west coast and another near the
southwest corner of the island

Transportation - note: there is a day beacon near the middle of the
west coast

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US; visited
annually by the US Coast Guard

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

JERSEY

(British crown dependency)

@Jersey:Geography

Location: Western Europe, island in the English Channel, northwest of
France

Geographic coordinates: 49 15 N, 2 10 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 117 sq km
land: 117 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.7 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 70 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 12 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: temperate; mild winters and cool summers

Terrain: gently rolling plain with low, rugged hills along north coast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 143 m

Natural resources: agricultural land

Land use:
arable land : 57%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: 43%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: largest and southernmost of Channel Islands; about
30% of population concentrated in Saint Helier

@Jersey:People

Population: 88,510 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 18% (male 7,995; female 7,435)
15-64 years: 68% (male 30,009; female 30,523)
65 years and over: 14% (male 5,170; female 7,378) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.73% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 12.64 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.17 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.83 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.11 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
total population : 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 2.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 78.51 years
male: 75.78 years
female: 81.55 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.5 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Channel Islander(s)
adjective: Channel Islander

Ethnic groups: UK and Norman-French descent

Religions: Anglican, Roman Catholic, Baptist, Congregational New
Church, Methodist, Presbyterian

Languages: English (official), French (official), Norman-French
dialect spoken in country districts

Literacy: NA

@Jersey:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Bailiwick of Jersey
conventional short form : Jersey

Data code: JE

Dependency status: British crown dependency

Government type: NA

National capital: Saint Helier

Administrative divisions: none (British crown dependency)

Independence: none (British crown dependency)

National holiday: Liberation Day, 9 May (1945)

Constitution: unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and
practice

Legal system: English law and local statute

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952)
head of government: Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief Sir
Michael WILKES (since NA 1995) and Bailiff Philip Martin BAILHACHE
(since NA 1995)
cabinet : committees appointed by the Assembly of the States
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; lieutenant
governor and bailiff appointed by the queen

Legislative branch: unicameral Assembly of the States (57 seats, 53
elected including 12 senators popularly elected for six-year terms,
half retiring every third year, 12 constables popularly elected
triennially, and 29 deputies popularly elected triennially)
elections: last held NA (next to be held NA)
election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - independents 52

Judicial branch: Royal Court, judges elected by an electoral college
and the bailiff

Political parties and leaders: none; all independents

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (British crown dependency)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (British crown dependency)

Flag description: white with the diagonal red cross of Saint Patrick
(patron saint of Ireland) extending to the corners of the flag

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is based largely on financial
services, agriculture, and tourism. Potatoes, cauliflower, tomatoes,
and especially flowers are important export crops, shipped mostly to
the UK. The Jersey breed of dairy cattle is known worldwide and
represents an important export earner. Milk products go to the UK and
other EU countries. In 1986 the finance sector overtook tourism as the
main contributor to GDP, accounting for 40% of the island's output. In
recent years, the government has encouraged light industry to locate
in Jersey, with the result that an electronics industry has developed
alongside the traditional manufacturing of knitwear. All raw material
and energy requirements are imported, as well as a large share of
Jersey's food needs.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry : NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $643.7 million
expenditures: $597.2 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: tourism, banking and finance, dairy

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 50,000 kW standby
note: electricity supplied by France

Electricity - production: NA kWh
note: electricity supplied by France

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh (1992)

Agriculture - products: potatoes, cauliflowers, tomatoes; meat, dairy
products

Exports: $NA
commodities: light industrial and electrical goods, foodstuffs,
textiles
partners: UK

Imports: $NA
commodities: machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods,
foodstuffs, mineral fuels, chemicals
partners: UK

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid: none

Currency: 1 Jersey pound (£J) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Jersey pounds (£J) per US$1 - 0.6023 (January 1997),
0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995), 0.6529 (1994), 0.6658 (1993), 0.5664
(1992); the Jersey pound is at par with the British pound

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Jersey:Communications

Telephones: 61,447 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international : 3 submarine cables

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: NA

@Jersey:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: NA km
paved: NA km
unpaved : NA km

Ports and harbors: Gorey, Saint Aubin, Saint Helier

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

JOHNSTON ATOLL

(territory of the US)

@Johnston Atoll:Geography

Location: Oceania, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, about one-third
of the way from Hawaii to the Marshall Islands

Geographic coordinates: 16 45 N, 169 30 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 2.8 sq km
land: 2.8 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 4.7 times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 10 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, but generally dry; consistent northeast trade winds
with little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: mostly flat

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Summit Peak 5 m

Natural resources: NA; guano deposits worked until depletion about
1890; none remains in 1997

Land use:
arable land : 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: no natural fresh water resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean;
Johnston Island and Sand Island are natural islands, which have been
expanded by coral dredging; North Island (Akau) and East Island
(Hikina) are manmade islands formed from coral dredging; closed to the
public; former nuclear weapons test site; site of Johnston Atoll
Chemical Agent Disposal System (JACADS); some low-growing vegetation

@Johnston Atoll:People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants
note: there are 1,200 US military and civilian contractor personnel
(January 1997 est.)

@Johnston Atoll:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Johnston Atoll

Data code: JQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US; administered by
the US Defense Nuclear Agency (DNA) and managed cooperatively by DNA
and the Fish and Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior
as part of the National Wildlife Refuge system

National capital: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of the US)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of the US)

Flag description: the flag of the US is used

Economy

Economy - overview: Economic activity is limited to providing services
to US military personnel and contractors located on the island. All
food and manufactured goods must be imported.

Electricity - capacity: NA kW
note : electricity supplied by the base operating support contractor

Electricity - production: NA kWh
note: electricity supplied by the base operating support contractor

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

@Johnston Atoll:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system: 52 telephone lines; excellent system
domestic: 60-channel submarine cable, 22 DSN circuits by satellite,
Autodin with standard remote terminal, digital telephone switch,
Military Affiliated Radio System (MARS station), UHF/VHF air-ground
radio, a link to the Pacific Consolidated Telecommunications Network
(PCTN) satellite
international : NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM 5 channels, shortwave NA

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: commercial satellite television system,
16 channels

Televisions: NA

@Johnston Atoll:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : NA km
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Johnston Island

Airports: 1

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

JORDAN

@Jordan:Geography

Location: Middle East, northwest of Saudi Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 31 00 N, 36 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 89,213 sq km
land: 88,884 sq km
water: 329 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Indiana

Land boundaries:
total: 1,619 km
border countries : Iraq 181 km, Israel 238 km, Saudi Arabia 728 km,
Syria 375 km, West Bank 97 km

Coastline: 26 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: mostly arid desert; rainy season in west (November to April)

Terrain: mostly desert plateau in east, highland area in west; Great
Rift Valley separates East and West Banks of the Jordan River

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Dead Sea -408 m
highest point: Jabal Ram 1,754 m

Natural resources: phosphates, potash, shale oil

Land use:
arable land: 4%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures : 9%
forests and woodland: 1%
other: 85% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 630 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: limited natural fresh water resources;
deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

@Jordan:People

Population: 4,324,638 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 44% (male 968,833; female 921,158)
15-64 years: 53% (male 1,188,248; female 1,125,527)
65 years and over : 3% (male 60,876; female 59,996) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.6% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 35.95 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 3.88 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -6.07 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.06 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.02 male(s)/female
total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 30.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 72.69 years
male: 70.81 years
female: 74.68 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.94 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Jordanian(s)
adjective: Jordanian

Ethnic groups: Arab 98%, Circassian 1%, Armenian 1%

Religions: Sunni Muslim 92%, Christian 8%

Languages: Arabic (official), English widely understood among upper
and middle classes

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 86.6%
male : 93.4%
female: 79.4% (1995 est.)

@Jordan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
conventional short form: Jordan
local long form: Al Mamlakah al Urduniyah al Hashimiyah
local short form: Al Urdun
former: Transjordan

Data code: JO

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: Amman

Administrative divisions: 8 governorates (muhafazat, singular -
muhafazah); Al Balqa', Al Karak, Al Mafraq, 'Amman, At Tafilah, Az
Zarqa', Irbid, Ma'an

Independence: 25 May 1946 (from League of Nations mandate under
British administration)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 May (1946)

Constitution: 8 January 1952

Legal system: based on Islamic law and French codes; judicial review
of legislative acts in a specially provided High Tribunal; has not
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: King HUSSEIN bin Talal Al-Hashimi (since 2 May 1953)
head of government : Prime Minister Abd al-Salam al-MAJALI (since 19
March 1997)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the prime minister in consultation with
the king
elections: none; the king is a constitutional monarch; prime minister
appointed by the king

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly or Majlis al-'Umma
consists of the House of Notables or Majlis al-A'ayan (a 40-member
body appointed by the king from designated categories of public
figures; members serve four-year terms) and the House of
Representatives (80 seats; members elected by popular vote on the
basis of proportional representation to serve four-year terms)
elections: House of Representatives - last held 8 November 1993 (next
to be held NA November 1997
election results: House of Representatives - percent of vote by party
- NA; seats by party - IAF 16, Jordanian National Alliance Party 4,
Al-Yaqazah Party 2, Al-Watan Party 2, Al-'Ahd Party 2, Jordanian Arab
Democratic Party 2, Al-Mustaqbal Party 1, Jordanian Arab Socialist
Ba'th Party 1, Jordanian Democratic Progressive Party 1, Jordanian
People's Democratic Party-Hashd 1, Jordanian Socialist Democratic
Party 1, independents 47
note : the House of Representatives has been convened and dissolved by
the king several times since 1974; in November 1989 the first
parliamentary elections in 22 years were held

Judicial branch: Court of Cassation

Political parties and leaders: Al-Ahrar (Liberals) Party, Ahmad
al-ZU'BI, secretary general; Al-Taqaddumi (Progressive) Party, Fawwaz
al-ZUBI, secretary general; Constitutional Jordanian Arab Front Party,
Milhim al-TALL, leader; Democratic Arab Islamic Movement Party-Du'a',
Yusuf ABU BAKR, secretary general; Islamic Action Front (IAF), Ishaq
al-FARHAN, secretary general; Jordanian Arab Socialist Ba'th Party,
Taysir al-HIMSI, command first secretary; Jordanian Communist Party
(JCP), Ya'qub ZAYADIN, secretary general; Jordanian Democratic Popular
Unity Party, 'Azmi al-KHAWAJA, secretary general; Jordanian People's
Democratic Party-Hashd, Salim al-NAHHAS, secretary general; Jordanian
Unionist Democratic Party, 'Isa MADANAT (secretary general), Ali AMIR
(secretary general), Munis al-RAZZAZ (secretary general); Pan-Arab
Action Front Party, Muhammad al-ZU'BI, secretary general; Progressive
Arab Ba'th Party, Mahmud al-MA'AYITAH, command secretary; Al-Mustaqbal
(Future) Party, Sulayman 'ARAR, secretary general; Jordanian Arab
Partisans Party, Muhammad al-MAJALI, leader, Muhammad al-SHURAYDAH,
secretary general; Jordanian Peace Party, leader NA; Ansar Party,
leader NA; Ummah Party, leader NA; Arab Land Party, leader NA
note: in 1995, the Jordanian Arab Democratic Party, the Jordanian
Democratic Progressive Party, and the Jordanian Socialist Democratic
Party merged to form the Jordanian Unionist Democratic Party, Isa
MADANAT, Ali AMIR, Munis al-RAZZAZ, secretaries general; in May 1997
the following parties - Al-'Ahd (Pledge) Party, 'Abd al-Hadi
al-MAJALI, secretary general; Al-Watan (Homeland) Party, 'Akif
al-FAYIZ, leader; Al-Yaqazah (Awakening) Party, 'Abd al-Ra'uf
al-RAWABIDAH, secretary general; Democratic Arab Unionist Party-Wa'd,
Anis al-MU'ASHIR, secretary general; Jordanian Arab Masses Party, 'Abd
al-Khaliq SHATAT, secretary general; Jordanian National Alliance
Party, Mijhim al-KHURAYSHAH, secretary general; Popular Unity
Party-the Unionists, Mustafa AL-'ISAWI, secretary general; and the
Progress and Justice Party, 'Ali al-SA'D, secretary general - merged
to form the National Constitutional Party, 'Abd al Hadi AL-MAJALI,
secretary general

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACC, AFESD, AL, AMF,
CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
IFAD, IFC, IFCTU, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM
(observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OIC, PCA, UN, UNAVEM III,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNMOT, UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UNRWA, UNTAES,
UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Fayez A. TARAWNEH
chancery: 3504 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone : [1] (202) 966-2664
FAX: [1] (202) 966-3110

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Wesley W. EGAN, Jr.
embassy: Jabel Amman, Amman
mailing address : P. O. Box 354, Amman 11118 Jordan; APO AE 09892-0200
telephone: [962] (6) 820101
FAX: [962] (6) 820159

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of black (top), white,
and green with a red isosceles triangle based on the hoist side
bearing a small white seven-pointed star; the seven points on the star
represent the seven fundamental laws of the Koran

Economy

Economy - overview: Jordan is a small Arab country with inadequate
supplies of water and other natural resources such as oil and coal.
Jordan benefited from increased Arab aid during the oil boom of the
late 1970s and early 1980s, when its annual real GNP growth averaged
more than 10%. In the remainder of the 1980s, however, reductions in
both Arab aid and worker remittances slowed real economic growth to an
average of roughly 2% per year. Imports - mainly oil, capital goods,
consumer durables, and food - outstripped exports, with the difference
covered by aid, remittances, and borrowing. In mid-1989, the Jordanian
Government began debt-rescheduling negotiations and agreed to
implement an IMF-supported program designed to gradually reduce the
budget deficit and implement badly needed structural reforms. The
Persian Gulf crisis that began in August 1990, however, aggravated
Jordan's already serious economic problems, forcing the government to
shelve the IMF program, stop most debt payments, and suspend
rescheduling negotiations. Aid from Gulf Arab states, worker
remittances, and trade contracted; and refugees flooded the country,
producing serious balance-of-payments problems, stunting GDP growth,
and straining government resources. The economy rebounded in 1992,
largely due to the influx of capital repatriated by workers returning
from the Gulf, but the recovery was uneven in 1994-96. The government
is implementing the reform program adopted in 1992 and continues to
secure rescheduling and write-offs of its heavy foreign debt. Debt,
poverty, and unemployment remain Jordan's biggest on-going problems.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $20.9 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.9% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 6%
industry: 28%
services : 66% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4.5% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 600,000 (1992)
by occupation: industry 11.4%, commerce, restaurants, and hotels
10.5%, construction 10.0%, transport and communications 8.7%,
agriculture 7.4%, other services 52.0% (1992)

Unemployment rate: 16% (1994 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $2.7 billion
expenditures: $2.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $630
million (1997 est.)

Industries: phosphate mining, petroleum refining, cement, potash,
light manufacturing

Industrial production growth rate: 3.9% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 1.07 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 4.76 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,173 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, barley, citrus, tomatoes, melons,
olives; sheep, goats, poultry

Exports:
total value : $1.9 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: phosphates, fertilizers, potash, agricultural products,
manufactures
partners: India, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, EU, Indonesia, UAE

Imports:
total value: $4.1 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities : crude oil, machinery, transport equipment, food, live
animals, manufactured goods
partners: EU, US, Iraq, Japan, Turkey

Debt - external: $7.3 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $238 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Jordanian dinar (JD) = 1,000 fils

Exchange rates: Jordanian dinars (JD) per US$1 - 0.7090 (January
1997), 0.7090 (1996), 0.7005 (1995), 0.6987 (1994), 0.6928 (1993),
0.6797 (1992)
note: since May 1989, the dinar has been pegged to a basket of
currencies

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Jordan:Communications

Telephones: 81,500 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: adequate telephone system
domestic : microwave radio relay, cable, and radiotelephone links
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
and 1 Indian Ocean) and 1 Arabsat; coaxial cable and microwave radio
relay to Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Syria; microwave radio relay to
Lebanon is inactive; participant in Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 7, shortwave 0

Radios: 1.1 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 8 and 1 TV receive-only satellite link

Televisions: 350,000 (1992 est.)

@Jordan:Transportation

Railways:
total : 676 km
narrow gauge: 676 km 1.050-m gauge; note - an additional 110 km
stretch of the old Hejaz railroad is out of use

Highways:
total: 6,750 km
paved: 6,750 km
unpaved: 0 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 209 km

Ports and harbors: Al 'Aqabah

Merchant marine:
total: 3 bulk ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 41,651 GRT/67,515 DWT
(1996 est.)

Airports: 14 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 14
over 3,047 m: 8
2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Jordanian Armed Forces (JAF; includes Royal
Jordanian Land Force, Royal Naval Force, and Royal Jordanian Air
Force); Ministry of the Interior's Public Security Force (falls under
JAF only in wartime or crisis situations)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,043,324 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 743,712 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 46,760 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $589 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 8.2% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

JUAN DE NOVA ISLAND

(possession of France)

@Juan de Nova Island:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, island in the Mozambique Channel, about
one-third of the way between Madagascar and Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 17 03 S, 42 45 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 4.4 sq km
land : 4.4 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about seven times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 24.1 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 12 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to depth the of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: NA

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 10 m

Natural resources: guano deposits and other fertilizers

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 0%
forests and woodland: 90%
other: 10%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: periodic cyclones

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: wildlife sanctuary

@Juan de Nova Island:People

Population: uninhabited

@Juan de Nova Island:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Juan de Nova Island
local long form: none
local short form: Ile Juan de Nova

Data code: JU

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by a high
commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Independence: none (possession of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Juan de Nova Island:Transportation

Railways:
total: NA km; short line going to a jetty

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claimed by Madagascar
______________________________________________________________________

KAZAKSTAN

@Kazakstan:Geography

Location: Central Asia, northwest of China

Geographic coordinates: 48 00 N, 68 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
total : 2,717,300 sq km
land: 2,669,800 sq km
water: 47,500 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than four times the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 12,012 km
border countries: China 1,533 km, Kyrgyzstan 1,051 km, Russia 6,846
km, Turkmenistan 379 km, Uzbekistan 2,203 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)
note: Kazakstan borders the Aral Sea (1,015 km) and the Caspian Sea
(1,894 km)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: continental, cold winters and hot summers, arid and semiarid

Terrain: extends from the Volga to the Altai Mountains and from the
plains in western Siberia to oasis and desert in Central Asia

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Vpadina Kaundy -132 m
highest point: Zhengis Shingy 7,439 m

Natural resources: major deposits of petroleum, natural gas, coal,
iron ore, manganese, chrome ore, nickel, cobalt, copper, molybdenum,
lead, zinc, bauxite, gold, uranium

Land use:
arable land: 12%
permanent crops: 11%
permanent pastures: 57%
forests and woodland : 4%
other: 16% (1996 est.)

Irrigated land: 22,000 sq km (1996 est.)

Natural hazards: earthquakes in the south, mudslides around Almaty

Environment - current issues: radioactive or toxic chemical sites
associated with its former defense industries and test ranges are
found throughout the country and pose health risks for humans and
animals; industrial pollution is severe in some cities; because the
two main rivers which flowed into the Aral Sea have been diverted for
irrigation, it is drying up and leaving behind a harmful layer of
chemical pesticides and natural salts; these substances are then
picked up by the wind and blown into noxious dust storms; pollution in
the Caspian Sea; soil pollution from overuse of agricultural chemicals
and salinization from faulty irrigation practices

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Ship Pollution
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

Geography - note: landlocked

@Kazakstan:People

Population: 16,881,793 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 30% (male 2,536,307; female 2,462,742)
15-64 years: 63% (male 5,219,618; female 5,480,693)
65 years and over: 7% (male 392,374; female 790,059) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.24% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 17.36 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.97 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -9.84 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.5 male(s)/female
total population: 0.93 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 57.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 63.79 years
male: 58.32 years
female : 69.53 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.14 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Kazakstani(s)
adjective: Kazakstani

Ethnic groups: Kazak (Qazaq) 46%, Russian 34.7%, Ukrainian 4.9%,
German 3.1%, Uzbek 2.3%, Tatar 1.9%, other 7.1% (1996)

Religions: Muslim 47%, Russian Orthodox 44%, Protestant 2%, other 7%

Languages: Kazak (Qazaq) official language spoken by over 40% of
population, Russian official language spoken by two-thirds of
population and used in everyday business

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98%
male: 99%
female: 96% (1989 est.)

@Kazakstan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Kazakstan
conventional short form: Kazakstan
local long form : Qazaqstan Respublikasy
local short form: none
former: Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: KZ

Government type: republic

National capital: Almaty (according to a September 1995 presidential
decree, the capital is to be moved to Aqmola)

Administrative divisions: 16 oblystar (singular - oblys) and 1 city
(qalalar, singular - qala)*; Almaty Qalasy*, Almaty Oblysy, Aqmola
Oblysy, Aqtobe Oblysy, Atyrau Oblysy, Batys Qazaqstan Oblysy (Oral),
Mangghystau Oblysy (Aqtau), Ongtustik Qazaqstan Oblysy (Shymkent),
Pavlodar Oblysy, Qaraghandy Oblysy, Qostanay Oblysy, Qyzylorda Oblysy,
Shyghys Qazaqstan Oblysy (Oskemen; formerly Ust'-Kamenogorsk),
Soltustik Qazaqstan Oblysy (Petropavl), Taldyqorghan Oblysy, Torghay
Oblysy, Zhambyl Oblysy (Taraz)
note: on 3 May 1997, President NAZARBAYEV that the total number of
oblasts would be reduced to 14; administrative divisions have the same
names as their administrative centers (exceptions have the
administrative center name following in parentheses)

Independence: 16 December 1991 (from the Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 October (1991); Republic Day,
16 December (1991)

Constitution: adopted by national referendum 30 August 1995; first
post-independence constitution was adopted 28 January 1993

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Nursultan A. NAZARBAYEV (chairman of the
Supreme Soviet from 22 February 1990-91, president since 1 December
1991); State Secretary Abish KEKILDAYEV (since 30 October 1996) is
second in rank to the president
head of government: Prime Minister Akezhan KAZHEGELDIN (since 12
October 1994) and First Deputy Prime Minister Akhmetzhan YESIMOV
(since 24 October 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections : president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 1 December 1991 (next to be held NA 2000); note -
President NAZARBAYEV's term was extended to the year 2000 by a
nationwide referendum held 30 April 1995; state secretary (created by
presidential decree) is appointed by the president; prime minister and
first deputy prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Nursultan A. NAZARBAYEV elected president without
opposition; percent of vote - NA
note: President NAZARBAYEV has expanded his presidential powers by
decree: only he can initiate constitutional amendments, appoint and
dismiss the government, dissolve parliament, call referenda at his
discretion, and appoint administrative heads of regions and cities

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (47
seats; 7 senators are appointed by the president; other members are
popularly elected, two each from each oblast and Almaty, to serve
four-year terms) and the Majilis (67 seats; members are popularly
elected to serve four-year terms); note - with the oblasts being
reduced to 14, the Senate will eventually be reduced to 37
elections: Senate - (indirect) last held 5 December 1995 (next to be
held NA 1999); Majilis - last held 9 December and 23 December 1995
(next to be held NA 1999)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - party members 13, no party affiliation 34, of which
"independent" state officials 25, nominated by the president 7,
elected by popular vote 15; Majilis - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - party members 22, no party affiliation 45

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (44 members); Constitutional Council (7
members)

Political parties and leaders: Alash National Freedom Party party
[Aron ATABEK]; People's Unity Party or PUP (was Union of People's
Unity) [Akhan BIZHANOV, chairman]; Democratic Party [Tulegen ZHUKEYEV
and Altynbek SARSENBAYEV, cochairmen]; People's Congress of Kazakstan
or NKK [Olzhas SULEYMENOV, chairman]; AZAMAT Movement [Petr SVOIK,
Murat AUEZOV, and Galym ABILSAITOV, cochairmen]; Communist Party or
KPK [Serikbolsyn ABDILDIN, first secretary]; National Democratic Party
[Kamal ORMANTAYEV, chairman]; AZAT party [Toleubek KARAMENDIN,
chairman]; Labor movement [Madel ISMAILOV, chairman]; Peasant Union of
the Republic Kazakstan or KPU; Republican People's Slavic
Movement-Harmony or Lad [Aleksander SAMARKIN, chairman]; Party for
Social Justice and Economic Revival "Tagibat"; Social Democratic Party
of Kazakstan or SDPK [Dos KUSHIMOV, cochairman]; People's Cooperative
Party [Umirzak SARSENOV, chairman]; Organization of Veterans;
Republican Party; Russian Center [Nina SIDOROVA, chairwoman]; Russian
Cossacks [Vladimir DESYATOV, head (ataman)]; Pensioners Movement or
Pokoleniye [Irina SAVOSTINA, chairwoman]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Independent Trade Union Center
[Leonid SOLOMIN, president]; Kazakstani-American Bureau on Human
Rights [Yevgeniy ZHOVTIS, executive director]; Democratic Committee on
Human Rights [Baretta YERGALIEVA, chairwoman]; Independent Miners
Union [Victor GAIPOV, president]; The Almaty-Helsinki Foundation for
Human Rights [Ninel FOKINA, chairwoman]; Legal Development of
Kazakstan [Vitaliy VORONOV, chairman]

International organization participation: AsDB, CCC, CIS, EBRD, ECE,
ECO, ESCAP, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NACC, OIC, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Bolat K. NURGALIYEV
chancery: (temporary) 3421 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Washington, DC
20008
telephone: [1] (202) 333-4504 through 4507
FAX: [1] (202) 333-4509

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador A. Elizabeth JONES
embassy: 99/97 Furmanova Street, Almaty, Republic of Kazakstan 480012
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone: [7] (3272) 63-39-21, 50-76-23, 50-76-26
FAX : [7] (3272) 63-38-83

Flag description: sky blue background representing the endless sky and
a gold sun with 32 rays soaring above a golden steppe eagle in the
center; on the hoist side is a "national ornamentation" in yellow

Economy

Economy - overview: Kazakstan, the second largest of the former Soviet
states in territory, possesses enormous untapped fossil fuel reserves
as well as plentiful supplies of other minerals and metals. It also
has considerable agricultural potential with its vast steppe lands
accommodating both livestock and grain production. Kazakstan's
industrial sector rests on the extraction and processing of these
natural resources and also on a relatively large machine building
sector specializing in construction equipment, tractors, agricultural
machinery, and some defense items. The breakup of the USSR and the
collapse of demand for Kazakstan's traditional heavy industry products
have resulted in a sharp contraction of the economy since 1991, with
the steepest annual decline occurring in 1994. In 1995-96 the pace of
the government program of economic reform and privatization quickened,
resulting in a substantial shifting of assets into the private sector.
The December 1996 signing of the Caspian Pipeline Consortium agreement
to build a new pipeline from Kazakstan's western Tengiz oil field to
the Black Sea increases prospects for substantially larger oil exports
in several years. The emigration of large numbers of skilled Slavic
managers and technicians from the northern industrial areas will hold
back future growth.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $48.6 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.1% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,880 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 12%
industry: 30%
services : 58% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 28.7% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 6.9 million
by occupation: industry 27%, agriculture and forestry 23%, other 50%
(1996)

Unemployment rate: 2.6% includes only officially registered
unemployed; also large additional numbers of unemployed and
underemployed workers (December 1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures : $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: oil, coal, iron ore, manganese, chromite, lead, zinc,
copper, titanium, bauxite, gold, silver, phosphates, sulfur, iron and
steel, nonferrous metal, tractors and other agricultural machinery,
electric motors, construction materials; much of industrial capacity
is shut down and/or is in need of repair

Industrial production growth rate: 0.3% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 17 million kW 000 kW

Electricity - production: 58.9 billion kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,800 kWh (1996 est.)

Agriculture - products: grain, mostly spring wheat, cotton; wool, meat

Exports:
total value: $5.7 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: oil, ferrous and nonferrous metals, chemicals, grain,
wool, meat, coal
partners: Russia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Netherlands, China

Imports:
total value : $6 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: machinery and parts, industrial materials, oil and gas
partners: Russia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Turkey, Germany

Debt - external: $3.5 billion (July 1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $10 million (1993)
note: commitments, 1992-95, $4,780 million ($1,795 million
disbursements)

Currency: 1 Kazakstani tenge = 100 tiyn

Exchange rates: tenges per US$1 - 74.70 (January 1997), 67.30 (1996),
60.95 (1995), 35.54 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Kazakstan:Communications

Telephones: 2.2 million

Telephone system: service is poor
domestic: landline and microwave radio relay
international: international traffic with other former Soviet
republics and China carried by landline and microwave radio relay and
with other countries by satellite and through 8 international
telecommunications circuits at the Moscow international gateway
switch; satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat and a new satellite
earth station established at Almaty of unknown type

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

Radios: 4.088 million (with multiple speakers for program diffusion
6.082 million)

Television broadcast stations: 1 broadcast station; Orbita (TV receive
only) earth station

Televisions: 4.75 million

@Kazakstan:Transportation

Railways:
total : 13,841 km in common carrier service; does not include
industrial lines
broad gauge: 13,841 km 1.520-m gauge (3,299 km electrified) (1992)

Highways:
total: 158,581 km
paved: NA km
unpaved : NA km (1994)
note: there are 87,572 km of public roads, maintained by governmental
highway maintenance organizations; the rest are privately maintained
by industrial organizations; of the total, 107,885 km are either paved
or otherwise surfaced for all-weather use

Waterways: 4,002 km on the Syrdariya River and Ertis River

Pipelines: crude oil 2,850 km; refined products 1,500 km; natural gas
3,480 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Aqtau (Shevchenko), Atyrau (Gur'yev), Oskemen
(Ust-Kamenogorsk), Pavlodar, Semey (Semipalatinsk)

Airports: 352 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 55
over 3,047 m: 7
2,438 to 3,047 m: 23
1,524 to 2,437 m : 11
914 to 1,523 m: 5
under 914 m: 9 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 297
over 3,047 m: 9
2,438 to 3,047 m: 8
1,524 to 2,437 m: 25
914 to 1,523 m : 65
under 914 m: 190 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense Force, National
Guard, Security Forces (internal and border troops)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 4,416,061 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 3,526,153 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 154,520 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 18.9 billion tenges (1995);
note - conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the
current exchange rate could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet
determined among Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakstan, Russia, and Turkmenistan

Illicit drugs: significant illicit cultivation of cannabis and limited
cultivation of opium poppy and ephedra (for the drug ephedrone);
limited government eradication program; cannabis consumed largely in
the CIS; used as transshipment point for illicit drugs to Russia,
North America, and Western Europe from Southwest Asia
______________________________________________________________________

KENYA

@Kenya:Geography

Location: Eastern Africa, bordering the Indian Ocean, between Somalia
and Tanzania

Geographic coordinates: 1 00 N, 38 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total : 582,650 sq km
land: 569,250 sq km
water: 13,400 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Nevada

Land boundaries:
total: 3,446 km
border countries : Ethiopia 830 km, Somalia 682 km, Sudan 232 km,
Tanzania 769 km, Uganda 933 km

Coastline: 536 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: varies from tropical along coast to arid in interior

Terrain: low plains rise to central highlands bisected by Great Rift
Valley; fertile plateau in west

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Kenya 5,199 m

Natural resources: gold, limestone, soda ash, salt barytes, rubies,
fluorspar, garnets, wildlife

Land use:
arable land: 7%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 37%
forests and woodland : 30%
other: 25% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 660 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: water pollution from urban and
industrial wastes; degradation of water quality from increased use of
pesticides and fertilizers; deforestation; soil erosion;
desertification; poaching

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of the
Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Desertification

Geography - note: the Kenyan Highlands comprise one of the most
successful agricultural production regions in Africa; glaciers on Mt.
Kenya; unique physiography supports abundant and varied wildlife of
scientific and economic value

@Kenya:People

Population: 28,803,085 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 44% (male 6,403,826; female 6,264,971)
15-64 years: 53% (male 7,682,401; female 7,696,504)
65 years and over: 3% (male 340,664; female 414,719) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.13% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 32.44 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.83 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.34 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.82 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 55.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 54.39 years
male : 54.21 years
female: 54.59 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.26 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Kenyan(s)
adjective: Kenyan

Ethnic groups: Kikuyu 22%, Luhya 14%, Luo 13%, Kalenjin 12%, Kamba
11%, Kisii 6%, Meru 6%, other African 15%, non-African (Asian,
European, and Arab) 1%

Religions: Protestant (including Anglican) 38%, Roman Catholic 28%,
indigenous beliefs 26%, other 8%

Languages: English (official), Swahili (official), numerous indigenous
languages

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 78.1%
male: 86.3%
female: 70% (1995 est.)

@Kenya:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Kenya
conventional short form : Kenya
former: British East Africa

Data code: KE

Government type: republic

National capital: Nairobi

Administrative divisions: 7 provinces and 1 area*; Central, Coast,
Eastern, Nairobi Area*, North Eastern, Nyanza, Rift Valley, Western

Independence: 12 December 1963 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 12 December (1963)

Constitution: 12 December 1963, amended as a republic 1964; reissued
with amendments 1979, 1983, 1986, 1988, 1991, and 1992

Legal system: based on English common law, tribal law, and Islamic
law; judicial review in High Court; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction, with reservations; constitutional amendment of 1982
making Kenya a de jure one-party state repealed in 1991

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Daniel Toroitich arap MOI (since 14 October
1978); Vice President George SAITOTI (since 10 May 1989); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Daniel Toroitich arap MOI (since 14
October 1978); Vice President George SAITOTI (since 10 May 1989); note
- the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote from among the members of
the National Assembly for a five-year term; election last held 29
December 1992 (next to be held by early 1998); vice president
appointed by the president
election results : President Daniel T. arap MOI reelected; percent of
vote - Daniel T. arap MOI 37%, Kenneth MATIBA (FORD-ASILI) 26%, Mwai
KIBAKI (DP) 19%, Oginga ODINGA (FORD-Kenya) 17%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Bunge (200 seats,
12 appointed by the president, 188 popularly elected members to serve
5-year terms)
elections: last held 29 December 1992 (next to be held between 1 April
1997 and 31 January 1998)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
KANU 100, FORD-Kenya 31, FORD-Asili 31, DP 23, smaller parties 3;
president nominates 12 additional members; note - as of 9 April 1996
seat distribution (among non-appointed seats) was: KANU 106,
FORD-Kenya 32, FORD-Asili 22, DP 22, smaller parties and vacancies 6
note : first multiparty election since repeal of one-party state law
in 1991

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal, chief justice is appointed by the
president; High Court

Political parties and leaders:
ruling party : Kenya African National Union or KANU [President Daniel
Toroitich arap MOI]
opposition party: Forum for the Restoration of Democracy or FORD-Kenya
[Michael WAMALWA]; Forum for the Restoration of Democracy or
FORD-Asili [Kenneth MATIBA]; Democratic Party of Kenya or DP [Mwai
KIBAKI]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Roman Catholic and other
Christian churches; unregistered SAFINA party with which prominent
naturalist Richard Leakey is associated; human rights groups; labor
unions

International organization participation: ACP, C, CCC, EADB, ECA, FAO,
G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IGADD,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, NAM,
OAU, UN, UN Security Council (temporary), UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMOP, UNOMIL, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UNU, UPU, WCL, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Benjamin Edgar KIPKORIR
chancery: 2249 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 387-6101
FAX : [1] (202) 462-3829
consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Prudence B. BUSHNELL (17 July 1996)
embassy: corner of Moi Avenue and Haile Selassie Avenue, Nairobi
mailing address: P. O. Box 30137, Unit 64100, APO AE 09831
telephone: [254] (2) 334141
FAX : [254] (2) 340838

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of black (top), red,
and green; the red band is edged in white; a large warrior's shield
covering crossed spears is superimposed at the center

Economy

Economy - overview: Since 1993, the government of Kenya has
implemented a program of economic liberalization and reform. Steps
have included the removal of import licensing and price controls,
removal of foreign exchange controls, fiscal and monetary restraint,
and reduction of the public sector through privatization of publicly
owned companies and downsizing the civil service. With the support of
the World Bank, IMF, and other donors, these reforms have led to a
turnaround in economic performance following a period of negative
growth in the early 1990s. Kenya's real GDP grew at 5% in 1995 and 4%
in 1996, and inflation remained under control. Substantial barriers to
growth and development remain, including electricity shortages, the
government's continued and inefficient dominance of key sectors,
endemic corruption, and the country's high population growth rate
(which has declined substantially in recent years).

GDP: purchasing power parity - $39.2 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 29.7%
industry: 11.1%
services: 59.2% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.6% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 8.78 million (1993 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 75%-80%, non-agriculture 20%-25%

Unemployment rate: 35% urban (1994 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $2.7 billion
expenditures : $2.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $620
million (FY95/96)

Industries: small-scale consumer goods (plastic, furniture, batteries,
textiles, soap, cigarettes, flour), processing agricultural products;
oil refining, cement; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 3.8% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 810,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 3.48 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 125 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, tea, corn, wheat, sugarcane, fruit,
vegetables; dairy products, beef, pork, poultry, eggs

Exports:
total value: $1.9 billion (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: tea 35.7%, coffee 28.7%, petroleum products 8.6%
partners : Uganda 22.8%, UK 20.1%, Tanzania 19.1%, Germany 14.0%,
Netherlands 7.6%, US 6.1%

Imports:
total value: $2.6 billion (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: machinery and transportation equipment 53%, petroleum and
petroleum products 23.7%, iron and steel 12.2%, raw materials, food
and consumer goods (1989)
partners : UK 21.3%, UAE 18%, Japan 14%, Germany, US

Debt - external: $7 billion (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : multilateral $490 million; bilateral $433 million (1993
est.)

Currency: 1 Kenyan shilling (KSh) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Kenyan shillings (KSh) per US$1 - 54.738 (January
1997), 57.115 (1996), 51.430 (1995), 56.051 (1994), 58.001 (1993),
32.217 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Kenya:Communications

Telephones: 357,251 (1989 est.)

Telephone system: in top group of African systems
domestic: primarily microwave radio relay
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
and 1 Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 16, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 6

Televisions: 260,000 (1993 est.)

@Kenya:Transportation

Railways:
total : 2,652 km
narrow gauge: 2,652 km 1.000-m gauge

Highways:
total: 63,663 km
paved: 8,785 km
unpaved : 54,878 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: part of Lake Victoria system is within boundaries of Kenya

Pipelines: petroleum products 483 km

Ports and harbors: Kisumu, Lamu, Mombasa

Merchant marine:
total : 2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,883 GRT/6,255 DWT
ships by type: oil tanker 1, roll on/roll off 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 200 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 92
over 3,047 m: 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m : 22
under 914 m: 63 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 108
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 12
914 to 1,523 m: 95 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary General Service
Unit of the Police

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 6,903,241 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 4,266,063 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $134 million (FY94/95)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.9% (FY94/95)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: administrative boundary with Sudan does not
coincide with international boundary

Illicit drugs: widespread harvesting of small, wild plots of marijuana
and qat (chat); transit country for South Asian heroin destined for
Europe and, sometimes, North America; Indian methaqualone also
transits on way to South Africa
______________________________________________________________________

KINGMAN REEF

(territory of the US)

@Kingman Reef:Geography

Location: Oceania, reef in the North Pacific Ocean, about one-half of
the way from Hawaii to American Samoa

Geographic coordinates: 6 24 N, 162 24 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 1 sq km
land : 1 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 1.7 times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 3 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, but moderated by prevailing winds

Terrain: low and nearly level

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point : unnamed location 1 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1996)

Natural hazards: wet or awash most of the time, maximum elevation of
about 1 meter makes Kingman Reef a maritime hazard

Environment - current issues: none

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: barren coral atoll with deep interior lagoon; closed
to the public

@Kingman Reef:People

Population: uninhabited

@Kingman Reef:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Kingman Reef

Data code: KQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US; administered by
the US Navy; however, it is awash the majority of the time, so it is
not usable and is uninhabited

National capital: none; administered from Washington, DC

Flag description: the flag of the US is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Kingman Reef:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: lagoon was used as a halfway station between Hawaii and
American Samoa by Pan American Airways for flying boats in 1937 and
1938

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

KIRIBATI

@Kiribati:Geography

Location: Oceania, group of islands in the Pacific Ocean, straddling
the equator, about one-half of the way from Hawaii to Australia; note
- on 1 January 1995, Kiribati unilaterally moved the International
Date Line from the middle of the country to include its easternmost
islands and make it the same day throughout the country

Geographic coordinates: 1 25 N, 173 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 717 sq km
land: 717 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes three island groups - Gilbert Islands, Line Islands,
Phoenix Islands

Area - comparative: four times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,143 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; marine, hot and humid, moderated by trade winds

Terrain: mostly low-lying coral atolls surrounded by extensive reefs

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location on Banaba 81 m

Natural resources: phosphate (production discontinued in 1979)

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops : 51%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: 3%
other: 46% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons can occur any time, but usually November to
March; occasional tornadoes

Environment - current issues: heavy pollution in lagoon of south
Tarawa atoll due to heavy migration mixed with traditional practices
such as lagoon latrines and open-pit dumping; ground water at risk

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Marine
Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: 20 of the 33 islands are inhabited; Banaba (Ocean
Island) in Kiribati is one of the three great phosphate rock islands
in the Pacific Ocean - the others are Makatea in French Polynesia and
Nauru

@Kiribati:People

Population: 82,449 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years : NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 1.85% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 26.79 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.71 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.53 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years : NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 51.15 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 62.35 years
male: 60.56 years
female : 64.37 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.17 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : I-Kiribati (singular and plural)
adjective: I-Kiribati

Ethnic groups: Micronesian

Religions: Roman Catholic 53%, Protestant (Congregational) 41%,
Seventh-Day Adventist, Baha'i, Church of God, Mormon 6% (1985 est.)

Languages: English (official), Gilbertese

Literacy: NA

@Kiribati:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Kiribati
conventional short form: Kiribati
note : pronounced kiribas
former: Gilbert Islands

Data code: KR

Government type: republic

National capital: Tarawa

Administrative divisions: 3 units; Gilbert Islands, Line Islands,
Phoenix Islands
note: in addition, there are 6 districts (Banaba, Central Gilberts,
Line Islands, Northern Gilberts, Southern Gilberts, Tarawa) and 21
island councils - one for each of the inhabited islands (Abaiang,
Abemama, Aranuka, Arorae, Banaba, Beru, Butaritari, Kanton,
Kiritimati, Kuria, Maiana, Makin, Marakei, Nikunau, Nonouti, Onotoa,
Tabiteuea, Tabuaeran, Tamana, Tarawa, Teraina

Independence: 12 July 1979 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 12 July (1979)

Constitution: 12 July 1979

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President (Beretitenti) Teburoro TITO (since 1 October
1994); Vice President (Kauoman-ni-Beretitenti) Tewareka TENTOA (since
12 October 1994); note - the president is both the chief of state and
head of government
head of government: President (Beretitenti) Teburoro TITO (since 1
October 1994); Vice President (Kauoman-ni-Beretitenti) Tewareka TENTOA
(since 12 October 1994); note - the president is both the chief of
state and head of government
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members of
the House of Assembly
elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
note - the House of Assembly chooses the presidential candidates from
among their members and then those candidates compete in a general
election; election last held 30 September 1994 (next to be held by NA
September 1998); vice president appointed by the president
election results: Teburoro TITO elected president; percent of vote -
Teburoro TITO 51.2%, Tewareka TENTOA 18.3%, Roniti TEIWAKI 16.0%,
Peter Taberannang TIMEON 14.5%

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Assembly or Maneaba Ni
Maungatabu (41 seats; 39 elected by popular vote, one ex officio
member, and one nominated to represent Banaba; members serve four-year
terms)
elections : last held 22 July 1994 (next to be held by NA July 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
Maneaban Te Mauri 13, National Progressive Party 7, independents 19

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal, judges at all levels are appointed
by the president; High Court, judges at all levels are appointed by
the president

Political parties and leaders: National Progressive Party, Teatao
TEANNAKI; Christian Democratic Party, Teburoro TITO; New Movement
Party, leader NA; Liberal Party, Tewareka TENTOA; Maneaban Te Mauri
Party, Roniti TEIWAKI
note : there is no tradition of formally organized political parties
in Kiribati; they more closely resemble factions or interest groups
because they have no party headquarters, formal platforms, or party
structures

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP, IBRD,
ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFC, IMF, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol,
ITU, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Kiribati does not have an embassy
in the US

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Kiribati; the ambassador to the Marshall Islands is accredited to
Kiribati; Honolulu is a honorary consul

Flag description: the upper half is red with a yellow frigate bird
flying over a yellow rising sun, and the lower half is blue with three
horizontal wavy white stripes to represent the ocean

Economy

Economy - overview: A remote country of 33 scattered coral atolls,
Kiribati has few national resources. Commercially viable phosphate
deposits were exhausted at the time of independence in 1979. Copra and
fish now represent the bulk of production and exports. The economy has
fluctuated widely in recent years. Real GDP growth has declined from
about 10% in 1988 to about 2.6% in 1995. Economic development is
constrained by a shortage of skilled workers, weak infrastructure, and
remoteness from international markets. The financial sector is at an
early stage of development. Foreign financial aid, largely from the UK
and Japan, is a critical supplement to GDP, equal in amount to 25%-50%
of GDP in recent years. Remittances from overseas I-Kiribati account
for more than $5 million each year.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $62 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.6% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 11%
industry: 4%
services: 85% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5.1% (1994 est.)

Labor force:
total: 7,870 economically active, not including subsistence farmers
(1985 est.)

Unemployment rate: 2%; underemployment 70% (1992 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $32.5 million
expenditures: $54.3 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: fishing, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: 0.7% (1992 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 5,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 10 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: copra, taro, breadfruit, sweet potatoes,
vegetables; fish

Exports:
total value: $6.3 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: copra 50%, seaweed 16%, fish 15%
partners: Denmark, Fiji, US

Imports:
total value : $38.6 million (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, miscellaneous
manufactured goods, fuel
partners: Australia 40%, Japan 13%, Fiji 10%, NZ 6%, US 4% (1994)

Debt - external: $2 million (December 1989 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $4.725 million from Australia (FY96/97 est.); $2.175
million from NZ (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.2835 (January
1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995), 1.3667 (1994), 1.4704 (1993),
1.3600 (1992)

Fiscal year: NA

@Kiribati:Communications

Telephones: 1,400 (1984 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international : satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)
note: Kiribati is being linked to the Pacific Ocean Cooperative
Telecommunications Network, which should improve telephone service

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 15,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1988 est.)

Televisions: 0 (1988 est.)

@Kiribati:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 655 km (1995 est.)
paved : NA km
unpaved: NA km

Waterways: small network of canals, totaling 5 km, in Line Islands

Ports and harbors: Banaba, Betio, English Harbor, Kanton

Merchant marine:
total: 2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,248 GRT/4,496 DWT
ships by type : oil tanker 1, short-sea passenger 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 20 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 9
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
under 914 m: 5 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 11
914 to 1,523 m: 11 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: no regular military forces; Police Force (carries
out law enforcement functions and paramilitary duties; small police
posts are on all islands)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

KOREA, NORTH

@Korea, North:Geography

Location: Eastern Asia, northern half of the Korean Peninsula
bordering the Korea Bay and the Sea of Japan, between China and South
Korea

Geographic coordinates: 40 00 N, 127 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total: 120,540 sq km
land: 120,410 sq km
water: 130 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Mississippi

Land boundaries:
total: 1,673 km
border countries: China 1,416 km, South Korea 238 km, Russia 19 km

Coastline: 2,495 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 12 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
military boundary line : 50 nm in the Sea of Japan and the exclusive
economic zone limit in the Yellow Sea where all foreign vessels and
aircraft without permission are banned

Climate: temperate with rainfall concentrated in summer

Terrain: mostly hills and mountains separated by deep, narrow valleys;
coastal plains wide in west, discontinuous in east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Sea of Japan 0 m
highest point: Paektu-san 2,744 m

Natural resources: coal, lead, tungsten, zinc, graphite, magnesite,
iron ore, copper, gold, pyrites, salt, fluorspar, hydropower

Land use:
arable land : 14%
permanent crops: 2%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 61%
other : 23% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 14,600 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: late spring droughts often followed by severe
flooding; occasional typhoons during the early fall

Environment - current issues: localized air pollution attributable to
inadequate industrial controls; water pollution; inadequate supplies
of potable water

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
Environmental Modification, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution
signed, but not ratified: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of the
Sea

Geography - note: strategic location bordering China, South Korea, and
Russia; mountainous interior is isolated, nearly inaccessible, and
sparsely populated

@Korea, North:People

Population: 24,317,004 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 30% (male 3,672,851; female 3,528,590)
15-64 years: 66% (male 7,996,814; female 8,068,347)
65 years and over : 4% (male 372,818; female 677,584) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.68% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 22.27 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.43 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.55 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 25 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 70.6 years
male : 67.5 years
female: 73.85 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.29 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Korean(s)
adjective: Korean

Ethnic groups: racially homogeneous

Religions: Buddhism and Confucianism, some Christianity and syncretic
Chondogyo
note: autonomous religious activities now almost nonexistent;
government-sponsored religious groups exist to provide illusion of
religious freedom

Languages: Korean

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write Korean
total population: 99%
male: 99%
female: 99% (1990 est.)

@Korea, North:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Democratic People's Republic of Korea
conventional short form: North Korea
local long form: Choson-minjujuui-inmin-konghwaguk
local short form: none
note: the North Koreans generally use the term "Choson" to refer to
their country
abbreviation : DPRK

Data code: KN

Government type: Communist state; one-man dictatorship

National capital: P'yongyang

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces (do, singular and plural) and 3
special cities* (si, singular and plural); Chagang-do (Chagang
Province), Hamgyong-bukto (North Hamgyong Province), Hamgyong-namdo
(South Hamgyong Province), Hwanghae-bukto (North Hwanghae Province),
Hwanghae-namdo (South Hwanghae Province), Kaesong-si* (Kaesong City),
Kangwon-do (Kangwon Province), Namp'o-si* (Namp'o City),
P'yongan-bukto (North P'yongan Province), P'yongan-namdo (South
P'yongan Province), P'yongyang-si* (P'yongyang City), Yanggang-do
(Yanggang Province)

Independence: 9 September 1948
note: 15 August 1945, date of independence from the Japanese and
celebrated in North Korea as National Liberation Day

National holiday: DPRK Foundation Day, 9 September (1948)

Constitution: adopted 1948, completely revised 27 December 1972,
revised again in April 1992

Legal system: based on German civil law system with Japanese
influences and Communist legal theory; no judicial review of
legislative acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 17 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: KIM Chong-il [de facto]; note - President KIM Il-song
was reelected without opposition 24 May 1990 and died 8 July 1994
leaving his son KIM Chong-il as designated successor; however the son
has not assumed the titles that his father held and no new elections
have been held or scheduled
head of government : Acting Premier HONG Song-nam (since NA February
1997)
cabinet: State Administration Council appointed by the Supreme
People's Assembly
elections: premier elected by the Supreme People's Assembly
election results: HONG Song-nam elected acting premier; percent of
Supreme People's Assembly vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Supreme People's Assembly or Ch'oego
Inmin Hoeui (687 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms)
elections : last held 7-9 April 1990 (next to be held NA); note - the
term of the Assembly expired in April 1995 without a new election and
it has not been convened since the death of KIM Il-song in July 1994
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - the
KWP approves a single list of candidates who are elected without
opposition; minor parties hold a few seats

Judicial branch: Central Court, judges are elected by the Supreme
People's Assembly

Political parties and leaders: major party - Korean Workers' Party
(KWP), KIM Chong-il, secretary, Central Committee; Korean Social
Democratic Party, KIM Pyong-sik, chairman; Chondoist Chongu Party, YU
Mi-yong, chairwoman

International organization participation: ESCAP, FAO, G-77, ICAO,
ICRM, IFAD, IFRCS, IHO, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, ISO,
ITU, NAM, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; note - North Korea has a
Permanent Mission to the UN in New York, headed by KIM Hyong-u

Diplomatic representation from the US: none

Flag description: three horizontal bands of blue (top), red (triple
width), and blue; the red band is edged in white; on the hoist side of
the red band is a white disk with a red five-pointed star

Economy

Economy - overview: More than 90% of this command economy is
socialized; agricultural land is collectivized; and state-owned
industry produces 95% of manufactured goods. State control of economic
affairs is unusually tight even for a communist country because of the
small size and homogeneity of the society and the strict rule of KIM
Il-song in the past and now his son, KIM Chong-il. Economic growth
during the period 1984-88 averaged 2%-3%, but output declined by an
average of 4%-5% annually during 1989-96 because of systemic problems
and disruptions in socialist-style economic relations and
technological links with the former USSR and China. The leadership has
insisted on maintaining its high level of military outlays from a
shrinking economic pie. Moreover, a serious drawdown in inventories
and critical shortages in the energy sector have led to increasing
interruptions in industrial production. Abundant mineral resources and
hydropower have formed the basis of industrial development since World
War II. Manufacturing is centered on heavy industry, including
military industry, with light industry lagging far behind. Despite the
use of improved seed varieties, expansion of irrigation, and the heavy
use of fertilizers, North Korea has not yet become self-sufficient in
food production. Indeed, a shortage of arable lands, several years of
poor harvests, systemic inefficiencies, a cumbersome distribution
system, and extensive floods in 1995-96 have resulted in recurring
food shortages. Substantial grain shipments from Japan and South Korea
are offsetting a portion of the losses. North Korea remains far behind
South Korea in economic development and living standards.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $20.9 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $900 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 25%
industry: 60%
services: 15% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 9.615 million
by occupation: agricultural 36%, nonagricultural 64%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $19.3 billion
expenditures : $19.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1992 est.)

Industries: military products; machine building, electric power,
chemicals; mining (coal, iron ore, magnesite, graphite, copper, zinc,
lead, and precious metals), metallurgy; textiles, food processing

Industrial production growth rate: -7% to -9% (1992 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 9.5 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 35.96 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,394 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, corn, potatoes, soybeans, pulses;
cattle, pigs, pork, eggs

Exports:
total value: $805 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: minerals, metallurgical products, agricultural and
fishery products, manufactures (including armaments)
partners : China, Japan, South Korea, Germany, Hong Kong, Russia

Imports:
total value: $1.24 billion (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities : petroleum, grain, coking coal, machinery and equipment,
consumer goods
partners: China, Japan, Hong Kong, Germany, Russia, Singapore

Debt - external: $8 billion (1992 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note: small amounts of grant aid from South Korea, Japan, US and other
countries

Currency: 1 North Korean won (Wn) = 100 chon

Exchange rates: North Korean won (Wn) per US$1 - 2.15 (May 1994), 2.13
(May 1992), 2.14 (September 1991), 2.1 (January 1990), 2.3 (December
1989)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Korea, North:Communications

Telephones: 30,000 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: system is believed to be available principally for
government business
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)
and 1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean Region); other international
connections through Moscow and Beijing

Radio broadcast stations: AM 18, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 3.5 million

Television broadcast stations: 11

Televisions: 400,000 (1992 est.)

@Korea, North:Transportation

Railways:
total: 5,000 km
standard gauge : 4,095 km 1.435-m gauge (3,500 km electrified; 159 km
double track)
narrow gauge: 665 km 0.762-m gauge
dual gauge: 240 km (standard and broad gauge) (1996 est.)

Highways:
total: 23,000 to 30,000 km
paved : 1,725 km
unpaved: 21,275 to 28,275 km (1990 est.)

Waterways: 2,253 km; mostly navigable by small craft only

Pipelines: crude oil 37 km

Ports and harbors: Ch'ongjin, Haeju, Hungnam (Hamhung), Kimch'aek,
Kosong, Najin, Namp'o, Sinuiju, Songnim, Sonbong (formerly Unggi),
Ungsang, Wonsan

Merchant marine:
total : 99 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 641,090 GRT/899,243 DWT
ships by type: bulk 8, cargo 83, combination bulk 1, oil tanker 2,
passenger 2, passenger-cargo 1, short-sea passenger 2
note: North Korea owns an additional 5 ships (1,000 GRT or over)
totaling 58,435 DWT operating under the registries of Cambodia,
Honduras, and Poland (1996 est.)

Airports: 49 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 22
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m : 15
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 2 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 27
2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
914 to 1,523 m: 12
under 914 m: 6 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Korean People's Army (includes Army, Navy, Air
Force), Civil Security Forces

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 6,928,338 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 4,188,070 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 200,136 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $5 billion to $7 billion (1995
est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 25% (1995 est.)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: short section of boundary with China is
indefinite; Demarcation Line with South Korea
______________________________________________________________________

KOREA, SOUTH

@Korea, South:Geography

Location: Eastern Asia, southern half of the Korean Peninsula
bordering the Sea of Japan and the Yellow Sea, south of North Korea

Geographic coordinates: 37 00 N, 127 30 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total: 98,480 sq km
land: 98,190 sq km
water: 290 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Indiana

Land boundaries:
total: 238 km
border countries: North Korea 238 km

Coastline: 2,413 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf : not specified
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm; 3 nm in the Korea Strait

Climate: temperate, with rainfall heavier in summer than winter

Terrain: mostly hills and mountains; wide coastal plains in west and
south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Sea of Japan 0 m
highest point : Halla-san 1,950 m

Natural resources: coal, tungsten, graphite, molybdenum, lead,
hydropower

Land use:
arable land: 19%
permanent crops : 2%
permanent pastures: 1%
forests and woodland: 65%
other: 13% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 13,350 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons bring high winds and floods;
earthquakes in southwest

Environment - current issues: air pollution in large cities; water
pollution from the discharge of sewage and industrial effluents; drift
net fishing

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
Timber 94
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

@Korea, South:People

Population: 45,948,811 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 23% (male 5,515,667; female 4,925,479)
15-64 years: 71% (male 16,579,117; female 16,096,684)
65 years and over : 6% (male 1,067,663; female 1,764,201) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.02% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 16.17 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.66 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.33 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.14 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.12 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.6 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 73.6 years
male : 70.01 years
female: 77.69 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.78 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Korean(s)
adjective: Korean

Ethnic groups: homogeneous (except for about 20,000 Chinese)

Religions: Christianity 49%, Buddhism 47%, Confucianism 3%, pervasive
folk religion (shamanism), Chondogyo (Religion of the Heavenly Way),
and other 1%

Languages: Korean, English widely taught in high school

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98%
male: 99.3%
female: 96.7% (1995 est.)

@Korea, South:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Korea
conventional short form: South Korea
local long form: Taehan-min'guk
local short form: none
note : the South Koreans generally use the term "Hanguk" to refer to
their country
abbreviation: ROK

Data code: KS

Government type: republic

National capital: Seoul

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces (do, singular and plural) and 6
special cities* (gwangyoksi, singular and plural); Cheju-do,
Cholla-bukto, Cholla-namdo, Ch'ungch'ong-bukto, Ch'ungch'ong-namdo,
Inch'on-gwangyoksi*, Kangwon-do, Kwangju-gwangyoksi*, Kyonggi-do,
Kyongsang-bukto, Kyongsang-namdo, Pusan-gwangyoksi*, Soul-t'ukpyolsi*,
Taegu-gwangyoksi*, Taejon-gwangyoksi*

Independence: 15 August 1948

National holiday: Independence Day, 15 August (1948)

Constitution: 25 February 1988

Legal system: combines elements of continental European civil law
systems, Anglo-American law, and Chinese classical thought

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President KIM Yong-sam (since 25 February 1993)
head of government : Prime Minister KO Kon (since 4 March 1997);
Deputy Prime Ministers KANG Kyong-sik (since 5 March 1997) and KWON
O-ki (since 20 December 1995)
cabinet: State Council appointed by the president on the prime
minister's recommendation
elections: president elected by popular vote for a single five-year
term; election last held 18 December 1992 (next to be held 18 December
1997); prime minister appointed by the president; deputy prime
ministers appointed by the president on the prime minister's
recommendation
election results: KIM Yong-sam elected president; percent of vote -
KIM Yong-sam (DLP) 41.9%, KIM Tae-chung (DP) 33.8%, CHONG Chu-yong
(UPP) 16.3%, other 8%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Kukhoe (299 seats;
members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : last held 11 April 1996 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - NKP
139, NCNP 79, ULD 50, DP 15, independents 16; note - the distribution
of seats as of December 1996 was NKP 155, NCNP 78, ULD 47, DP 12,
independents 7

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, justices are appointed by the
president subject to the consent of the National Assembly

Political parties and leaders:
majority party : New Korea Party (NKP), KIM Yong-sam, president
opposition: United Liberal Democratic Party (ULD), KIM Chong-pil,
president; Democratic Party (DP), YI Ki-taek, chairman; National
Congress for New Politics (NCNP), KIM Tae-chung, president

Political pressure groups and leaders: Korean National Council of
Churches; National Democratic Alliance of Korea; National Federation
of Student Associations; National Federation of Farmers' Associations;
National Council of Labor Unions; Federation of Korean Trade Unions;
Korean Veterans' Association; Federation of Korean Industries; Korean
Traders Association; Korean Confederation of Trade Unions

International organization participation: AfDB, APEC, AsDB, BIS
(pending member), CCC, CP, EBRD, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, OAS (observer), OECD,
OSCE (partner), UN, UN Security Council (temporary), UNAVEM III,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMOGIP, UNOMIG, UNU, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador PAK Kun-u
chancery: 2450 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 939-5600
consulate(s) general: Agana (Guam), Anchorage, Atlanta, Boston,
Chicago, Honolulu, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, San
Francisco, and Seattle

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant)
embassy: 82 Sejong-Ro, Chongro-ku, Seoul
mailing address: American Embassy, Unit 15550, APO AP 96205-0001
telephone : [82] (2) 397-4114
FAX: [82] (2) 738-8845
consulate(s): Pusan

Flag description: white with a red (top) and blue yin-yang symbol in
the center; there is a different black trigram from the ancient I
Ching (Book of Changes) in each corner of the white field

Economy

Economy - overview: As one of the Four Dragons of East Asia, South
Korea has achieved an incredible record of growth. Three decades ago
its GDP per capita was comparable with levels in the poorer countries
of Africa and Asia. Today its GDP per capita is eight times India's,
15 times North Korea's, and already up with the lesser economies of
the European Union. This success has been achieved by a unique system
of guidance by an authoritarian government of what is essentially an
entrepreneurial process. The government has sponsored large-scale
adoption of technology and management from Japan and other modern
nations; has successfully pushed the development of export industries
while encouraging the import of machinery and materials at the expense
of consumer goods; and has pushed its labor force to a work effort
seldom matched anywhere even in wartime. Real GDP grew by an average
10% in 1986-91, then paused to a "mere" 5% in 1992-93, moved back up
to 8% in 1994 and 9% in 1995, and about 7% in 1996. With a much higher
standard of living and with a considerable easing of authoritarian
controls, the work pace has softened. Growth rates will probably slow
down over the medium term.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $647.2 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6.9% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $14,200 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 8%
industry: 45%
services: 47% (1991 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 20 million
by occupation: services and other 52%, mining and manufacturing 27%,
agriculture, fishing, forestry 21% (1991)

Unemployment rate: 1.9% (1996)

Budget:
revenues: $69 billion
expenditures : $67 billion, including capital expenditures of $17
billion (1995 est.)

Industries: electronics, automobile production, chemicals,
shipbuilding, steel, textiles, clothing, footwear, food processing

Industrial production growth rate: 11.9% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 31.67 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 155.89 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,563 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, root crops, barley, vegetables, fruit;
cattle, pigs, chickens, milk, eggs; fish catch of 2.9 million metric
tons, seventh largest in world

Exports:
total value : $130.9 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: electronic and electrical equipment, machinery, steel,
automobiles, ships; textiles, clothing, footwear; fish
partners: US 17%, EU 13%, Japan 12%

Imports:
total value: $150.2 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities : machinery, electronics and electronic equipment, oil,
steel, transport equipment, textiles, organic chemicals, grains
partners: US 22%, Japan 21%, EU 13%

Debt - external: $93 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 South Korean won (W) = 100 chun (theoretical)

Exchange rates: South Korean won (W) per US$1 - 849.88 (January 1997),
804.45 (1996), 771.27 (1995), 803.45 (1994), 802.67 (1993), 780.65
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Korea, South:Communications

Telephones: 16.6 million (1993)

Telephone system: excellent domestic and international services
domestic: NA
international: fiber-optic submarine cable to China; satellite earth
stations - 3 Intelsat (2 Pacific Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean) and 1
Inmarsat (Pacific Ocean Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 79, FM 46, shortwave 0

Radios: 42 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 256 (57 of which are 1 kW or greater)
(1987 est.)

Televisions: 9.3 million (1992 est.)

@Korea, South:Transportation

Railways:
total: 3,081 km
standard gauge : 3,081 km 1.435-m gauge (560 km electrified) (1996
est.)

Highways:
total: 74,235 km
paved: 56,419 km (including 1,824 km of expressways)
unpaved: 17,816 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,609 km; use restricted to small native craft

Pipelines: petroleum products 455 km; note - additionally, there is a
parallel petroleum, oils, and lubricants (POL) pipeline being
completed

Ports and harbors: Chinhae, Inch'on, Kunsan, Masan, Mokp'o, P'ohang,
Pusan, Ulsan, Yosu

Merchant marine:
total: 461 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,634,127 GRT/10,343,557
DWT
ships by type: bulk 123, cargo 124, chemical tanker 27, combination
bulk 3, combination ore/oil 1, container 71, liquefied gas tanker 13,
multifunction large-load carrier 1, oil tanker 68, refrigerated cargo
17, short-sea passenger 2, vehicle carrier 11
note: South Korea owns an additional 254 ships (1,000 GRT or over)
totaling 12,744,507 DWT operating under the registries of Cyprus,
Liberia, Malta, Panama, Singapore, and Thailand (1996 est.)

Airports: 103 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 101
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 18
1,524 to 2,437 m: 15
914 to 1,523 m: 14
under 914 m: 53 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 199 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, National
Maritime Police (Coast Guard)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 13,730,520 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 8,775,136 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 397,167 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $17.4 billion (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.3% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Demarcation Line with North Korea; Liancourt
Rocks claimed by Japan
______________________________________________________________________

KUWAIT

@Kuwait:Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Persian Gulf, between Iraq and
Saudi Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 29 30 N, 45 45 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total : 17,820 sq km
land: 17,820 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries:
total: 464 km
border countries: Iraq 242 km, Saudi Arabia 222 km

Coastline: 499 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: dry desert; intensely hot summers; short, cool winters

Terrain: flat to slightly undulating desert plain

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
highest point : unnamed location 306 m

Natural resources: petroleum, fish, shrimp, natural gas

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 8%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 92% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: sudden cloudbursts are common from October to April,
they bring inordinate amounts of rain which can damage roads and
houses; sandstorms and dust storms occur throughout the year, but are
most common between March and August

Environment - current issues: limited natural fresh water resources;
some of world's largest and most sophisticated desalination facilities
provide much of the water; air and water pollution; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Climate Change, Environmental Modification, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Marine Dumping

Geography - note: strategic location at head of Persian Gulf

@Kuwait:People

Population: 1,834,269 (July 1997 est.)
note: includes 1,381,063 non-nationals (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 33% (male 333,251; female 272,206)
15-64 years : 65% (male 772,612; female 421,205)
65 years and over: 2% (male 21,028; female 13,967) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 4.34% (1997 est.)
note : this rate reflects the continued post-Gulf crisis return of
expatriates

Birth rate: 21.54 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 2.28 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 24.14 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.22 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.83 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.51 male(s)/female
total population : 1.59 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 11.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 76.44 years
male: 74.43 years
female: 78.56 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.54 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Kuwaiti(s)
adjective: Kuwaiti

Ethnic groups: Kuwaiti 45%, other Arab 35%, South Asian 9%, Iranian
4%, other 7%

Religions: Muslim 85% (Shi'a 30%, Sunni 45%, other 10%), Christian,
Hindu, Parsi, and other 15%

Languages: Arabic (official), English widely spoken

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 78.6%
male : 82.2%
female: 74.9% (1995 est.)

@Kuwait:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : State of Kuwait
conventional short form: Kuwait
local long form: Dawlat al Kuwayt
local short form: Al Kuwayt

Data code: KU

Government type: nominal constitutional monarchy

National capital: Kuwait

Administrative divisions: 5 governorates (muhafazat, singular -
muhafazah); Al Ahmadi, Al Jahrah, Al Kuwayt, Hawalli, Al Farwaniyah

Independence: 19 June 1961 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 25 February (1950)

Constitution: approved and promulgated 11 November 1962

Legal system: civil law system with Islamic law significant in
personal matters; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: adult males who have been naturalized for 30 years or more
or have resided in Kuwait since before 1920 and their male descendants
at age 21
note: only 10% of all citizens are eligible to vote; in 1996,
naturalized citizens who do not meet the pre-1920 qualification but
have been naturalized for 30 years were eligible to vote for the first
time

Executive branch:
chief of state: Amir JABIR al-Ahmad al-Jabir Al Sabah (since 31
December 1977)
head of government: Prime Minister and Crown Prince SAAD al-Abdallah
al-Salim Al Sabah (since 8 February 1978); First Deputy Prime Minister
SABAH al-Ahmad al-Jabir Al Sabah (since 17 October 1992); Second
Deputy Prime Minister SALIM al-Sabah al-Salim Al Sabah (since 7
October 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister and
approved by the amir
elections: none; the amir is a hereditary monarch of the MUBARAK line
of the ruling Sabah family; prime minister and deputy prime ministers
appointed by the amir

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Majlis al-Umma (50
seats; members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : last held 7 October 1996 (next to be held NA October 2000)
election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - independents 50; note
- all cabinet ministers are also ex officio members of the National
Assembly

Judicial branch: High Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: several political groups act as
de facto parties: Bedouins, merchants, Sunni and Shi'a activists, and
secular leftists and nationalists

International organization participation: ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF,
BDEAC, CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM,
IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPEC, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador MUHAMMAD al-Sabah al-Salim Al SABAH
chancery: 2940 Tilden Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 966-0702
FAX : [1] (202) 966-0517

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Ryan C. CROCKER
embassy: Bneid al-Gar (opposite the Kuwait International Hotel),
Kuwait City
mailing address: P.O. Box 77, SAFAT, 13001 SAFAT, Kuwait; Unit 6900,
APO AE 09880-9000
telephone: [965] 539-5307 or 539-5308
FAX: [965] 538-0282

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white,
and red with a black trapezoid based on the hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: Kuwait is a small and relatively open economy with
proved crude oil reserves of about 94 billion barrels - 10% of world
reserves. Kuwait has rebuilt its war-ravaged petroleum sector; its
crude oil production averaged 2 million barrels per day in 1996.
Petroleum accounts for nearly half of GDP, 90% of export revenues, and
75% of government income. Kuwait lacks water and has practically no
arable land, thus preventing development of agriculture. With the
exception of fish, it depends almost wholly on food imports. About 75%
of potable water must be distilled or imported. Because of its high
per capita income, comparable with Western European incomes, Kuwait
provides its citizens with extensive health, educational, and
retirement benefits. The bulk of the work force is non-Kuwaiti, living
at a considerably lower level. Per capita military expenditures are
among the highest in the world. The economy improved moderately in
1994-96, with the growth in industry and finance. The World Bank has
urged Kuwait to push ahead with privatization, including in the oil
industry, but the government will move slowly on opening the petroleum
sector.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $32.5 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $16,700 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 0%
industry : 42%
services: 58% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4.5% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1 million (1994 est.)
by occupation: industry and agriculture 25%, services 25%, government
and social services 50% (1994 est.)
note: 72.07% of the population in the 15-64 age group is non-national
(July 1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 1.8% (official 1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $10 billion
expenditures : $14 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY96/97 est.)

Industries: petroleum, petrochemicals, desalination, food processing,
construction materials, salt, construction

Industrial production growth rate: 1% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 6.99 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 21.76 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 12,793 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: practically no crops; extensive fishing in
territorial waters

Exports:
total value: $13.6 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : oil
partners: Japan 23%, India 16%, US 12%, Singapore 10%, Netherlands 10%
(1995 est.)

Imports:
total value: $8.4 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: food, construction materials, vehicles and parts,
clothing
partners : US 24%, UK 14%, France 13%, Japan 10%, Germany 8% (1995
est.)

Debt - external: $8 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Kuwaiti dinar (KD) = 1,000 fils

Exchange rates: Kuwaiti dinars (KD) per US$1 - 0.3010 (January 1997),
0.2994 (1996), 0.2984 (1995), 0.2976 (1994), 0.3017 (1993)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Kuwait:Communications

Telephones: 548,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: the civil network suffered some damage as a result
of the Gulf war, but most of the telephone exchanges were left intact
and, by the end of 1994, domestic and international telecommunications
had been restored to normal operation; the quality of service is
excellent
domestic: new telephone exchanges provide a large capacity for new
subscribers; trunk traffic is carried by microwave radio relay,
coaxial cable, open wire and fiber-optic cable; a cellular telephone
system operates throughout Kuwait and the country is well supplied
with pay telephones
international: coaxial cable and microwave radio relay to Saudi
Arabia; satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean, 2
Indian Ocean), 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean), and 1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 720,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (1986 est.)

Televisions: 800,000 (1993 est.)

@Kuwait:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 4,360 km
paved: 3,510 km
unpaved : 850 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 877 km; petroleum products 40 km; natural gas 165
km

Ports and harbors: Ash Shu'aybah, Ash Shuwaykh, Kuwait, Mina' 'Abd
Allah, Mina' al Ahmadi, Mina' Su'ud

Merchant marine:
total: 46 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,053,667 GRT/3,246,597
DWT
ships by type: cargo 10, container 3, liquefied gas tanker 7,
livestock carrier 4, oil tanker 21, vehicle carrier 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 5 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 5
over 3,047 m : 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Guard, Ministry of
Interior Forces, Coast Guard

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 663,032 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 393,541 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 18,340 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $3.5 billion (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 12.8% (FY95/96)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: in November 1994, Iraq formally accepted the
UN-demarcated border with Kuwait which had been spelled out in
Security Council Resolutions 687 (1991), 773 (1993), and 883 (1993);
this formally ends earlier claims to Kuwait and to Bubiyan and Warbah
islands; ownership of Qaruh and Umm al Maradim islands disputed by
Saudi Arabia
______________________________________________________________________

KYRGYZSTAN

@Kyrgyzstan:Geography

Location: Central Asia, west of China

Geographic coordinates: 41 00 N, 75 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
total: 198,500 sq km
land: 191,300 sq km
water: 7,200 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than South Dakota

Land boundaries:
total: 3,878 km
border countries: China 858 km, Kazakstan 1,051 km, Tajikistan 870 km,
Uzbekistan 1,099 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: dry continental to polar in high Tien Shan; subtropical in
southwest (Fergana Valley); temperate in northern foothill zone

Terrain: peaks of Tien Shan and associated valleys and basins
encompass entire nation

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Kara-Daryya 132 m
highest point : Jengish Chokusu 7,439 m

Natural resources: abundant hydroelectric potential; significant
deposits of gold and rare earth metals; locally exploitable coal, oil,
and natural gas; other deposits of nepheline, mercury, bismuth, lead,
and zinc

Land use:
arable land: 7%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 44%
forests and woodland : 4%
other: 45% (1993 est.)
note : Kyrgyzstan has the world's largest natural growth walnut forest

Irrigated land: 9,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: water pollution; many people get their
water directly from contaminated streams and wells; as a result,
water-borne diseases are prevalent; increasing soil salinity from
faulty irrigation practices

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Hazardous Wastes
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked

@Kyrgyzstan:People

Population: 4,512,809 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 36% (male 829,888; female 812,056)
15-64 years: 58% (male 1,271,390; female 1,321,774)
65 years and over: 6% (male 101,616; female 176,085) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.05% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 22.27 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.59 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -13.15 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.58 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 73.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 63.97 years
male : 59.65 years
female: 68.49 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.73 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Kyrgyzstani(s)
adjective: Kyrgyzstani

Ethnic groups: Kirghiz 52.4%, Russian 18%, Uzbek 12.9%, Ukrainian
2.5%, German 2.4%, other 11.8%

Religions: Muslim 75%, Russian Orthodox 20%, other 5%

Languages: Kirghiz (Kyrgyz) - official language, Russian - official
language
note: in March 1996, the Kyrgyzstani legislature amended the
constitution to make Russian an official language, along with Kirghiz,
in territories and work places where Russian-speaking citizens
predominate

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 97%
male : 99%
female: 96% (1989 est.)

@Kyrgyzstan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Kyrgyz Republic
conventional short form: Kyrgyzstan
local long form: Kyrgyz Respublikasy
local short form: none
former: Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: KG

Government type: republic

National capital: Bishkek

Administrative divisions: 6 oblasttar (singular - oblast) and 1 city*
(singular - shaar); Bishkek Shaary*, Chuy Oblasty (Bishkek),
Jalal-Abad Oblasty, Naryn Oblasty, Osh Oblasty, Talas Oblasty,
Ysyk-Kol Oblasty (Karakol)
note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center name
following in parentheses)

Independence: 31 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: National Day, 2 December; Independence Day, 31
August (1991)

Constitution: adopted 5 May 1993
note : amendment proposed by President AKAYEV and passed in a national
referendum on 10 February 1996 significantly expands the powers of the
president at the expense of the legislature

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Askar AKAYEV (since 28 October 1990)
head of government: Prime Minister Apas JUMAGULOV (since NA December
1993)
cabinet : Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president on the
recommendation of the prime minister
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
elections last held 24 December 1995 (next to be held NA 2000); prime
minister appointed by the president
election results : Askar AKAYEV elected president; percent of vote -
Askar AKAYEV 75%; note - elections were held early which gave the two
opposition candidates little time to campaign; AKAYEV may have
orchestrated the "deregistration" of two other candidates, one of whom
was a major rival

Legislative branch: bicameral Supreme Council or Zhogorku Kenesh
consists of the Assembly of People's Representatives (70 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms) and the
Legislative Assembly (35 seats; members are elected by popular vote to
serve five-year terms)
elections: Assembly of People's Representatives - last held 5 February
1995 (next to be held NA 2000); Legislative Assembly - last held 5
February 1995 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results : Assembly of People's Representatives - percent of
vote by party - NA; seats by party - NA; note - not all of the 70
seats were filled at the 5 February 1995 elections; as a result,
run-off elections were held at later dates; the assembly meets twice
yearly; Legislative Assembly - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - NA; note - not all of the 35 seats were filled at the 5
February 1995 elections; as a result, run-off elections were held
note: the legislature became bicameral for the 5 February 1995
elections

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed for a 10-year
term by the Zhogorku Kenesh on recommendation of the president;
Constitutional Court; Higher Court of Arbitration

Political parties and leaders: Social Democratic Party or SDP;
Democratic Movement of Kyrgyzstan or DDK [Jypar JEKSHEYEV, chairman];
National Unity; Communist Party of Kyrgyzstan or PCK [Absamat
MASALIYEV, chairman]; Democratic Movement of Free Kyrgyzstan or ErK;
Republican Popular Party of Kyrgyzstan; Agrarian Party of Kyrgyzstan;
Ata Meken Party [Omurbek TEKEBAYEV]; ASABA [Chaprashty BAZARBAY];
Movement for the People's Salvation [Djumgalbek AMAMBAYEV]; Ashar
[Zhumagazy USUPOV]

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Unity Democratic
Movement; Peasant Party; Council of Free Trade Unions; Union of
Entrepreneurs; Agrarian Party; Kyrgyz Committee on Human Rights
[Ramazan DYRYIDAYEV]

International organization participation: AsDB, CIS, EBRD, ECE, ECO,
ESCAP, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, IOC,
IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, NACC, OIC, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Bakytbek ABDRISAYEV
chancery: 1732 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone: [1] (202) 338-5141
FAX : [1] (202) 338-5139

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Eileen A. MALLOY
embassy: Erkindik Prospekt #66, Bishkek 720002
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone: [7] (3312) 22-26-93, 22-32-89
FAX: [7] (3312) 22-35-51

Flag description: red field with a yellow sun in the center having 40
rays representing the 40 Kirghiz tribes; on the obverse side the rays
run counterclockwise, on the reverse, clockwise; in the center of the
sun is a red ring crossed by two sets of three lines, a stylized
representation of the roof of the traditional Kirghiz yurt

Economy

Economy - overview: Kyrgyzstan is a small, poor, mountainous country
with a predominantly agricultural economy. Cotton, wool, and meat are
the main agricultural products and exports. Industrial exports
included gold, mercury, uranium, and hydropower. Kyrgyzstan has been
one of the most progressive countries of the former Soviet Union in
carrying out market reforms. Following a successful stabilization
program, which lowered inflation from 88% in 1994 to 32% for 1996,
attention is turning toward stimulating growth. Much of the
government's stock in enterprises has been sold. Drops in production
have been severe since the break up of the Soviet Union in December
1991, but by mid-1995 production began to recover and exports began to
increase. Pensioners, unemployed workers, and government workers with
salaries arrears continue to suffer. Foreign assistance plays a
substantial role in the country's budget. In 1996 the economy showed
strong signs that recovery was underway.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $5.8 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,290 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 35%
industry : 28%
services: 37% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 32% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1.7 million
by occupation: agriculture and forestry 40%, industry and construction
19%, other 41% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 4.8% includes officially registered unemployed;
7.8% by ILO methodology (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: small machinery, textiles, food processing, cement, shoes,
sawn logs, refrigerators, furniture, electric motors, gold, rare earth
metals

Industrial production growth rate: 10.8% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 3.63 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 13.7 billion kWh (1996 est.)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,912 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wool, tobacco, cotton, potatoes, vegetables,
grapes, fruits and berries; sheep, goats, cattle

Exports:
total value : $506 million (1996)
commodities: cotton, wool, meat, tobacco; gold, mercury, uranium,
hydropower; machinery; shoes
partners: China, UK, FSU

Imports:
total value: $890 million (1996)
commodities: grain, lumber, industrial products, ferrous metals, fuel,
machinery, textiles, footwear
partners: US, China, FSU

Debt - external: $584 million (of which $115 million to Russia) (1995
est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $56 million (1993)
note: commitments, 1992-95, $1,695 million ($390 million
disbursements)

Currency: 1 Kyrgyzstani som (KGS) = 100 tyiyn

Exchange rates: soms (KGS) per US$1 - 14.6 (January 1997), 11.2
(yearend 1995), 10.6 (yearend 1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Kyrgyzstan:Communications

Telephones: 342,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: poorly developed; about 100,000 unsatisfied
applications for household telephones
domestic: principally microwave radio relay
international: connections with other CIS countries by landline or
microwave radio relay and with other countries by leased connections
with Moscow international gateway switch and by satellite; satellite
earth stations - 1 Intersputnik and 1 Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: 1 state-run radio broadcast station

Radios: 825,000 (radio receiver systems with multiple speakers for
program diffusion 748,000)

Television broadcast stations: 1
note : receives Turkish broadcasts

Televisions: 875,000

@Kyrgyzstan:Transportation

Railways:
total: 370 km in common carrier service; does not include industrial
lines
broad gauge: 370 km 1.520-m gauge (1990)

Highways:
total: 18,560 km
paved: 16,890 km (including 140 km of expressways)
unpaved : 1,670 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 600 km (1990)

Pipelines: natural gas 200 km

Ports and harbors: Balykchy (Ysyk-Kol or Rybach'ye)

Airports: 54 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 14
over 3,047 m : 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 9
under 914 m: 1 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 40
1,524 to 2,437 m : 4
914 to 1,523 m: 4
under 914 m: 32 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, National Guard, Security Forces (internal and
border troops), Civil Defense

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,109,139 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 900,105 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 44,447 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 151 million soms (1995); note -
conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the current
exchange rate could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: territorial dispute with Tajikistan on
southwestern boundary in Isfara Valley area

Illicit drugs: limited illicit cultivator of cannabis and opium poppy,
mostly for CIS consumption; limited government eradication program;
increasingly used as transshipment point for illicit drugs to Russia
and Western Europe from Southwest Asia
______________________________________________________________________

LAOS

@Laos:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, northeast of Thailand

Geographic coordinates: 18 00 N, 105 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 236,800 sq km
land : 230,800 sq km
water: 6,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Utah

Land boundaries:
total: 5,083 km
border countries : Burma 235 km, Cambodia 541 km, China 423 km,
Thailand 1,754 km, Vietnam 2,130 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical monsoon; rainy season (May to November); dry season
(December to April)

Terrain: mostly rugged mountains; some plains and plateaus

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Mekong River 70 m
highest point: Phou Bia 2,817 m

Natural resources: timber, hydropower, gypsum, tin, gold, gemstones

Land use:
arable land : 3%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 3%
forests and woodland: 54%
other : 40% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,250 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: floods, droughts, and blight

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; a majority
of the population does not have access to potable water

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Environmental
Modification, Nuclear Test Ban
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography - note: landlocked

@Laos:People

Population: 5,116,959 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 45% (male 1,174,029; female 1,144,634)
15-64 years: 52% (male 1,277,175; female 1,354,220)
65 years and over: 3% (male 76,544; female 90,357) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.78% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 41.25 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 13.4 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.85 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 94.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 53.19 years
male: 51.63 years
female: 54.83 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.76 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Lao(s) or Laotian(s)
adjective: Lao or Laotian

Ethnic groups: Lao Loum (lowland) 68%, Lao Theung (upland) 22%, Lao
Soung (highland) including the Hmong ("Meo") and the Yao (Mien) 9%,
ethnic Vietnamese/Chinese 1%

Religions: Buddhist 60%, animist and other 40%

Languages: Lao (official), French, English, and various ethnic
languages

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 56.6%
male: 69.4%
female : 44.4% (1995 est.)

@Laos:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Lao People's Democratic Republic
conventional short form: Laos
local long form : Sathalanalat Paxathipatai Paxaxon Lao
local short form: none

Data code: LA

Government type: Communist state

National capital: Vientiane

Administrative divisions: 16 provinces (khoueng, singular and plural),
1 municipality* (kampheng nakhon, singular and plural), and 1 special
zone** (khetphiset, singular and plural); Attapu, Bokeo, Bolikhamxai,
Champasak, Houaphan, Khammouan, Louangnamtha, Louangphabang, Oudomxai,
Phongsali, Salavan, Savannakhet, Viangchan*, Viangchan, Xaignabouli,
Xaisomboun**, Xekong, Xiangkhoang

Independence: 19 July 1949 (from France)

National holiday: National Day, 2 December (1975) (proclamation of the
Lao People's Democratic Republic)

Constitution: promulgated 14 August 1991

Legal system: based on traditional customs, French legal norms and
procedures, and Socialist practice

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President NOUHAK PHOUMSAVAN (appointed 25 November
1992 by the Supreme People's Assembly to succeed KAYSONE PHOMVIHAN who
died in office; elected by the new National Assembly 22 February
1993); Vice President SISAVAT KEOBOUNPHAN (since 20 April 1996 when
the position of vice president was first created)
head of government : Prime Minister Gen. KHAMTAI SIPHANDON (since 15
August 1991); Deputy Prime Ministers KHAMPHOUI KEOBOUALAPHA (since 15
August 1991) and BOUNGNANG VOLACHIT (since 20 April 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president, approved by
the National Assembly
elections : president elected by the National Assembly for a five-year
term; election last held 22 February 1993 (next to be held NA 1998);
prime minister appointed by the president with the approval of the
National Assembly for a five-year term
election results: NOUHAK PHOUMSAVAN elected president; percent of
National Assembly vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (85 seats; members
elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 20 December 1992 (next to be held NA 1997)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - LPRP
or LPRP-approved (independent, non-party members) 85; note - the
distribution of seats as of January 1997 is as follows - LPRP 78,
independents 5, vacant 2

Judicial branch: People's Supreme Court, the president of the People's
Supreme Court is elected by the National Assembly on the
recommendation of the National Assembly Standing Committee, the vice
president of the People's Supreme Court and the judges are appointed
by the National Assembly Standing Committee

Political parties and leaders: Lao People's Revolutionary Party
(LPRP), KHAMTAI Siphandon, party president; other parties proscribed

Political pressure groups and leaders: noncommunist political groups
proscribed; most opposition leaders fled the country in 1975

International organization participation: ACCT, AsDB, ASEAN
(observer), CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU,
Mekong Group, NAM, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador HIEM PHOMMACHANH
chancery: 2222 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 332-6416
FAX : [1] (202) 332-4923

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Wendy Jean CHAMBERLIN
embassy: Rue Bartholonie, B.P. 114, Vientiane
mailing address: American Embassy, Box V, APO AP 96546
telephone: [856] (21) 212581, 212582, 212585
FAX: [856] (21) 212584

Flag description: three horizontal bands of red (top), blue (double
width), and red with a large white disk centered in the blue band

Economy

Economy - overview: The government of Laos - one of the few remaining
official communist states - has been decentralizing control and
encouraging private enterprise since 1986. The results, starting from
an extremely low base, have been striking - growth has averaged 7.5%
annually since 1988. Even so, Laos is a landlocked country with a
primitive infrastructure. It has no railroads, a rudimentary road
system, and limited external and internal telecommunications.
Electricity is available in only a few urban areas. Subsistence
agriculture accounts for half of GDP and provides 80% of total
employment. The predominant crop is rice. In non-drought years, Laos
is self-sufficient overall in food, but each year flood, pests, and
localized drought cause shortages in various parts of the country. For
the foreseeable future the economy will continue to depend on aid from
the IMF and other international sources; aid from the former
USSR/Eastern Europe has been cut sharply. As in many developing
countries, deforestation and soil erosion will hamper efforts to
maintain the high rate of GDP growth.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $5.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,150 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 56%
industry: 19%
services: 25% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 15% (1996 est.)

Labor force: 1 million-1.5 million
by occupation: agriculture 80% (1992 est.)

Unemployment rate: 5.6% in urban areas (1994 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $218 million
expenditures: $379 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: tin and gypsum mining, timber, electric power,
agricultural processing, construction

Industrial production growth rate: 7.5% (1992 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 261,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 890 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 48 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: sweet potatoes, vegetables, corn, coffee,
sugarcane, cotton; water buffalo, pigs, cattle, poultry

Exports:
total value: $240 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: electricity, wood products, coffee, tin, garments
partners : Thailand, Japan, France, Germany, Netherlands

Imports:
total value: $570 million (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: food, fuel oil, consumer goods, manufactures
partners: Thailand, China, Japan, France, US

Debt - external: $2 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 new kip (NK) = 100 at

Exchange rates: new kips (NK) per US$1 - 961.00 (January 1997), 921.14
(1996), 804.69 (1995), 717.67 (1994), 716.25 (1993), 716.08 (1992)
note: as of September 1995, a floating exchange rate policy was
adopted

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September

@Laos:Communications

Telephones: 6,600 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: service to general public very poor; radiotelephone
communications network provides generally erratic service to
government users
domestic: radiotelephone communications
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean
Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 10, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 560,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2

Televisions: 32,000 (1993 est.)

@Laos:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 18,153 km
paved: 2,505 km
unpaved: 15,648 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: about 4,587 km, primarily Mekong and tributaries; 2,897
additional kilometers are sectionally navigable by craft drawing less
than 0.5 m

Pipelines: petroleum products 136 km

Ports and harbors: none

Merchant marine:
total: 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,370 GRT/3,000 DWT
(1996 est.)

Airports: 39 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 25
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
914 to 1,523 m : 3
under 914 m: 16 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 14
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 13 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Lao People's Army (LPA; includes riverine naval and
militia elements), Air Force, National Police Department

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,123,934 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 606,542 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 54,712 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $105 million (FY92/93)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 8.1% (FY92/93)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: boundary dispute with Thailand

Illicit drugs: world's third largest opium producer (200 metric tons
from some 25,250 hectares in 1996); heroin producer; increasingly used
as transshipment point for heroin produced in Burma; illicit producer
of cannabis
______________________________________________________________________

LATVIA

@Latvia:Geography

Location: Eastern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea, between Estonia
and Lithuania

Geographic coordinates: 57 00 N, 25 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 64,100 sq km
land: 64,100 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
total: 1,150 km
border countries : Belarus 141 km, Estonia 339 km, Lithuania 453 km,
Russia 217 km

Coastline: 531 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation

Climate: maritime; wet, moderate winters

Terrain: low plain

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Baltic Sea 0 m
highest point : Gaizinkalns 312 m

Natural resources: minimal; amber, peat, limestone, dolomite

Land use:
arable land: 27%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 13%
forests and woodland: 46%
other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 160 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: air and water pollution because of a
lack of waste conversion equipment; Gulf of Riga and Daugava River
heavily polluted; contamination of soil and groundwater with chemicals
and petroleum products at military bases

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous
Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

@Latvia:People

Population: 2,421,163 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 19% (male 238,793; female 229,160)
15-64 years : 66% (male 762,635; female 836,839)
65 years and over: 15% (male 112,989; female 240,747) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -1.56% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 8.21 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 15.72 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -8.13 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.91 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.47 male(s)/female
total population: 0.85 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 17.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 66.91 years
male: 60.8 years
female: 73.33 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.21 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Latvian(s)
adjective: Latvian

Ethnic groups: Latvian 51.8%, Russian 33.8%, Byelorussian 4.5%,
Ukrainian 3.4%, Polish 2.3%, other 4.2%

Religions: Lutheran, Roman Catholic, Russian Orthodox

Languages: Lettish (official), Lithuanian, Russian, other

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 100%
male: 100%
female: 99% (1989 est.)

@Latvia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Latvia
conventional short form: Latvia
local long form: Latvijas Republika
local short form: Latvija
former : Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: LG

Government type: republic

National capital: Riga

Administrative divisions: 26 counties (singular - rajons) and 7
municipalities*: Aizkraukles Rajons, Aluksnes Rajons, Balvu Rajons,
Bauskas Rajons, Cesu Rajons, Daugavpils*, Daugavpils Rajons, Dobeles
Rajons, Gulbenes Rajons, Jekabpils Rajons, Jelgava*, Jelgavas Rajons,
Jurmala*, Kraslavas Rajons, Kuldigas Rajons, Leipaja*, Liepajas
Rajons, Limbazu Rajons, Ludzas Rajons, Madonas Rajons, Ogres Rajons,
Preiju Rajons, Rezekne*, Rezeknes Rajons, Riga*, Rigas Rajons, Saldus
Rajons, Talsu Rajons, Tukuma Rajons, Valkas Rajons, Valmieras Rajons,
Ventspils*, Ventspils Rajons

Independence: 6 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 18 November (1918)

Constitution: the 1991 Constitutional Law which supplements the 1922
constitution, provides for basic rights and freedoms

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Guntis ULMANIS (since 7 July 1993)
head of government: Prime Minister Andris SKELE (since 21 December
1995)
cabinet: Council of Ministers nominated by the prime minister and
appointed by the Parliament
elections: president elected by Parliament for a four-year term;
election last held 7 July 1993 (next to be held by 20 June 1997);
prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Guntis ULMANIS elected president in the first round
of balloting; percent of parliamentary vote - 53%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Saeima (100 seats;
members are elected by direct popular vote to serve three-year terms)
elections : last held 30 September-1 October 1995 (next to be held NA
October 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - Saimnieks 18%, LC 17%,
For Latvia 16%, TB 14%, LNNK 8%, Unity 8%, LSZ/LKDS 7%, Harmony 6%,
Socialist 6%; seats by party - Saimnieks 18, LC 17, For Latvia 16, TB
14, LNNK 8, Unity 8, LSZ/LKDS 7, Harmony 6, Socialist 6

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges' appointments are confirmed by
the Parliament

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party "Saimnieks" or DPS
[Ziedonis CEVERS, chairman]; Latvia's Way or LC [Valdis BIRKAVS]; For
Latvia [Joachim SIEGERIST]; Fatherland and Freedom or TB [Maris
GRINBLATS]; Latvian Unity Party or LVP [A. KAULS]; Latvian National
Conservative Party or LNNK [Anna SEILE]; Green Party or LSZ [O.
BATAREVSK]; Latvian Farmers Union or LZS [A. ROZENTALS]; Christian
Democrat Union or LKDS [Maris VITOLDS]; National Harmony Party or TSP
[Janis JURKANS]; Latvian Socialist Party or LSP [F. STROGANOVS];
Latvian Liberal Party or LLP [J. DANOSS]; Political Association of the
Underprivileged or MPA [B. PELSE, V. DIMANTS, J. KALNINS]; Latvian
Democratic Labor Party or LDDP [J. BOJARS]; Party of Russian Citizens
or LKPP [V. SOROCHIN, V. IVANOV]; Peoples Front of Latvia or LTF
[Uldis AUGSTKALNS]; Political Union of Economists or TPA [E. KIDE];
Latvian National Democratic Party or LNDP [A. MALINS]; "Our Land" or
MZ [M. DAMBEKALNE]; Anticommunist Union or PA [P. MUCENIEKS]; Latvian
Social-Democratic Workers Party or LSDSP; Party for the Defense of
Latvia's Defrauded People; Latvian Independence Party or LNP [Valdis
KONOVALOVS]

International organization participation: BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, EBRD,
ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO,
ITU, NACC, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WEU (associate
partner), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Ojars Eriks KALNINS
chancery: 4325 17th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011
telephone: [1] (202) 726-8213, 8214
FAX: [1] (202) 726-6785

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Larry C. NAPPER
embassy: Raina Boulevard 7, LV-1510, Riga
mailing address: PSC 78, Box R, APO AE 09723
telephone: [371] (2) 210-005
FAX : [371] (2) 226-530

Flag description: three horizontal bands of maroon (top), white
(half-width), and maroon

Economy

Economy - overview: In the five years following the implosion of the
USSR in December 1991, the Latvian economy has made substantial
progress toward establishing a modern market economy and widening
economic ties with the West. Two major long-term concerns are the
growing trade deficit and the impact of organized crime. The economy
in 1996 has largely recovered from the mid-1995 collapse of several
commercial banks - including Latvia's large bank, Bank Baltija - and a
severe government budget crisis. Prime Minister SKELE has stated that
he expects the country's GDP to grow 5% in 1997 through the
implementation of the government's new economic reform program. In
December 1996, the government passed a balanced 1997 budget - its
first - that SKELE predicts will reduce inflation to 10% to 12% in
1997. Unemployment, which has held steady at about 6% over the past
two years, reached roughly 7.5% in 1996. One of SKELE's key objectives
for 1997 is to speed up the privatization program, which has lagged
behind other areas of reform.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $9.4 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,800 (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 9%
industry : 34%
services: 57% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 13.2% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1.268 million (1995)
by occupation: industry 41%, agriculture and forestry 16%, services
43% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 7.5% (1996 official est.)

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures : $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: buses, vans, street and railroad cars, synthetic fibers,
agricultural machinery, fertilizers, washing machines, radios,
electronics, pharmaceuticals, processed foods, textiles; dependent on
imports for energy, raw materials, and intermediate products

Industrial production growth rate: 2% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 2.018 million kW (1993)

Electricity - production: 4.27 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,197 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grain, sugar beets, potatoes, vegetables;
meat, milk, eggs; fish

Exports:
total value: $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: machinery and equipment, timber, textiles, foodstuffs
partners : Russia, other CIS, Germany, Sweden, UK

Imports:
total value: $2.4 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities : fuels, machinery and equipment, chemicals
partners: Russia, other CIS, Germany, Sweden, UK, Finland

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $122 million (1993)
note: commitments from the West and international institutions, $525
million (1992-95)

Currency: 1 Latvian lat (LVL) = 100 santims; introduced NA March 1993

Exchange rates: lats (LVL) per US$1 - 0.563 (January 1997), 0.551
(1996), 0.528 (1995), 0.560 (1994), 0.675 (1993), 0.736 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Latvia:Communications

Telephones: 660,000 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: service is better than in most of the other former
Soviet republics
domestic: an NMT-450 analog cellular telephone network covers 75% of
Latvia's population
international: international traffic carried by leased connection to
the Moscow international gateway switch, through the new Ericsson
digital telephone exchange in Riga, and through the Finnish cellular
net; Sprint data network carries electronic mail

Radio broadcast stations: 25 (unknown type)

Radios: 1.4 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 30

Televisions: 1.1 million (1993 est.)

@Latvia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,412 km
broad gauge: 2,379 km 1.520-m gauge (271 km electrified) (1992)
narrow gauge: 33 km 0.750-m gauge (1994)

Highways:
total: 60,046 km
paved: 22,998 km
unpaved: 37,048 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 300 km perennially navigable

Pipelines: crude oil 750 km; refined products 780 km; natural gas 560
km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Daugavpils, Liepaja, Riga, Ventspils

Merchant marine:
total: 51 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 491,582 GRT/639,414 DWT
ships by type: cargo 7, oil tanker 19, refrigerated cargo 18,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 7 (1996 est.)

Airports: 50 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 36
2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 27 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 14
2,438 to 3,047 m : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m: 10 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Ground Forces, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces,
Security Forces, Border Guard, Home Guard (Zemessardze)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 575,121 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 450,640 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 16,323 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 176 million rubles (1994); note
- conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the
prevailing exchange rate could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3% to 5% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: based on the 1920 Treaty of Riga, Latvia had
claimed the Abrene/Pytalovo section of border ceded by the Latvian
Soviet Socialist Republic to Russia in 1944; disputes maritime border
with Lithuania (primary concern is oil exploration rights)

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for opiates and cannabis from
Southwest Asia and cocaine from Latin America to Western Europe and
Scandinavia; produces illicit amphetamines for export
______________________________________________________________________

LEBANON

Introduction

Current issues: Lebanon has made progress toward rebuilding its
political institutions and regaining its national sovereignty since
the end of the devastating 16-year civil war, which began in 1975.
Under the Ta'if Accord - the blueprint for national reconciliation -
the Lebanese have established a more equitable political system,
particularly by giving Muslims a greater say in the political process.
Since the end of the civil war, the Lebanese have formed five cabinets
and conducted two legislative elections. Most of the militias have
been weakened or disbanded. The Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) has seized
vast quantities of weapons used by the militias during the war and
extended central government authority over about one-half of the
country. Hizballah, the radical Shi'a party, retains most of its
weapons. Foreign forces still occupy areas of Lebanon. Israel
maintains troops in southern Lebanon and continues to support a proxy
militia, the Army of South Lebanon (ASL), along a narrow stretch of
territory contiguous to its border. The ASL's enclave encompasses this
self-declared security zone and about 20 kilometers north to the
strategic town of Jazzin. Syria maintains about 30,000 troops in
Lebanon. These troops are based mainly in Beirut, North Lebanon, and
the Bekaa Valley. Syria's deployment was legitimized by the Arab
League during Lebanon's civil war and in the Ta'if accord. Citing the
continued weakness of the LAF, Beirut's requests, and failure of the
Lebanese Government to implement all of the constitutional reforms in
the Ta'if accord, Damascus has so far refused to withdraw its troops
from Lebanon.

@Lebanon:Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between Israel
and Syria

Geographic coordinates: 33 50 N, 35 50 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 10,400 sq km
land: 10,230 sq km
water : 170 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.7 times the size of Connecticut

Land boundaries:
total : 454 km
border countries: Israel 79 km, Syria 375 km

Coastline: 225 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: Mediterranean; mild to cool, wet winters with hot, dry
summers; Lebanon mountains experience heavy winter snows

Terrain: narrow coastal plain; Al Biqa' (Bekaa Valley) separates
Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon Mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Mediterranean Sea 0 m
highest point: Jabal al Makmal 3,087 m

Natural resources: limestone, iron ore, salt, water-surplus state in a
water-deficit region

Land use:
arable land : 21%
permanent crops: 9%
permanent pastures: 1%
forests and woodland: 8%
other: 61% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 860 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust storms, sandstorms

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion;
desertification; air pollution in Beirut from vehicular traffic and
the burning of industrial wastes; pollution of coastal waters from raw
sewage and oil spills

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution
signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification, Marine Dumping,
Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: Nahr al Litani only major river in Near East not
crossing an international boundary; rugged terrain historically helped
isolate, protect, and develop numerous factional groups based on
religion, clan, and ethnicity

@Lebanon:People

Population: 3,449,578 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 30% (male 531,171; female 511,522)
15-64 years: 64% (male 1,036,728; female 1,150,847)
65 years and over: 6% (male 100,682; female 118,628) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.62% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 22.74 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.56 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.9 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.85 male(s)/female
total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 32.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 70.35 years
male: 67.82 years
female : 73 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.32 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Lebanese (singular and plural)
adjective: Lebanese

Ethnic groups: Arab 95%, Armenian 4%, other 1%

Religions: Islam 70% (5 legally recognized Islamic groups - Alawite or
Nusayri, Druze, Isma'ilite, Shi'a, Sunni), Christian 30% (11 legally
recognized Christian groups - 4 Orthodox Christian, 6 Catholic, 1
Protestant), Judaism NEGL%

Languages: Arabic (official), French (official), Armenian, English

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 92.4%
male: 94.7%
female: 90.3% (1995 est.)

@Lebanon:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Lebanese Republic
conventional short form: Lebanon
local long form : Al Jumhuriyah al Lubnaniyah
local short form: Lubnan

Data code: LE

Government type: republic

National capital: Beirut

Administrative divisions: 5 governorates (muhafazat, singular -
muhafazah); Al Biqa', Al Janub, Ash Shamal, Bayrut, Jabal Lubnan

Independence: 22 November 1943 (from League of Nations mandate under
French administration)

National holiday: Independence Day, 22 November (1943)

Constitution: 23 May 1926, amended a number of times

Legal system: mixture of Ottoman law, canon law, Napoleonic code, and
civil law; no judicial review of legislative acts; has not accepted
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; compulsory for all males; authorized for
women at age 21 with elementary education

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Ilyas HARAWI (since 24 November 1989)
head of government : Prime Minister Rafiq al-HARIRI (since 22 October
1992)
cabinet: Cabinet chosen by the prime minister in consultation with the
members of the National Assembly; the current Cabinet was formed in
1996
elections: president elected by the National Assembly for a six-year
term; election last held 24 November 1989 (next to be held NA 1998);
note - in 1995, the National Assembly amended the Constituition to
extend the president's term by three years; prime minister and deputy
prime minister appointed by the president in consultation with the
National Assembly; by custom, the president is a Maronite Christian,
the prime minister is a Sunni Muslim, and the speaker of the
legislature is a Shi'a Muslim
election results: Ilyas HARAWI elected president; percent of National
Assembly vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Majlis Alnuwab
(Arabic) or Assemblee Nationale (French) (128 seats; members elected
by popular vote on the basis of sectarian proportional representation
to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held in the summer of 1996 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - NA
(one-half Christian and one-half Muslim)

Judicial branch: four Courts of Cassation (three courts for civil and
commercial cases and one court for criminal cases)

Political parties and leaders: political party activity is organized
along largely sectarian lines; numerous political groupings exist,
consisting of individual political figures and followers motivated by
religious, clan, and economic considerations

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACCT, AFESD, AL, AMF,
CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol,
IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OIC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNHCR, UNIDO, UNRWA, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Victor
EL-ZMETER
chancery: 2560 28th Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 939-6300
FAX: [1] (202) 939-6324
consulate(s) general: Detroit, New York, and Los Angeles

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Richard Henry JONES
embassy: Antelias, Beirut
mailing address: P. O. Box 70-840, Beirut; PSC 815, Box 2, FPO AE
09836-0002
telephone: [961] (1) 402200, 403300, 406650, 406651, 426183, 417774,
889926
FAX : [961] (1) 407112

Flag description: three horizontal bands of red (top), white (double
width), and red with a green and brown cedar tree centered in the
white band

Economy

Economy - overview: The 1975-91 civil war seriously damaged Lebanon's
economic infrastructure, cut national output by half, and all but
ended Lebanon's position as a Middle Eastern entrepot and banking hub.
Peace has enabled the central government to restore control in Beirut,
begin collecting taxes, and regain access to key port and government
facilities. Economic recovery has been helped by a financially sound
banking system and resilient small- and medium-scale manufacturers,
with family remittances, banking services, manufactured and farm
exports, and international aid as the main sources of foreign
exchange. Lebanon's economy has made impressive gains since Prime
Minister HARIRI launched his $18 billion "Horizon 2000" reconstruction
program in 1993. Real GDP grew 8% in 1994 and 7% in 1995 before
Israel's Operation Grapes of Wrath in April 1996 stunted economic
activity. During 1992-96, annual inflation fell from more than 170% to
10%, and foreign exchange reserves jumped to more than $4 billion from
$1.4 billion. Burgeoning capital inflows have fueled foreign payments
surpluses, and the Lebanese pound has remained relatively stable.
Progress also has been made in rebuilding Lebanon's war-torn physical
and financial infrastructure. Solidere, a $2-billion firm, is managing
the reconstruction of Beirut's central business district, the stock
market reopened in January 1996, and international banks and insurance
companies are returning. The government nonetheless faces serious
challenges in the economic arena. The government has had to fund
reconstruction by tapping foreign exchange reserves and boosting
borrowing. The stalled peace process and ongoing violence in southern
Lebanon could spawn wider hostilities that would disrupt vital capital
inflows. Furthermore, the gap between rich and poor has widened since
HARIRI took office, sowing grassroots dissatisfaction over the skewed
distribution of reconstruction's benefits and leading the government
to shift its focus from rebuilding infrastructure to improving social
conditions.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $13 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 13%
industry: 28%
services: 59% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 10% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1 million plus as many as 1 million foreign workers
by occupation: services 60%, industry 28%, agriculture 12% (1990 est.)

Unemployment rate: 20% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $1.9 billion
expenditures: $3.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $1
billion (1995 est.)

Industries: banking; food processing; textiles, jewelry; cement, oil
refining, chemicals, metal fabricating, wood products

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 1.22 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 4.75 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,285 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: citrus, vegetables, potatoes, olives, tobacco,
hemp (hashish); sheep, goats

Exports:
total value : $1 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: paper and paper products 26%, food stuffs 16%, textiles
and textile products 10%, jewelry 8%, metals and metal products 8%,
electrical equipment and products 8%, chemical products 6%, transport
vehicles 4% (1995)
partners: Saudi Arabia 13%, Switzerland 12%, UAE 11%, Syria 9%, US 5%,
Jordan 5% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $7 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities : machinery and transport equipment 28%, foodstuffs 20%,
consumer goods 19%, chemicals 9%, textiles 5%, metals 5%, fuels 3%
(1995)
partners: Italy 19%, France 13%, US 12%, Germany 11%, UK 6%, Belgium
5%, Turkey 3% (1995)

Debt - external: $3 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: aid pledges of $3.5 billion for 1997-2001

Currency: 1 Lebanese pound (£L) = 100 piasters

Exchange rates: Lebanese pounds (£L) per US$1 - 1,550.8 (January
1997), 1,571.4 (1996), 1,621.4 (1995), 1,680.1 (1994), 1,741.4 (1993),
1,712.8 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Lebanon:Communications

Telephones: 150,000 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: telecommunications system severely damaged by civil
war; rebuilding well underway
domestic: primarily microwave radio relay and cable
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
and 1 Atlantic Ocean) (erratic operations); coaxial cable to Syria;
microwave radio relay to Syria but inoperable beyond Syria to Jordan;
3 submarine coaxial cables

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 3, shortwave 1
note: government is licensing a limited number of the more than 100 AM
and FM stations operated sporadically by various factions that sprang
up during the civil war

Radios: 2.37 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 13
note: government is licensing a limited number of TV stations operated
by various factions

Televisions: 1.1 million (1993 est.)

@Lebanon:Transportation

Railways:
total: 222 km
standard gauge : 222 km 1.435-m (from Beirut to the Syrian border)

Highways:
total: 6,359 km
paved: 6,041 km
unpaved: 318 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 72 km (none in operation)

Ports and harbors: Al Batrun, Al Mina, An Naqurah, Antilyas, Az
Zahrani, Beirut, Jubayl, Juniyah, Shikka, Sidon, Tripoli, Tyre

Merchant marine:
total: 64 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 241,583 GRT/366,093 DWT
ships by type: bulk 5, cargo 43, chemical tanker 1, combination
ore/oil 1, container 2, livestock carrier 5, oil tanker 1,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 2, specialized tanker 1, vehicle carrier 3
(1996 est.)

Airports: 7 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 6
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m : 1
under 914 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF; includes Army, Navy,
and Air Force)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 876,677 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 543,861 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $278 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 5.5% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Israeli troops in southern Lebanon since
June 1982; Syrian troops in northern, central, and eastern Lebanon
since October 1976

Illicit drugs: small illicit producer of hashish and heroin for the
international drug trade; hashish production is shipped to Western
Europe, the Middle East, and North and South America; a key locus of
cocaine processing and trafficking; a Lebanese/Syrian eradication
campaign started in the early 1990s has practically eliminated the
opium and cannabis crops
______________________________________________________________________

LESOTHO

@Lesotho:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, an enclave of South Africa

Geographic coordinates: 29 30 S, 28 30 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 30,350 sq km
land: 30,350 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
total: 909 km
border countries : South Africa 909 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; cool to cold, dry winters; hot, wet summers

Terrain: mostly highland with plateaus, hills, and mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: junction of the Orange and Makhaleng Rivers 1,400 m
highest point : Mount Thabana Ntlenyana 3,482 m

Natural resources: water, agricultural and grazing land, some diamonds
and other minerals

Land use:
arable land: 11%
permanent crops : NA%
permanent pastures: 66%
forests and woodland : NA%
other: 23% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 30 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: population pressure forcing settlement
in marginal areas results in overgrazing, severe soil erosion, soil
exhaustion; desertification; Highlands Water Project will control,
store, and redirect water to South Africa

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Marine Life
Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine
Dumping

Geography - note: landlocked; surrounded by South Africa

@Lesotho:People

Population: 2,007,814 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 41% (male 408,723; female 406,849)
15-64 years : 55% (male 533,327; female 566,684)
65 years and over: 4% (male 37,990; female 54,241) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.83% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 32.19 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 13.92 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.94 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 80.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 51.66 years
male: 49.48 years
female: 53.91 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.22 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Mosotho (singular), Basotho (plural)
adjective: Basotho

Ethnic groups: Sotho 99.7%, Europeans 1,600, Asians 800

Religions: Christian 80%, rest indigenous beliefs

Languages: Sesotho (southern Sotho), English (official), Zulu, Xhosa

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 71.3%
male : 81.1%
female: 62.3% (1995 est.)

@Lesotho:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Kingdom of Lesotho
conventional short form: Lesotho
former: Basutoland

Data code: LT

Government type: modified constitutional monarchy

National capital: Maseru

Administrative divisions: 10 districts; Berea, Butha-Buthe, Leribe,
Mafeteng, Maseru, Mohale's Hoek, Mokhotlong, Qacha's Nek, Quthing,
Thaba-Tseka

Independence: 4 October 1966 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 4 October (1966)

Constitution: 2 April 1993

Legal system: based on English common law and Roman-Dutch law;
judicial review of legislative acts in High Court and Court of Appeal;
has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : King LETSIE III (since 7 February 1996, succeeded to
the throne following the death of his father, King MOSHOESHOE II, on
16 January 1996); note - King LETSIE III formerly occupied the throne
(November 1990 to February 1995) while his father was in exile
head of government: Prime Minister Ntsu MOKHEHLE (since 2 April 1993)
cabinet: Cabinet
elections: none; the king is a hereditary monarch, but, under the
terms of the constitution which came into effect after the March 1993
election, he has no executive or legislative powers; moreover, under
traditional law the king can be elected or deposed by a majority vote
of the College of Chiefs; following legislative elections, the leader
of the party that wins the most seats usually becomes prime minister

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (33
members - 22 principal chiefs and 11 other members appointed by the
ruling party) and the Assembly (65 seats; members elected for a
five-year term by popular vote)
elections: last held 27 March 1993 (next to be held by March 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - BCP
65

Judicial branch: High Court; Court of Appeal; Magistrate's Court;
customary or traditional court

Political parties and leaders: Basotho National Party or BNP
[Evaristus SEKHONYANA]; Basotholand Congress Party or BCP [Ntsu
MOKHEHLE]; Marematlou Freedom Party or MFP [Vincent MALEBO]; United
Democratic Party or UDP [Charles MOFELI]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFCTU, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, SACU,
SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Dr. Eunice M. BULANE
chancery: 2511 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone : [1] (202) 797-5533 through 5536
FAX: [1] (202) 234-6815

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Bismarck MYRICK
embassy: 254 Kingsway, Maseru West (Consular Section)
mailing address: P. O. Box 333, Maseru 100, Lesotho
telephone: [266] 312666
FAX : [266] 310116

Flag description: divided diagonally from the lower hoist side corner;
the upper half is white, bearing the brown silhouette of a large
shield with crossed spear and club; the lower half is a diagonal blue
band with a green triangle in the corner

Economy

Economy - overview: Small, landlocked, and mountainous, Lesotho has no
important natural resources other than water. Its economy is based on
agriculture, light manufacturing, and remittances from miners employed
in South Africa. The number of such mine workers has declined steadily
over the past five years; in 1996 their remittances added about 33% to
GDP compared with the addition of roughly 67% in 1990. The great
majority of households gain their livelihoods from subsistence farming
and migrant labor; a large portion of the adult male work force is
employed in South African mines. Manufacturing depends largely on farm
products which support the milling, canning, leather, and jute
industries. Although drought has decreased agricultural activity over
the past few years, completion of a major hydropower facility will
permit the sale of water to South Africa and will support the
economy's continued expansion. The pace of the privatization of
state-owned firms increased toward the end of 1994.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $3.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 10% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,860 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 14%
industry: 46%
services : 40% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 8.7% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 689,000 economically active
by occupation: 86% of resident population engaged in subsistence
agriculture; roughly 35% of the active male wage earners work in South
Africa

Unemployment rate: substantial unemployment and underemployment
effecting more than half of the labor force (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $445 million
expenditures: $400 million, including capital expenditures of $128
million (FY94/95 est.)

Industries: food, beverages, textiles, handicrafts; construction;
tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 12.5% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 13,400 kW (1993)
note: 98% of electricity supplied by South Africa

Electricity - production: NA kWh
note: 98% of electricity supplied by South Africa

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: corn, wheat, pulses, sorghum, barley;
livestock

Exports:
total value: $218 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: clothing, furniture, footwear, machinery and equipment,
wool (1993)
partners: South African Customs Union 46%, North America 34%, EU 18%
(1993)

Imports:
total value: $1.1 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: corn, clothing, building materials, vehicles, machinery,
medicines, petroleum products (1993)
partners: South African Customs Union 83%, Asia 12%, EU 3% (1993)

Debt - external: $512 million (1993)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 loti (L) = 100 lisente
note : maloti (M) is the plural form of loti

Exchange rates: maloti (M) per US$1 - 4.6410 (January 1997), 4.2706
(1996), 3.6266 (1995), 3.5490 (1994), 3.2636 (1993), 2.8497 (1992);
note - the Basotho loti is at par with the South African rand

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Lesotho:Communications

Telephones: 12,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: rudimentary system
domestic: consists of a few landlines, a small microwave radio relay
system, and a minor radiotelephone communication system
international : satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 66,000

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 11,000 (1992 est.)

@Lesotho:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2.6 km; note - owned by, operated by, and included in the
statistics of South Africa
narrow gauge: 2.6 km 1.067-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total : 4,955 km
paved: 887 km
unpaved: 4,068 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 29 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 25
over 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 23 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 4
914 to 1,523 m : 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Lesotho Defense Force (LDF; includes Army and Air
Wing), Lesotho Mounted Police

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 468,658 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 253,025 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

LIBERIA

Introduction

Current issues: Years of civil strife have destroyed much of Liberia's
economic infrastructure, made civil administration nearly impossible,
and brought economic activity virtually to a halt. The deterioration
of economic conditions has been greatly exacerbated by the flight of
most business people with their expertise and capital. Civil order
ended in 1990 when President Samuel Kenyon DOE was killed by rebel
forces. In April 1996, when forces loyal to faction leaders Charles
Ghankay TAYLOR and Alhaji KROMAH attacked rival ethnic Krahn factions,
the fighting further damaged Monrovia's dilapidated infrastructure.
Fighting waned in late May 1996, allowing West African peacekeepers to
regain control of Monrovia. The Abuja II peace accord was signed in
August 1996 replacing the Chairman of the ruling Council of State,
Wilton SANKAWULO, with Ruth PERRY. National elections were scheduled
for 30 May 1997, but long-term prospects for peace will remain poor
unless the warring factions can overcome their greed, mutual
suspicions and ethnic hatreds.

@Liberia:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean, between
Cote d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone

Geographic coordinates: 6 30 N, 9 30 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 111,370 sq km
land : 96,320 sq km
water: 15,050 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Tennessee

Land boundaries:
total: 1,585 km
border countries: Guinea 563 km, Cote d'Ivoire 716 km, Sierra Leone
306 km

Coastline: 579 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; dry winters with hot days and cool to
cold nights; wet, cloudy summers with frequent heavy showers

Terrain: mostly flat to rolling coastal plains rising to rolling
plateau and low mountains in northeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Wuteve 1,380 m

Natural resources: iron ore, timber, diamonds, gold

Land use:
arable land: 1%
permanent crops: 3%
permanent pastures: 59%
forests and woodland: 18%
other: 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust-laden harmattan winds blow from the Sahara
(December to March)

Environment - current issues: tropical rain forest subject to
deforestation; soil erosion; loss of biodiversity; pollution of rivers
from the dumping of iron ore tailings and of coastal waters from oil
residue and raw sewage

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94
signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental
Modification, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation

@Liberia:People

Population: 2,602,068 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 45% (male 584,918; female 579,728)
15-64 years: 52% (male 689,376; female 657,029)
65 years and over : 3% (male 43,868; female 47,149) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 6.92% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 42.3 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 11.53 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 38.39 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)
note: until domestic peace is restored, many Liberian refugees will
not return from exile

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.93 male(s)/female
total population : 1.03 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 105.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 59.02 years
male : 56.43 years
female: 61.69 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.16 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Liberian(s)
adjective: Liberian

Ethnic groups: indigenous African tribes 95% (including Kpelle, Bassa,
Gio, Kru, Grebo, Mano, Krahn, Gola, Gbandi, Loma, Kissi, Vai, and
Bella), Americo-Liberians 5% (descendants of former slaves)

Religions: traditional 70%, Muslim 20%, Christian 10%

Languages: English 20% (official), about 20 tribal languages, of which
a few can be written and are used in correspondence

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 38.3%
male : 53.9%
female: 22.4% (1995 est.)

@Liberia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Liberia
conventional short form: Liberia

Data code: LI

Government type: republic

National capital: Monrovia

Administrative divisions: 13 counties; Bomi, Bong, Grand Bassa, Grand
Cape Mount, Grand Gedeh, Grand Kru, Lofa, Margibi, Maryland,
Montserrado, Nimba, River Cess, Sinoe

Independence: 26 July 1847

National holiday: Independence Day, 26 July (1847)

Constitution: 6 January 1986

Legal system: dual system of statutory law based on Anglo-American
common law for the modern sector and customary law based on unwritten
tribal practices for indigenous sector

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Chairman of the Council of State Ruth PERRY (since NA
August 1996); note - chairman of the Council of State is both the
chief of state and head of government
head of government : Chairman of the Council of State Ruth PERRY
(since NA August 1996); note - chairman of the Council of State is
both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet selected by the leaders of the major factions in the
civil war
elections: last presidential election held 15 October 1985 (next to be
held 19 July 1997); results - Samuel Kanyon DOE (NDPL) 50.9%, Jackson
DOE (LAP) 26.4%, other 22.7%
note : constitutional government ended in September 1990 when
President Samuel Kanyon DOE was killed by rebel forces; civil war
ensued and in August 1996 the Abuja II peace accord was signed by the
major warring factions; a transitional coalition government under Ruth
PERRY was formed in August 1996; presidential elections are scheduled
for 19 July 1997

Legislative branch: unicameral Transitional Legislative Assembly, the
members of which are appointed by the leaders of the major factions in
the civil war
note : the former bicameral legislature no longer exists and is
unlikely to be reconstituted soon

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: present conditions of civil strife and
anarchy have rendered Liberia's political parties completely
ineffectual; prior to the outbreak of warfare among armed factions the
following political parties were prominent: National Democratic Party
of Liberia or NDPL [Augustus CAINE, chairman]; Liberian Action Party
or LAP [Emmanuel KOROMAH, chairman]; Unity Party or UP [Joseph KOFA,
chairman]; United People's Party or UPP [Gabriel Baccus MATTHEWS,
chairman]; National Patriotic Party or NPP [Charles Ghankay TAYLOR,
chairman]; Liberian Peoples Party or LPP [Dusty WOLOKOLLIE, chairman]

Political pressure groups and leaders: the following armed factions,
in accordance with the peace accord of August 1995, form the
transitional government of Liberia: Armed Forces of Liberia or AFL
(formerly a part of the national armed forces) [Lt. Gen. Hezekiah
BOWEN, leader]; National Patriotic Front of Liberia or NPFL (initiated
hostilities against Samuel DOE's government from Cote d' Ivoire in
December 1989) [Charles Ghankay TAYLOR, leader]; Central Revolutionary
Committee or CRC (dissident members of the NPFL in conflict with
forces loyal to Charles Ghankay TAYLOR) [Thomas J. WOEWIYU, LEADER];
Liberia Peace Council or LPC (has opposed NPLF forces in southeastern
Liberia) [Dr. George F. SAIGBE BOLEY, chairman; Octavius WALKER,
secretary-general]; United Liberation Movement of Liberia for
Democracy or ULIMO (former supporters of Samuel DOE that have split on
ethnic lines into two groups in conflict with each other: ULIMO-K
[Alhaji G. V. KROMAH, leader] and ULIMO-J [Maj. Gen. Roosevelt
JOHNSON, leader]); Lofa Defence Force or LDF (has fought the ULIMO
forces in Lofa county) [Francois MASSAQUOI, leader]; note - the
ULIMO-J forces are of the Krahn ethnic group and the ULIMO-K forces
are of the Mandingo ethnic group

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA, ECOWAS,
FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM,
ITU, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Konah K. BLACKETT
chancery: 5201 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011
telephone : [1] (202) 723-0437
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador (vacant); Chief of Mission William MILAM
embassy: 111 United Nations Drive, Monrovia
mailing address: P. O. Box 100098, Mamba Point, Monrovia
telephone: [231] 226-370
FAX : [231] 226-148

Flag description: 11 equal horizontal stripes of red (top and bottom)
alternating with white; there is a white five-pointed star on a blue
square in the upper hoist-side corner; the design was based on the US
flag

Economy

Economy - overview: Civil war since 1990 has destroyed much of
Liberia's economy, especially the infrastructure in and around
Monrovia. Businessmen have fled the country, taking capital and
expertise with them. Many will not return. Richly endowed with water,
mineral resources, forests and a climate favorable to agriculture,
Liberia had been a producer and exporter of basic products, while
local manufacturing, mainly foreign owned, had been small in scope.
Political and economic instability - including the stripping of
resources by local warlords - threatens prospects for reconstruction
as well as the repatriation of an estimated 750,000 Liberian refugees
who have fled to neighboring countries. The continued political
turmoil has prevented restoration of normal economic life, including
the re-establishment of a strong central government with effective
economic development programs.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $2.4 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 0% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,100 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 30%
industry: 36%
services: 34%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 50% (1994 est.)

Labor force:
total: 510,000 including 220,000 in the monetary economy
by occupation: agriculture 70.5%, services 10.8%, industry and
commerce 4.5%, other 14.2%
note : non-African foreigners hold about 95% of the top-level
management and engineering jobs

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $225 million
expenditures: $285 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1994 est.)

Industries: rubber processing, food processing, construction
materials, furniture, palm oil processing, iron ore, diamonds

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 430,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 1.05 billion kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 384 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: rubber, coffee, cocoa, rice, cassava
(tapioca), palm oil, sugarcane, bananas; sheep, goats; timber

Exports:
total value: $667 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: diamonds, iron ore, rubber, timber, coffee
partners: US, EU, Netherlands, Singapore

Imports:
total value : $5.8 billion (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: mineral fuels, chemicals, machinery, transportation
equipment, manufactured goods; rice and other foodstuffs
partners: US, EU, Japan, China, Netherlands, ECOWAS, South Korea

Debt - external: $2.1 billion (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Liberian dollar (L$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Liberian dollars (L$) per US$1 - 1.0000 (officially
fixed rate since 1940); market exchange rate: Liberian dollars (L$)
per US$1 - 50 (October 1995), 7 (January 1992); market rate floats
against the US dollar

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Liberia:Communications

Telephones: less than 25,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: telephone and telegraph service via microwave radio
relay network; main center is Monrovia; most telecommunications
services inoperable due to insurgency
domestic: NA
international : satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 622,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 5 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 51,000 (1992 est.)

@Liberia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 490 km (single track); note - three rail systems owned and
operated by foreign steel and financial interests in conjunction with
Liberian Government; one of these, the Lamco Railroad, closed in 1989
after iron ore production ceased; the other two have been shut down by
the civil war
standard gauge : 345 km 1.435-m gauge
narrow gauge: 145 km 1.067-m gauge

Highways:
total: 10,300 km
paved: 628 km
unpaved : 9,672 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Buchanan, Greenville, Harper, Monrovia

Merchant marine:
total : 1,616 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 60,081,452
GRT/99,395,792 DWT
ships by type: barge carrier 3, bulk 418, cargo 121, chemical tanker
117, combination bulk 29, combination ore/oil 58, container 151,
liquefied gas tanker 83, multifunction large-load carrier 1, oil
tanker 450, passenger 36, refrigerated cargo 68, roll-on/roll-off
cargo 29, short-sea passenger 1, specialized tanker 11, vehicle
carrier 40
note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 56 countries
among which are Germany 179, US 176, Norway 166, Japan 154, Greece
147, Hong Kong 120, China 45, UK 40, Monaco 39, and Cyprus 33 (1996
est.)

Airports: 36 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 30
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 1
under 914 m: 28 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 6
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: NA; the ultimate structure of the Liberian military
force will depend on who is the victor in the ongoing civil war

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 592,730 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 316,906 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $14 million (1993)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.9% (1993)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: increasingly a transshipment point for Southeast and
Southwest Asian heroin and South American cocaine for the European and
US markets
______________________________________________________________________

LIBYA

@Libya:Geography

Location: Northern Africa, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between
Egypt and Tunisia

Geographic coordinates: 25 00 N, 17 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 1,759,540 sq km
land: 1,759,540 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Alaska

Land boundaries:
total: 4,383 km
border countries: Algeria 982 km, Chad 1,055 km, Egypt 1,150 km, Niger
354 km, Sudan 383 km, Tunisia 459 km

Coastline: 1,770 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 12 nm
note: Gulf of Sidra closing line - 32 degrees 30 minutes north

Climate: Mediterranean along coast; dry, extreme desert interior

Terrain: mostly barren, flat to undulating plains, plateaus,
depressions

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Sabkhat Ghuzayyil -47 m
highest point: Bikku Bitti 2,267 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, gypsum

Land use:
arable land: 1%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 8%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 91% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 4,700 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dust-laden ghibli is a southern wind
lasting one to four days in spring and fall; dust storms, sandstorms

Environment - current issues: desertification; very limited natural
fresh water resources; the Great Manmade River Project, the largest
water development scheme in the world, is being built to bring water
from large aquifers under the Sahara to coastal cities

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Desertification, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea

@Libya:People

Population: 5,648,359 (July 1997 est.)
note: includes 305,959 non-nationals (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 48% (male 1,369,984; female 1,323,254)
15-64 years: 49% (male 1,422,043; female 1,358,013)
65 years and over: 3% (male 91,953; female 83,112) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.64% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 43.94 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.49 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.11 male(s)/female
total population: 1.04 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 57.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 65.05 years
male : 62.84 years
female: 67.37 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.19 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Libyan(s)
adjective: Libyan

Ethnic groups: Berber and Arab 97%, Greeks, Maltese, Italians,
Egyptians, Pakistanis, Turks, Indians, Tunisians

Religions: Sunni Muslim 97%

Languages: Arabic, Italian, English, all are widely understood in the
major cities

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 76.2%
male: 87.9%
female: 63% (1995 est.)

@Libya:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
conventional short form: Libya
local long form: Al Jumahiriyah al Arabiyah al Libiyah ash Shabiyah al
Ishtirakiyah
local short form: none

Data code: LY

Government type: Jamahiriya (a state of the masses) in theory,
governed by the populace through local councils; in fact, a military
dictatorship

National capital: Tripoli

Administrative divisions: 25 municipalities (baladiyah, singular -
baladiyat); Ajdabiya, Al 'Aziziyah, Al Fatih, Al Jabal al Akhdar, Al
Jufrah, Al Khums, Al Kufrah, An Nuqat al Khams, Ash Shati', Awbari, Az
Zawiyah, Banghazi, Darnah, Ghadamis, Gharyan, Misratah, Murzuq, Sabha,
Sawfajjin, Surt, Tarabulus, Tarhunah, Tubruq, Yafran, Zlitan
note: the 25 municipalities may have been replaced by 1,500 communes
in 1992

Independence: 24 December 1951 (from Italy)

National holiday: Revolution Day, 1 September (1969)

Constitution: 11 December 1969, amended 2 March 1977

Legal system: based on Italian civil law system and Islamic law;
separate religious courts; no constitutional provision for judicial
review of legislative acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state : Revolutionary Leader Gen. Muammar Abu Minyar
al-QADHAFI (since 1 September 1969); note - holds no official title,
but is de facto chief of state
head of government: Secretary of the General People's Committee
(Premier) Abd al-Majid al-QA'UD (since 29 January 1994)
cabinet: General People's Committee established by the General
People's Congress
elections : national elections are indirect through a hierarchy of
peoples' committees; head of government elected by the General
People's Congress; election last held NA (next to be held NA)
election results: Abd al-Majid al-QA'UD elected head of government;
percent of General People's Congress vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral General People's Congress (NA seats;
members elected indirectly through a hierarchy of peoples' committees)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: various Arab nationalist
movements with almost negligible memberships may be functioning
clandestinely, as well as some Islamic elements

International organization participation: ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF,
AMU, CAEU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU,
NAM, OAPEC, OAU, OIC, OPEC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Libya does not have an embassy in
the US

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US suspended all embassy
activities in Tripoli on 2 May 1980

Flag description: plain green; green is the traditional color of Islam
(the state religion)

Economy

Economy - overview: The socialist-oriented economy depends primarily
upon revenues from the oil sector, which contributes practically all
export earnings and about one-third of GDP. In 1990 per capita GDP was
the highest in Africa at $5,410, but subsequently GDP growth has
slowed on average and has fluctuated sharply in response to changes in
the world oil market. Import restrictions and inefficient resource
allocations have led to periodic shortages of basic goods and
foodstuffs. The nonoil manufacturing and construction sectors, which
account for about 20% of GDP, have expanded from processing mostly
agricultural products to include the production of petrochemicals,
iron, steel, and aluminum. Although agriculture accounts for only 5%
of GDP, it employs 18% of the labor force. Climatic conditions and
poor soils severely limit farm output, and Libya imports about 75% of
its food requirements. The UN sanctions imposed in April 1992 have not
yet had a major impact on the economy because Libya's oil revenues
generate sufficient foreign exchange to sustain imports of food,
consumer goods, and equipment for the oil industry and ongoing
development projects.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $34.5 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.2% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,570 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 5%
industry : 55%
services: 40% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 25% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1 million (includes about 280,000 resident foreigners)
by occupation: industry 31%, services 27%, government 24%, agriculture
18%
note : 7.1% of the population in the 15-64 age group is non-national
(July 1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $13 billion
expenditures: $14.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: petroleum, food processing, textiles, handicrafts, cement

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 4.6 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 16.73 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,012 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, barley, olives, dates, citrus,
vegetables, peanuts; meat, eggs

Exports:
total value: $8.4 billion (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: crude oil, refined petroleum products, natural gas
partners: Italy, Germany, Spain, France, UK, Turkey, Greece, Egypt

Imports:
total value : $7.3 billion (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: machinery, transport equipment, food, manufactured goods
partners: Italy, Germany, UK, France, Spain, Turkey, Tunisia, Eastern
Europe

Debt - external: $2.6 billion excluding military debt (1995 est.)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Libyan dinar (LD) = 1,000 dirhams

Exchange rates: Libyan dinars (LD) per US$1 - 0.3764 (January 1997),
0.3651 (1996), 0.3532 (1995), 0.3596 (1994), 0.3250 (1993), 0.3013
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Libya:Communications

Telephones: 370,000

Telephone system: modern telecommunications system
domestic: microwave radio relay, coaxial cable, tropospheric scatter,
and a domestic satellite system with 14 earth stations
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
and 1 Indian Ocean); planned Arabsat and Intersputnik satellite earth
stations; submarine cables to France and Italy; microwave radio relay
to Tunisia and Egypt; tropospheric scatter to Greece; participant in
Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 17, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 1 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 12 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 500,000 (1993 est.)

@Libya:Transportation

Railways:
note : Libya has had no railroad in operation since 1965, all previous
systems having been dismantled; current plans are to construct a
1.435-m standard gauge line from the Tunisian frontier to Tripoli and
Misratah, then inland to Sabha, center of a mineral-rich area, but
there has been no progress; other plans made jointly with Egypt would
establish a rail line from As Sallum, Egypt, to Tobruk with completion
set for mid-1994; no progress has been reported

Highways:
total: 19,189 km
paved: 10,738 km
unpaved : 8,451 km (1987)

Waterways: none

Pipelines: crude oil 4,383 km; petroleum products 443 km (includes
liquefied petroleum gas or LPG 256 km); natural gas 1,947 km

Ports and harbors: Al Khums, Banghazi, Darnah, Marsa al Burayqah,
Misratah, Ra's Lanuf, Tobruk, Tripoli, Zuwarah

Merchant marine:
total : 30 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 689,086 GRT/1,209,083
DWT
ships by type: cargo 9, chemical tanker 1, liquefied gas tanker 2, oil
tanker 10, roll-on/roll-off cargo 4, short-sea passenger 4
note: Libya owns an additional 5 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
33,050 DWT operating under the registries of Algeria and Turkey (1996
est.)

Airports: 131 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 71
over 3,047 m : 24
2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
1,524 to 2,437 m: 22
914 to 1,523 m: 6
under 914 m: 14 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 60
over 3,047 m: 5
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
914 to 1,523 m : 39 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Command

Military manpower - military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 1,211,700 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 721,592 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 59,216 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.4 billion (1994 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 6.1% (1994 est.)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: maritime boundary dispute with Tunisia;
Libya claims about 19,400 sq km in northern Niger and part of
southeastern Algeria
______________________________________________________________________

LIECHTENSTEIN

@Liechtenstein:Geography

Location: Central Europe, between Austria and Switzerland

Geographic coordinates: 47 10 N, 9 32 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total : 160 sq km
land: 160 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.9 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
total: 78 km
border countries: Austria 37 km, Switzerland 41 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: continental; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow or rain;
cool to moderately warm, cloudy, humid summers

Terrain: mostly mountainous (Alps) with Rhine Valley in western third

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Ruggleller Riet 430 m
highest point: Grauspitz 2,599 m

Natural resources: hydroelectric potential

Land use:
arable land : 25%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 38%
forests and woodland: 19%
other: 18% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer
Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Biodiversity, Law
of the Sea

Geography - note: along with Uzbekistan, one of the only two doubly
landlocked countries in the world; variety of microclimatic variations
based on elevation

@Liechtenstein:People

Population: 31,389 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 19% (male 3,032; female 2,909)
15-64 years: 70% (male 10,952; female 11,059)
65 years and over: 11% (male 1,410; female 2,027) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.02% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 13.03 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.33 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 4.52 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
total population : 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 77.82 years
male: 75.38 years
female: 80.36 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.62 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Liechtensteiner(s)
adjective: Liechtenstein

Ethnic groups: Alemannic 87.5%, Italian, Turkish, and other 12.5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 80%, Protestant 6.9%, unknown 5.6%, other
7.5% (1995)

Languages: German (official), Alemannic dialect

Literacy:
definition: age 10 and over can read and write
total population: 100%
male : 100%
female: 100% (1981 est.)

@Liechtenstein:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Principality of Liechtenstein
conventional short form: Liechtenstein
local long form: Furstentum Liechtenstein
local short form: Liechtenstein

Data code: LS

Government type: hereditary constitutional monarchy

National capital: Vaduz

Administrative divisions: 11 communes (Gemeinden, singular -
Gemeinde); Balzers, Eschen, Gamprin, Mauren, Planken, Ruggell, Schaan,
Schellenberg, Triesen, Triesenberg, Vaduz

Independence: 23 January 1719 (Imperial Principality of Liechtenstein
established)

National holiday: Assumption Day, 15 August

Constitution: 5 October 1921

Legal system: local civil and penal codes; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Prince Hans ADAM II (since 13 November 1989, assumed
executive powers 26 August 1984); Heir Apparent Prince ALOIS von und
zu Liechtenstein (born 11 June 1968)
head of government: Head of Government Mario FRICK (since 15 December
1993) and Deputy Head of Government Michael RITTER (since 14 April
1997)
cabinet: Cabinet elected by the Diet; confirmed by the prince
elections : none; the prince is a hereditary monarch; following
legislative elections, the leader of the majority party in the Diet is
usually appointed the head of government by the prince and the leader
of the largest minority party in the Diet is usually appointed the
deputy head of government by the prince

Legislative branch: unicameral Diet or Landtag (25 seats; members are
elected by direct popular vote under proportional representation to
serve four-year terms)
elections: last held on 2 February 1997 (next to be held by NA 2001)
election results: percent of vote by party - VU 50.1%, FBP 41.3%, FL
8.5%; seats by party - VU 13, FBP 10, FL 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Oberster Gerichtshof; Superior Court
or Obergericht

Political parties and leaders: Fatherland Union or VU [Dr. Oswald
KRANZ]; Progressive Citizens' Party or FBP [Otmar HASLER]; The Free
List or FL

International organization participation: CE, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, IAEA,
ICRM, IFRCS, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UPU,
WCL, WIPO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: Liechtenstein does not have an
embassy in the US, but is represented by the Swiss embassy in routine
diplomatic matters

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Liechtenstein, but the US Ambassador at Bern (Switzerland) has been
nominated to be the non-resident US Ambassador to Liechtenstein

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and red
with a gold crown on the hoist side of the blue band

Economy

Economy - overview: Despite its small size and limited natural
resources, Liechtenstein has developed into a prosperous, highly
industrialized, free-enterprise economy with a vital financial service
sector and living standards on a par with the urban areas of its large
European neighbors. Low business taxes - the maximum tax rate is 18% -
and easy incorporation rules have induced about 25,000 holding or
so-called letter box companies to establish nominal offices in
Liechtenstein, providing 30% of state revenues. The country
participates in a customs union with Switzerland and uses the Swiss
franc as its national currency. It imports more than 90% of its energy
requirements. Liechtenstein is a member of the European Economic Area
(an organization serving as a bridge between EFTA and EU) since May
1995. The government is working to harmonize its economic policies
with those of an integrated Europe.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $713 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $23,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 0.8% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 22,187 of which 13,576 are foreigners; 7,781 commute from
Austria and Switzerland to work each day
by occupation : industry, trade, and building 45%, services 53%,
agriculture, fishing, forestry, and horticulture 2% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 1.1% (1996)

Budget:
revenues: $455 million
expenditures: $435 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: electronics, metal manufacturing, textiles, ceramics,
pharmaceuticals, food products, precision instruments, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 23,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 150 million kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 8,000 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, barley, maize, potatoes; livestock,
dairy products

Exports:
total value: $2.14 billion (1994)
commodities: small specialty machinery, dental products, stamps,
hardware, pottery
partners: EU and EFTA countries 60.57% (Switzerland 15.7%) (1995)

Imports:
total value : $852.3 million (1994)
commodities: machinery, metal goods, textiles, foodstuffs, motor
vehicles
partners : EU countries, Switzerland (1996)

Debt - external: $0 (1996)

Economic aid: none

Currency: 1 Swiss franc, franken, or franco (SwF) = 100 centimes,
rappen, or centesimi

Exchange rates: Swiss francs, franken, or franchi (SwF) per US$1 -
1.3936 (January 1997), 1.2360 (1996), 1.1825 (1995), 1.3677 (1994),
1.4776 (1993), 1.4062 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Liechtenstein:Communications

Telephones: 28,393 (1995 est.)

Telephone system: limited, but sufficient automatic telephone system
domestic: NA
international: linked to Swiss networks by cable and microwave radio
relay

Radio broadcast stations: 1 broadcast station in Triesea
note: linked to Swiss networks

Radios: 11,203 (1995)

Television broadcast stations: NA
note : linked to Swiss networks

Televisions: 11,421 (1995)

@Liechtenstein:Transportation

Railways:
total: 18.5 km; note - owned, operated, and included in statistics of
Austrian Federal Railways
standard gauge: 18.5 km 1.435-m gauge (electrified)

Highways:
total: 250 km
paved: 250 km
unpaved: 0 km

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: none

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Switzerland

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims 1,600 sq km of Czech territory
confiscated from its royal family in 1918; the Czech Republic insists
that restitution does not go back before February 1948, when the
communists seized power
______________________________________________________________________

LITHUANIA

@Lithuania:Geography

Location: Eastern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea, between Latvia and
Russia

Geographic coordinates: 56 00 N, 24 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 65,200 sq km
land: 65,200 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
total: 1,273 km
border countries: Belarus 502 km, Latvia 453 km, Poland 91 km, Russia
(Kaliningrad) 227 km

Coastline: 99 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: transitional, between maritime and continental; wet, moderate
winters and summers

Terrain: lowland, many scattered small lakes, fertile soil

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Baltic Sea 0 m
highest point: Juozapine Kalnas 292 m

Natural resources: peat

Land use:
arable land: 35%
permanent crops : 12%
permanent pastures: 7%
forests and woodland: 31%
other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 430 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: contamination of soil and groundwater
with petroleum products and chemicals at military bases

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

@Lithuania:People

Population: 3,617,104 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 21% (male 385,959; female 370,100)
15-64 years: 66% (male 1,157,987; female 1,240,850)
65 years and over : 13% (male 157,328; female 304,880) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: -0.49% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 10.64 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 12.96 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.93 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.52 male(s)/female
total population: 0.89 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 14.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 68.7 years
male: 62.61 years
female : 75.11 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.47 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Lithuanian(s)
adjective: Lithuanian

Ethnic groups: Lithuanian 80.1%, Russian 8.6%, Polish 7.7%,
Byelorussian 1.5%, other 2.1%

Religions: primarily Roman Catholic, others include Lutheran, Russian
Orthodox, Protestant, evangelical Christian Baptist, Islam, Judaism

Languages: Lithuanian (official), Polish, Russian

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98%
male: 99%
female: 98% (1989 est.)

@Lithuania:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Lithuania
conventional short form: Lithuania
local long form: Lietuvos Respublika
local short form: Lietuva
former: Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: LH

Government type: independent, democratic republic

National capital: Vilnius

Administrative divisions: 44 regions (rajonai, singular - rajonas) and
11 municipalities*: Akmenes Rajonas, Alytaus Rajonas, Alytus*,
Anyksciu Rajonas, Birsionas*, Birzu Rajonas, Druskininkai*, Ignalinos
Rajonas, Jonavos Rajonas, Joniskio Rajonas, Jurbarko Rajonas,
Kaisiadoriu Rajonas, Marijampoles Rajonas, Kaunas*, Kauno Rajonas,
Kedainiu Rajonas, Kelmes Rajonas, Klaipeda*, Klaipedos Rajonas,
Kretingos Rajonas, Kupiskio Rajonas, Lazdiju Rajonas, Marijampole*,
Mazeikiu Rajonas, Moletu Rajonas, Neringa* Pakruojo Rajonas, Palanga*,
Panevezio Rajonas, Panevezys*, Pasvalio Rajonas, Plunges Rajonas,
Prienu Rajonas, Radviliskio Rajonas, Raseiniu Rajonas, Rokiskio
Rajonas, Sakiu Rajonas, Salcininky Rajonas, Siauliai*, Siauliu
Rajonas, Silales Rajonas, Siltues Rajonas, Sirvinty Rajonas, Skuodo
Rajonas, Svencioniu Rajonas, Taurages Rajonas, Telsiu Rajonas, Traky
Rajonas, Ukmerges Rajonas, Utenos Rajonas, Varenos Rajonas,
Vilkaviskio Rajonas, Vilniaus Rajonas, Vilnius*, Zarasu Rajonas

Independence: 6 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 16 February (1918)

Constitution: adopted 25 October 1992

Legal system: based on civil law system; no judicial review of
legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Algirdas Mykolas BRAZAUSKAS (acting
president since 25 November 1992, president since 15 February 1993)
head of government : Premier Gediminas VAGNORIUS (since 28 November
1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
nomination of the premier
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 14 February 1993 (next to be held spring 1997);
premier appointed by the president on the approval of the Parliament
election results: Algirdas BRAZAUSKAS elected president; percent of
vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Seimas (141 seats, 71
members are directly elected by popular vote, 70 are elected by
proportional representation; members serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 20 October and 10 November 1996 (next to be held
NA October 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
Conservative Party 70, LKDP 16, Center Union 13, LDDP 12, LSDP 12, DP
2, independents 4, others 8, vacant 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed by the Parliament;
Court of Appeal, judges appointed by the Parliament

Political parties and leaders: Christian Democratic Party or LKDP
[Algirdas SAUDARGAS, chairman]; Democratic Labor Party of Lithuania or
LDDP [Mindaugas STANKEVICIUS, chairman]; Lithuanian Nationalist Union
or LTS [Rimantas SMETONA, chairman]; Lithuanian Social Democratic
Party or LSDP [Aloyzas SAKALAS, chairman]; Farmers' Union [Jonas
CIULEVICIUS, chairman]; Center Union [Romualdas OZOLAS, chairman];
Homeland Union/Conservative Party [Vytautas LANDSBERGIS, chairman];
Lithuanian Polish Union or LLS [Rsztardas MACIEKIANIEC, chairman];
Democratic Party or DP [Lydie WURTH-POLFER, president]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Lithuanian Future Forum

International organization participation: BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, EBRD,
ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM
(observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, NACC, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UPU, WEU (associate partner), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Alfonsas EIDINTAS
chancery: 2622 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 234-5860
FAX : [1] (202) 328-0466
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador James W. SWIHART, Jr.
embassy: Akmenu 6, Vilnius 2600
mailing address: PSC 78, Box V, APO AE 09723
telephone : [370] 670-6083
FAX: [370] 670-6084

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of yellow (top), green,
and red

Economy

Economy - overview: Since declaring independence in 1990, Lithuania
has implemented reforms aimed at eliminating the vestiges of the
former socialist system. With the help of the IMF and other
international institutions, the government has adopted a disciplined
program to restrain inflation, abolish most price controls, lower the
budget deficit, and privatize the economy. More than two-thirds of its
industrial facilities as well as most housing and agricultural
enterprises have been privatized. Although some important "strategic"
enterprises remain exempt from privatization, the new government has
outlined plans to privatize large companies dealing with transport,
pipelines, communications, and energy. While Lithuania has reduced its
trade dependence on Russia and other republics of the FSU from 85% in
1991 to about 40% in 1995, Russia remains Lithuania's leading trading
partner. Lithuania has made great strides in reducing its annual rate
of inflation - from over 1,100% in 1992 to about 35% in 1995 and 13.1%
in 1996. Although the government tried to stay the course on economic
reform and fiscal discipline in 1996, the new government, which took
office in 1996 inherited high debts for energy supplies. As for real
resources, Lithuania's growth depends largely on its ability to
exploit its strategic location - with its ice-free port at Klaipeda
and its rail and highway hub in Vilnius connecting it with Eastern
Europe, Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine. Lacking important natural
resources, it will remain dependent on imports of fuels and raw
materials.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $14.1 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,870 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 13%
industry: 32%
services: 55% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 13.1% (1996 official est.)

Labor force:
total : 1.836 million
by occupation: industry and construction 42%, agriculture and forestry
18%, other 40% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 8% (January 1997)

Budget:
revenues: $1.4 billion
expenditures: $1.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $168
million (1995)

Industries: metal-cutting machine tools, electric motors, television
sets, refrigerators and freezers, petroleum refining, shipbuilding
(small ships), furniture making, textiles, food processing,
fertilizers, agricultural machinery, optical equipment, electronic
components, computers, amber

Industrial production growth rate: 3.7% (1996)

Electricity - capacity: 5.46 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 9.57 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,151 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grain, potatoes, sugar beets, vegetables;
meat, milk, eggs; fish; flax fiber

Exports:
total value: $3.3 billion (1996 est.)
commodities : textiles 15%, agriculture and food 14%, chemicals 12%,
fuels 12%, machinery 11% (1995)
partners: Russia, Germany, Belarus, Latvia, Ukraine (1995)

Imports:
total value: $4.56 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: oil 25%, machinery 17%, textiles 10%, chemicals 9% (1995)
partners: Russia, Germany, Ukraine, Poland, Belarus

Debt - external: $895 million

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $144 million (1993)
note : commitments from the West and international financial
institutions, $765 million (1992-95)

Currency: 1 Lithuanian litas = 100 centas

Exchange rates: litai per US$1 - 4.000 (January 1997), 4.000 (1996),
4.000 (1995), 3.978 (1994), 4.344 (1993), 1.773 (1992); note - fixed
rate since 1 May 1994

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Lithuania:Communications

Telephones: 1.012 million (1995)

Telephone system: telecommunications system ranks among the most
modern of the former Soviet republics
domestic: an NMT-450 analog cellular telephone network operates in
Vilnius and other cities; landlines and microwave radio relay connect
switching centers
international: international connections no longer depend on the
Moscow international gateway switch, but are established by satellite
through Oslo from Vilnius and through Copenhagen from Kaunas;
satellite earth stations - 1 Eutelsat and 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
cellular network linked internationally through Copenhagen by
Eutelsat; international electronic mail is available; landlines or
microwave radio relay to former Soviet republics

Radio broadcast stations: AM 13, FM 26, shortwave 1, longwave 1

Radios: 1.42 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3

Televisions: 1.77 million (1993 est.)

@Lithuania:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,002 km
broad gauge: 2,002 km 1.524-m gauge (122 km electrified) (1994)

Highways:
total : 61,442 km
paved: 53,086 km (including 394 km of expressways)
unpaved: 8,356 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 600 km perennially navigable

Pipelines: crude oil, 105 km; natural gas 760 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Kaunas, Klaipeda

Merchant marine:
total : 45 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 275,871 GRT/305,943 DWT
ships by type: cargo 24, combination bulk 11, oil tanker 2, railcar
carrier 1, refrigerated cargo 3, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1, short-sea
passenger 3 (1996 est.)

Airports: 96 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 25
over 3,047 m: 3
2,438 to 3,047 m : 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m : 2
under 914 m: 14 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 71
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 1
914 to 1,523 m: 6
under 914 m: 63 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Ground Forces, Navy, Air and Air Defense Force,
Security Forces (internal and border troops), National Guard (Skat)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 904,096 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 712,366 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 26,204 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $31.7 million (1996 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1% (1996 est.)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: dispute with Russia over the position of the
riparian and maritime boundary with Kaliningrad Oblast; disputes
maritime border with Latvia (primary concern is oil exploration
rights); treaty with Belarus defining the border awaits demarcation

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for opiates and other illicit drugs
from Southwest Asia and Latin America to Western Europe and
Scandinavia
______________________________________________________________________

LUXEMBOURG

@Luxembourg:Geography

Location: Western Europe, between France and Germany

Geographic coordinates: 49 45 N, 6 10 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 2,586 sq km
land: 2,586 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Rhode Island

Land boundaries:
total: 359 km
border countries: Belgium 148 km, France 73 km, Germany 138 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: modified continental with mild winters, cool summers

Terrain: mostly gently rolling uplands with broad, shallow valleys;
uplands to slightly mountainous in the north; steep slope down to
Moselle floodplain in the southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Moselle River 133 m
highest point: Burgplatz 559 m

Natural resources: iron ore (no longer exploited)

Land use:
arable land: 24%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 20%
forests and woodland : 21%
other: 34%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: air and water pollution in urban areas

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile
Organic Compounds, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94
signed, but not ratified : Desertification, Environmental
Modification, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: landlocked

@Luxembourg:People

Population: 420,416 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 18% (male 39,219; female 37,459)
15-64 years: 67% (male 143,754; female 138,493)
65 years and over: 15% (male 24,653; female 36,838) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.16% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 11.92 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.29 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 8.92 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.67 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.33 years
male : 74.24 years
female: 80.52 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.7 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Luxembourger(s)
adjective: Luxembourg

Ethnic groups: Celtic base (with French and German blend), Portuguese,
Italian, and European (guest and worker residents)

Religions: Roman Catholic 97%, Protestant and Jewish 3%

Languages: Luxembourgish, German, French, English

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 100%
male : 100%
female: 100% (1980 est.)

@Luxembourg:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
conventional short form : Luxembourg
local long form: Grand-Duche de Luxembourg
local short form: Luxembourg

Data code: LU

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: Luxembourg

Administrative divisions: 3 districts; Diekirch, Grevenmacher,
Luxembourg

Independence: 1839

National holiday: National Day, 23 June (1921) (public celebration of
the Grand Duke's birthday)

Constitution: 17 October 1868, occasional revisions

Legal system: based on civil law system; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state: Grand Duke JEAN (since 12 November 1964); Heir
Apparent Prince HENRI (son of Grand Duke JEAN, born 16 April 1955)
head of government: Prime Minister Jean-Claude JUNCKER (since 1
January 1995) and Vice Prime Minister Jacques F. POOS (since 21 July
1984)
cabinet : Council of Ministers appointed by the sovereign, responsible
to the Chamber of Deputies
elections : none; the grand duke is a hereditary monarch; prime
minister and vice prime minister appointed by the sovereign but are
responsible to the Chamber of Deputies

Legislative branch: unicameral Chamber of Deputies or Chambre des
Deputes (60 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to serve
five-year terms)
elections: last held 12 June 1994 (next to be held by June 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - CSV
21, LSAP 17, DP 12, Action Committee for Democracy and Pension Rights
5, Greens 5
note: the Conseil d'Etat or Council of State is an advisory body whose
views are considered by the Chamber of Deputies

Judicial branch: Superior Court of Justice or Cour Superieure de
Justice, judges are appointed for life by the Grand Duke;
Administrative Court or Tribunale Administratin

Political parties and leaders: Christian Social People's Party or CSV
[Erna HENNICOT-SCHOEPGES]; Luxembourg Socialist Workers' Party or LSAP
[Ben FAYOT]; Democratic Party or DP [Lydie Wurth POLFER]; Action
Committee for Democracy and Pension Rights [Roby MEHLEN]; the Green
Alternative [Abbes JACOBY]; other minor parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: group of steel companies
representing iron and steel industry; Centrale Paysanne representing
agricultural producers; Christian and Socialist labor unions;
Federation of Industrialists; Artisans and Shopkeepers Federation

International organization participation: ACCT, Australia Group,
Benelux, CCC, CE, EBRD, ECE, EIB, EU, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, MTCR, NACC, NATO, NEA, NSG, OECD, OSCE, PCA,
UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Alphonse BERNS
chancery: 2200 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 265-4171
FAX : [1] (202) 328-8270
consulate(s) general: New York and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Clay CONSTANTINOU
embassy: 22 Boulevard Emmanuel-Servais, 2535 Luxembourg City
mailing address: American Embassy Luxembourg, Unit 1410, APO AE
09126-1410 (official mail); American Embassy Luxembourg, PSC 9, Box
9500, APO AE 09123 (personal mail)
telephone: [352] 46 01 23
FAX : [352] 46 14 01

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and light blue; similar to the flag of the Netherlands, which uses a
darker blue and is shorter; design was based on the flag of France

Economy

Economy - overview: The stable, prosperous economy features moderate
growth, low inflation, and low unemployment. Agriculture is based on
small family-owned farms. The industrial sector, until recently
dominated by steel, has become increasingly more diversified. During
the past decades, growth in the financial sector has more than
compensated for the decline in steel. Services, especially banking,
account for a growing proportion of the economy. Luxembourg
participates in an economic union with Belgium on trade and most
financial matters, is also closely connected economically to the
Netherlands, and, as a member of the EU, enjoys the advantages of the
open European market.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $10 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.7% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $24,500 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 5%
industry: 21%
services: 74% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.3% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 213,100 (one-third of labor force is foreign workers, mostly
from Portugal, Italy, France, Belgium, and Germany)
by occupation : trade, restaurants, hotels 20%, mining, quarrying,
manufacturing 16%, other market services 18%, community, social,
personal services 14%, construction 11%, finance, insurance, real
estate, business services 9%, transport, storage, communications 8%,
agriculture, hunting, forestry, fishing 1%, electricity, gas, water 1%
(1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 3% (1995)

Budget:
revenues: $5.46 billion
expenditures: $5.44 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: banking, iron and steel, food processing, chemicals, metal
products, engineering, tires, glass, aluminum

Industrial production growth rate: 3.3% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 1.2 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 1.2 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 13,443 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: barley, oats, potatoes, wheat, fruits, wine
grapes; livestock products

Exports:
total value: $7.3 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: finished steel products, chemicals, rubber products,
glass, aluminum, other industrial products
partners : Germany 28%, France 18%, Belgium 15%, UK 7%, Netherlands 5%

Imports:
total value: $9.1 million (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: minerals, metals, foodstuffs, quality consumer goods
partners: Belgium 38%, Germany 25%, France 11%, Netherlands 4%

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $50 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Luxembourg franc (LuxF) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Luxembourg francs (LuxF) per US$1 - 30.067 (January
1997), 30.962 (1996), 29.480 (1995), 33.456 (1994), 34.597 (1993),
32.150 (1992); note - the Luxembourg franc is at par with the Belgian
franc, which circulates freely in Luxembourg

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Luxembourg:Communications

Telephones: 221,900 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: highly developed, completely automated and efficient
system, mainly buried cables
domestic: nationwide cellular telephone system; buried cable
international: 3 channels leased on TAT-6 coaxial submarine cable
(Europe to North America)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 0, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: 230,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 plus 1 direct-broadcast satellite
link

Televisions: 100,500 (1993 est.)

@Luxembourg:Transportation

Railways:
total: 275 km
standard gauge : 275 km 1.435-m gauge (262 km electrified; 178 km
double track) (1995)

Highways:
total : 5,137 km
paved: 5,086 km (including 123 km of expressways)
unpaved: 51 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 37 km; Moselle

Pipelines: petroleum products 48 km

Ports and harbors: Mertert

Merchant marine:
total: 32 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 858,861 GRT/1,188,457 DWT
ships by type: bulk 1, chemical tanker 5, container 2, liquefied gas
tanker 12, oil tanker 4, passenger 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6 (1996
est.)

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
over 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, National Gendarmerie

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 107,842 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 88,733 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 2,337 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $142 million (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 0.8% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

MACAU

(overseas territory of Portugal)

@Macau:Geography

Location: Eastern Asia, bordering the South China Sea and China

Geographic coordinates: 22 10 N, 113 33 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total : 16 sq km
land: 16 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.1 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
total: 0.34 km
border countries: China 0.34 km

Coastline: 40 km

Maritime claims: not specified

Climate: subtropical; marine with cool winters, warm summers

Terrain: generally flat

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: South China Sea 0 m
highest point: Coloane Alto 174 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other : 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Ozone Layer Protection (extended from Portugal)
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: essentially urban; one causeway and two bridges
connect the two islands to the peninsula on mainland

@Macau:People

Population: 502,325 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 23% (male 60,270; female 56,803)
15-64 years: 68% (male 169,850; female 171,551)
65 years and over: 9% (male 18,208; female 25,643) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.05% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 13.78 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.41 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.09 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.71 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 80.05 years
male: 77.57 years
female : 82.65 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.53 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Macanese (singular and plural)
adjective: Macau

Ethnic groups: Chinese 95%, Portuguese 3%, other 2%

Religions: Buddhist 45%, Roman Catholic 7%, Protestant 1%, none 45.8%,
other 1.2% (1981)

Languages: Portuguese, Chinese (Cantonese)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 90%
male: 93%
female: 86% (1981 est.)

@Macau:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Macau
local long form: none
local short form : Ilha de Macau

Data code: MC

Dependency status: overseas territory of Portugal; note - scheduled to
revert to China on 20 December 1999

Government type: NA

National capital: Macau

Administrative divisions: 2 districts (concelhos, singular -
concelho); Ilhas, Macau

Independence: none (territory of Portugal; Portugal signed an
agreement with China on 13 April 1987 to return Macau to China on 20
December 1999; in the joint declaration, China promises to respect
Macau's existing social and economic systems and lifestyle for 50
years after transition)

National holiday: Day of Portugal, 10 June (1580)

Constitution: 17 February 1976, Organic Law of Macau; basic law
drafted primarily by Beijing, promulgated 31 March 1993

Legal system: Portuguese civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President of Portugal Jorge SAMPAIO (since 9 March
1996)
head of government: Governor General Vasco Joachim Rocha VIERA (since
20 March 1991)
cabinet: Consultative Council consists of a total of 15 members - five
appointed by the governor, two nominated by the governor, five elected
for a four-year term (two represent administrative bodies, one
represents moral, cultural, and welfare interests, and two represent
economic interests), and three statutory members
elections: none; governor general appointed by the president of
Portugal after consultation with the Legislative Assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly (23 seats; 8
elected by popular vote, 8 by indirect vote, and 7 appointed by the
governor; members serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 22 September 1996 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, consisting of five magistrates
including the president; lower court judges appointed for three-year
terms by the governor

Political parties and leaders: Association to Defend the Interests of
Macau, leader NA; Macau Democratic Center, leader NA; Group to Study
the Development of Macau, leader NA; Macau Independent Group, leader
NA

Political pressure groups and leaders: wealthy Macanese and Chinese
representing local interests, wealthy procommunist merchants
representing China's interests; in January 1967 the Macau Government
acceded to Chinese demands that gave China veto power over
administration

International organization participation: CCC, ESCAP (associate), IMO
(associate), Interpol (subbureau), WMO, WToO (associate), WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (Chinese territory under
Portuguese administration)

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US has no offices in Macau,
and US interests are monitored by the US Consulate General in Hong
Kong

Flag description: the flag of Portugal is used

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is based largely on tourism (including
gambling) and textile and fireworks manufacturing. Efforts to
diversify have spawned other small industries - toys, artificial
flowers, and electronics. The tourist sector has accounted for roughly
25% of GDP, and the clothing industry has provided about two-thirds of
export earnings; the gambling industry probably represents over 40% of
GDP. Macau depends on China for most of its food, fresh water, and
energy imports. Japan and Hong Kong are the main suppliers of raw
materials and capital goods.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $6.8 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $13,600 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5.5% (first half 1996)

Labor force:
total : 180,000 (1986)
by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: 2% (1992 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $305 million
expenditures: $298 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1989 est.)

Industries: clothing, textiles, toys, plastic products, furniture,
tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 260,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 1.2 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,750 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, vegetables

Exports:
total value: $1.99 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: textiles, clothing, toys
partners: US 42%, Hong Kong 10%, Germany 9.9%, China 9.6%, France 8%,
UK 7.2% (1995)

Imports:
total value : $1.99 billion (c.i.f.,1996 est.)
commodities: raw materials, foodstuffs, capital goods
partners: Hong Kong 33%, China 20%, Japan 18% (1992 est.)

Debt - external: $0 (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 pataca (P) = 100 avos

Exchange rates: patacas (P) per US$1 - 7.962 (1996), 8.034 (1993-95),
7.973 (1992); note - linked to the Hong Kong dollar at the rate of
1.03 patacas per Hong Kong dollar

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Macau:Communications

Telephones: 170,021 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: fairly modern communication facilities maintained
for domestic and international services
domestic: NA
international: HF radiotelephone communication facility; access to
international communications carriers provided via Hong Kong and
China; satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 135,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0
note: TV programs received from Hong Kong

Televisions: 34,000 (1992 est.)

@Macau:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 97 km
paved : 97 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Macau

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
over 3,047 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: NA

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 144,117 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 79,819 (1997 est.)

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Portugal

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

MACEDONIA,
Yugoslav Republic of]

@Macedonia,:Geography

Location: Southeastern Europe, north of Greece

Geographic coordinates: 41 50 N, 22 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total : 25,333 sq km
land: 24,856 sq km
water: 477 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Vermont

Land boundaries:
total: 748 km
border countries: Albania 151 km, Bulgaria 148 km, Greece 228 km,
Serbia and Montenegro 221 km (all with Serbia)

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: hot, dry summers and autumns and relatively cold winters with
heavy snowfall

Terrain: mountainous territory covered with deep basins and valleys;
there are three large lakes, each divided by a frontier line; country
bisected by the Vardar River

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Vardar River 50 m
highest point: Korab 2,753 m

Natural resources: chromium, lead, zinc, manganese, tungsten, nickel,
low-grade iron ore, asbestos, sulfur, timber

Land use:
arable land: 24%
permanent crops : 2%
permanent pastures: 25%
forests and woodland: 39%
other: 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 830 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: high seismic risks

Environment - current issues: air pollution from metallurgical plants

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked; major transportation corridor from
Western and Central Europe to Aegean Sea and Southern Europe to
Western Europe

@Macedonia,:People

Population: 1,995,859 (July 1997 est.)
note: the Macedonian government census of July 1994 put the population
at 1.94 million, but ethnic allocations were likely undercounted

Age structure:
0-14 years: 24% (male 245,923; female 231,621)
15-64 years: 67% (male 670,535; female 665,556)
65 years and over : 9% (male 82,285; female 99,939) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.68% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 15.88 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.13 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.01 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.08 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.82 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 20.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 72.48 years
male: 70.41 years
female: 74.71 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.07 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Macedonian(s)
adjective: Macedonian

Ethnic groups: Macedonian 65%, Albanian 22%, Turkish 4%, Serb 2%,
Gypsies 3%, other 4%

Religions: Eastern Orthodox 67%, Muslim 30%, other 3%

Languages: Macedonian 70%, Albanian 21%, Turkish 3%, Serbo-Croatian
3%, other 3%

Literacy: NA

@Macedonia,:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
conventional short form: none
local long form: Republika Makedonija
local short form: Makedonija
abbreviation: FYROM

Data code: MK

Government type: emerging democracy

National capital: Skopje

Administrative divisions: 34 counties (opstinas, singular - opstina)
Berovo, Bitola, Brod, Debar, Delcevo, Gevgelija, Gostivar, Kavadarci,
Kicevo, Kocani, Kratovo, Kriva Palanka, Krusevo, Kumanovo, Murgasevo,
Negotino, Ohrid, Prilep, Probistip, Radovis, Resen, Skopje-Centar,
Skopje-Cair, Skopje-Karpos, Skopje-Kisela Voda, Skopje-Gazi Baba,
Stip, Struga, Strumica, Sveti Nikole, Tetovo, Titov Veles, Valandovo,
Vinica
note: in September 1996, the Macedonian Parliament passed legislation
changing the territorial division of the country; names of the 123 new
municipalities are not yet available

Independence: 17 September 1991 (from Yugoslavia)

National holiday: 8 September

Constitution: adopted 17 November 1991, effective 20 November 1991

Legal system: based on civil law system; judicial review of
legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Kiro GLIGOROV (since 27 January 1991)
head of government: Prime Minister Branko CRVENKOVSKI (since 4
September 1992)
cabinet: Council of Ministers elected by the majority vote of all the
deputies in the Assembly; note - after the withdrawal of the Liberal
Party (LP) from the ruling coalition in early 1996, the Council of
Ministers was reorganized without LP participation
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 16 October 1994 (next to be held NA 1999)
election results: Kiro GLIGOROV elected president; percent of vote -
NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Assembly or Sobranje (120 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 16 and 30 October 1994 (next to be held NA
November 1998)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
SDSM 58, LP 29, SP 8, PDP 10, NDP 4, independents 7, other 4; note -
since October 1994 elections, some members of the Assembly have
changed their party affiliation; the seating as of January 1997 is as
follows: SDSM 61, LP 27, SP 6, PDP 11, NDP 2, PDPA 5, independents 3,
other 5

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, judges are elected by the
Judicial Council; Judicial Court of the Republic, judges are elected
by the Judicial Council

Political parties and leaders: Social-Democratic Alliance of Macedonia
or SDSM (former Communist Party) [Branko CRVENKOVSKI, president];
Party for Democratic Prosperity or PDP [Abdurahman ALITI, president];
National Democratic Party or NDP [Ilijas HALIMI, president]; Liberal
Party or LP [Stojan ANDOV, president]; Socialist Party of Macedonia or
SP [Ljubislav IVANOV-ZINGO, president]; Internal Macedonian
Revolutionary Organization - Democratic Party for Macedonian National
Unity or VMRO-DPMNE [Ljupco GEORGIEVSKI, president]; Democratic Party
or DP [Petar GOSEV, president]; Party for Democratic Prosperity of
Albanians or PDPA [Arben XHAFFERI, president]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Movement for All Macedonian
Action or MAAK; Democratic Party of Serbs; Democratic Party of Turks;
Party for Democratic Action (Slavic Muslim)

International organization participation: CCC, CE, CEI, EBRD, ECE,
FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat
(nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NACC, PFP, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Ljubica Z. ACEVSKA
chancery: 3050 K Street, NW, Suite 210, Washington, DC 20007
telephone: [1] (202) 337 3063
FAX: [1] (202) 337 3093

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Christopher Robert HILL (18 July 1996)
embassy: Ilindenska BB, 9100 Skopje
mailing address: American Embassy Skopje, Department of State,
Washington, DC 20521-7120 (pouch)
telephone : [389] (91) 116-180
FAX: [389] (91) 117-103

Flag description: a rising yellow sun with 8 rays extending to the
edges of the red field

Economy

Economy - overview: The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
although the poorest republic in the former Yugoslav federation, can
meet basic food and energy needs through its own agricultural and coal
resources. The economy slowly rebounded in 1996 after years of
recession. Continued recovery depends on Macedonia's ability to
redevelop trade ties with Greece and Serbia and Montenegro; as well as
on Skopje's continued commitment to economic liberalization. The
economy depends on outside sources for all of its oil and gas and most
of its modern machinery and parts. An important supplement of GDP is
the remittances from thousands of Macedonians working in Germany and
other West European nations.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $2 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.1% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $960 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 24%
industry: 44%
services : 32%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 591,773 (June 1994)
by occupation: manufacturing and mining 40% (1992)

Unemployment rate: 38% (1996 est.); note - many employed workers are,
in fact, furloughees

Budget:
revenues : $1.06 billion
expenditures: $1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1996
est.)

Industries: coal, metallic chromium, lead, zinc, ferronickel,
textiles, wood products, tobacco

Industrial production growth rate: 3.4% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 1.38 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 5.22 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,408 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, tobacco, wheat, corn, millet, cotton,
sesame, mulberry leaves, citrus, vegetables; beef, pork, poultry,
mutton

Exports:
total value: $900 million (1996 est.)
commodities: food, beverage, tobacco 17.0%, machinery and transport
equipment 13.3%, other manufactured goods 58%
partners : Bulgaria, other former Yugoslav republics, Germany, Italy

Imports:
total value: $1.4 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: machinery and equipment 19%, chemicals 14%, fuels 12%
partners: other former Yugoslav republics, Germany, Bulgaria, Italy,
Austria

Debt - external: $1.2 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note: US, $10 million (for humanitarian and technical assistance); in
December 1995, the EU agreed to provide a credit line of ECU 21.7
million for investment projects

Currency: 1 Macedonian denar (MKD) = 100 deni

Exchange rates: denar per US$1 - 40.5 (September 1996), 38.8 (December
1995), 39 (November 1994), 865 (October 1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Macedonia,:Communications

Telephones: 125,000

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 369,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 5 (relays 2)

Televisions: 327,011 (1992 est.)

@Macedonia,:Transportation

Railways:
total: 699 km
standard gauge: 699 km 1.435-m gauge (232 km electrified) (1995)

Highways:
total: 8,532 km
paved: 5,401 km (including 133 km of expressways)
unpaved: 3,131 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: none, lake transport only

Pipelines: 0 km

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 16 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 14
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
under 914 m: 12 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Police
Force

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 532,578 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 429,419 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 16,468 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 7 billion denars (1993 est.);
note - conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the
current exchange rate could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: dispute with Greece over name; in September
1995, Skopje and Athens signed an interim accord resolving their
dispute over symbols and certain constitutional provisions; Athens
also lifted its economic embargo on the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; Albanians in Macedonia claim discrimination in education,
access to public-sector jobs and representation in government

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin and
hashish; minor transit point for South American cocaine
______________________________________________________________________

MADAGASCAR

@Madagascar:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, island in the Indian Ocean, east of
Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 20 00 S, 47 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 587,040 sq km
land: 581,540 sq km
water: 5,500 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Arizona

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 4,828 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or 100 nm from the 2,500-m isobath
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical along coast, temperate inland, arid in south

Terrain: narrow coastal plain, high plateau and mountains in center

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Maromokotro 2,876 m

Natural resources: graphite, chromite, coal, bauxite, salt, quartz,
tar sands, semiprecious stones, mica, fish

Land use:
arable land: 4%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures : 41%
forests and woodland: 40%
other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10,870 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic cyclones

Environment - current issues: soil erosion results from deforestation
and overgrazing; desertification; surface water contaminated with raw
sewage and other organic wastes; several species of flora and fauna
unique to the island are endangered

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Marine Life Conservation,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the
Sea

Geography - note: world's fourth-largest island; strategic location
along Mozambique Channel

@Madagascar:People

Population: 14,061,627 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 45% (male 3,188,839; female 3,114,958)
15-64 years : 52% (male 3,608,508; female 3,680,574)
65 years and over: 3% (male 228,230; female 240,518) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.82% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 42.26 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 14.1 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.95 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 92 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 52.53 years
male : 51.4 years
female: 53.7 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.83 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Malagasy (singular and plural)
adjective: Malagasy

Ethnic groups: Malayo-Indonesian (Merina and related Betsileo),
Cotiers (mixed African, Malayo-Indonesian, and Arab ancestry -
Betsimisaraka, Tsimihety, Antaisaka, Sakalava), French, Indian,
Creole, Comoran

Religions: indigenous beliefs 52%, Christian 41%, Muslim 7%

Languages: French (official), Malagasy (official)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 80%
male: 88%
female : 73% (1990 est.)

@Madagascar:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Madagascar
conventional short form: Madagascar
local long form: Republique de Madagascar
local short form: Madagascar
former: Malagasy Republic

Data code: MA

Government type: republic

National capital: Antananarivo

Administrative divisions: 6 provinces (faritany); Antananarivo,
Antsiranana, Fianarantsoa, Mahajanga, Toamasina, Toliary

Independence: 26 June 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 26 June (1960)

Constitution: 19 August 1992 by national referendum

Legal system: based on French civil law system and traditional
Malagasy law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Didier RATSIRAKA; (since 10 February 1997)
note - President Albert ZAFY impeached by the High Constitutional
Court on 5 September 1996; Prime Minister Emmanuel RAKOTOVAHINY served
as interim president until the election of President RATSIRAKA and
then retired from the office of prime minister
head of government: Prime Minister Pascal RAKOTOMAVO (since 21
February 1997)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 29 December 1996 (next to be held NA 2002); prime
minister appointed by the president from a list of candidates
nominated by the National Assembly
election results: percent of the popular vote for president - Didier
RATSIRAKA (AREMA) 50.7%, Albert ZAFY (UNDD) 49.3%; percent of the
National Assembly vote for prime minister - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate or
Senat (two-thirds of upper house seats are to be filled from popularly
elected regional assemblies; the remaining third is to be filled by
presidential appointment; members serve four-year terms) and the
National Assembly or Assemblee Nationale (138 seats; members are
directly elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: National Assembly - last held 16 June 1993 (next to be held
3 August 1997)
election results: National Assembly - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - CFV coalition 76, PMDM/MFM 16, CSCD 11, Famima 10,
RPSD 7, various pro-Ratsiraka groups 10, others 8
note: the Senate has never been established because the regional
assemblies have not been formed and are not expected to be formed
before late in 1997, following a national referendum on a new
constitution

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme); High Constitutional
Court (Haute Cour Constitutionnelle)

Political parties and leaders: Committee of Living Forces or CFV, an
alliance of National Union for Development and Democracy or UNDD
[Emmanuel RAKOTOVAHINY, president], Support Committee for Democracy
and Development in Madagascar or CSDDM [Francisque RAVONY, president],
Action and Reflection Group for the Development of Madagascar or GRAD,
Congress Party for Madagascar Independence-Renewal or AKFM-Fanavaozana
[Richard ANDRIAMANJATO, president], and some 12 other parties, trade
unions, and religious groups; Association of United Malagasys or
Famima [Didier RATSIRAKA, leader]; Confederation of Civil Societies
for Development or CSCD [Guy Willy RAZANAMASY]; Militant Party for the
Development of Madagascar or PMDM/MFM, formerly the Movement for
Proletarian Power [Manandafy RAKOTONIRINA]; Rally for Social Democracy
or RPSD [Evariste MARSON, president]

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Council of Christian
Churches or FFKM; Federalist Movement

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA,
FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Pierrot Jocelyn RAJAONARIVELO
chancery: 2374 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 265-5525, 5526
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Vicki J. HUDDLESTON
embassy : 14-16 Rue Rainitovo, Antsahavola, Antananarivo
mailing address: B. P. 620, Antananarivo
telephone: [261] (2) 212-57, 200-89, 207-18
FAX: [261] (2) 234-539

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and green
with a vertical white band of the same width on hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: Madagascar suffers from chronic malnutrition,
underfunded health and education facilities, a roughly 3% annual
population growth rate, and severe loss of forest cover, accompanied
by erosion. Agriculture, including fishing and forestry, is the
mainstay of the economy, accounting for 33% of GDP and contributing
more than 70% to export earnings. Industry features the processing of
agricultural products and textile manufacturing. Growth in output in
1992-95 averaged only 1.4%, less than half the growth rate of the
population. Growth has been held back by antigovernment strikes and
demonstrations, a decline in world coffee demand, and the erratic
commitment of the government to economic reform. Formidable obstacles
stand in the way of Madagascar's realizing its considerable growth
potential; the extent of government reforms, outside financial aid,
and foreign investment will be key determinants.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $12.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $880 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 33%
industry: 15%
services: 52% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 47% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 4.9 million
by occupation : agriculture 45,500, domestic service 29,750, industry
26,250, commerce 24,500, construction 19,250, service 15,750,
transportation 10,500, other 3,500 (1985 est.)
note: 175,000 workers (3.6% of the total work force) earn money wages;
4,725,000 workers receive no monetary wage (of these, 91% are engaged
in subsistence agriculture)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $250 million
expenditures: $265 million, including capital expenditures of $180
million (1991 est.)

Industries: meat processing, soap, breweries, tanneries, sugar,
textiles, glassware, cement, automobile assembly plant, paper,
petroleum, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 3.8% (1993 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 208,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 450 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 36 kWh (1992)

Agriculture - products: coffee, vanilla, sugarcane, cloves, cocoa,
rice, cassava (tapioca), beans, bananas, peanuts; livestock products

Exports:
total value: $493 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: coffee 45%, vanilla 20%, cloves, shellfish, sugar,
petroleum products (1995 est.)
partners : France 41%, US, Japan, Italy (1995)

Imports:
total value: $612 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : intermediate manufactures 30%, capital goods 28%,
petroleum 15%, consumer goods 14%, food 13% (1995 est.)
partners: France 40%, Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, US (1995)

Debt - external: $4.4 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $454 million (1992-96)

Currency: 1 Malagasy franc (FMG) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Malagasy francs (FMG) per US$1 - 3,950 (November
1996), 3,974.9 (August 1996), 4,265.6 (1995), 3,067.3 (1994), 1,913.8
(1993), 1,864.0 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Madagascar:Communications

Telephones: 96,000 (1988 est.)

Telephone system: system is above average for Africa
domestic: open-wire lines, coaxial cables, microwave radio relay, and
tropospheric scatter links
international: submarine cable to Bahrain; satellite earth stations -
1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean) and 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 17, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 2.565 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (repeaters 36)

Televisions: 260,000 (1992 est.)

@Madagascar:Transportation

Railways:
total : 883 km
narrow gauge: 883 km 1.000-m gauge (1994)

Highways:
total: 49,837 km
paved: 5,731 km
unpaved : 44,106 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: of local importance only; isolated streams and small
portions of Canal des Pangalanes

Ports and harbors: Antsiranana, Antsohimbondrona, Mahajanga,
Toamasina, Toliara

Merchant marine:
total: 10 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 20,624 GRT/28,621 DWT
ships by type: cargo 4, chemical tanker 1, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil
tanker 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 (1996 est.)

Airports: 105 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 58
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m : 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 21
under 914 m: 31 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 47
1,524 to 2,437 m : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 45 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Popular Armed Forces (includes Intervention Forces,
Development Forces, Aeronaval Forces - includes Navy and Air Force),
Gendarmerie, Presidential Security Regiment

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 3,204,200 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,903,268 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 136,216 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $29 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims Bassas da India, Europa Island,
Glorioso Islands, Juan de Nova Island, and Tromelin Island (all
administered by France)

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis (cultivated and wild
varieties) used mostly for domestic consumption; transshipment point
for heroin
______________________________________________________________________

MALAWI

@Malawi:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, east of Zambia

Geographic coordinates: 13 30 S, 34 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 118,480 sq km
land: 94,080 sq km
water: 24,400 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Pennsylvania

Land boundaries:
total: 2,881 km
border countries: Mozambique 1,569 km, Tanzania 475 km, Zambia 837 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; rainy season (November to May); dry season (May to
November)

Terrain: narrow elongated plateau with rolling plains, rounded hills,
some mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: junction of the Shire River and international boundary
with Mozambique 37 m
highest point: Mount Mlanje Sapitwa 3,002 m

Natural resources: limestone, unexploited deposits of uranium, coal,
and bauxite

Land use:
arable land: 18%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 20%
forests and woodland: 39%
other: 23% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 280 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: deforestation; land degradation; water
pollution from agricultural runoff, sewage, industrial wastes;
siltation of spawning grounds endangers fish populations

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life
Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography - note: landlocked

@Malawi:People

Population: 9,609,081 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 46% (male 2,210,871; female 2,190,564)
15-64 years: 51% (male 2,430,178; female 2,520,608)
65 years and over: 3% (male 109,010; female 147,850) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.57% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 40.79 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 25.08 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)
note: the return of refugees to Mozambique is apparently complete

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.74 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 138.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 35.26 years
male: 34.86 years
female: 35.68 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.77 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Malawian(s)
adjective: Malawian

Ethnic groups: Chewa, Nyanja, Tumbuko, Yao, Lomwe, Sena, Tonga, Ngoni,
Ngonde, Asian, European

Religions: Protestant 55%, Roman Catholic 20%, Muslim 20%, traditional
indigenous beliefs

Languages: English (official), Chichewa (official), other languages
important regionally

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 56.4%
male: 71.9%
female: 41.8% (1995 est.)

@Malawi:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Malawi
conventional short form: Malawi
former: Nyasaland

Data code: MI

Government type: multiparty democracy

National capital: Lilongwe

Administrative divisions: 24 districts; Blantyre, Chikwawa,
Chiradzulu, Chitipa, Dedza, Dowa, Karonga, Kasungu, Lilongwe, Machinga
(Kasupe), Mangochi, Mchinji, Mulanje, Mwanza, Mzimba, Ntcheu, Nkhata
Bay, Nkhotakota, Nsanje, Ntchisi, Rumphi, Salima, Thyolo, Zomba

Independence: 6 July 1964 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day 6 July (1964); Republic Day 6 July
(1966)

Constitution: 18 May 1995

Legal system: based on English common law and customary law; judicial
review of legislative acts in the Supreme Court of Appeal; has not
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Bakili MULUZI (since 21 May 1994); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Bakili MULUZI (since 21 May 1994); note
- the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet named by the president
elections : president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 17 May 1994 (next to be held by May 1999)
election results: Bakili MULUZI elected president; percent of vote -
NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (177 seats; members
are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 17 May 1994 (next to be held by May 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - UDF
84, AFORD 33, MCP 55, others 5; note - because of defections and
byelections, the seats in the National Assembly were held at the end
of the year as follows: UDF 84, MCP 47, AFORD 34, independents 8, and
vacant 4
note : the constitution of 18 May 1995, in addition to reducing the
age at which universal suffrage is conferred from 21 to 18 years,
provided for a bicameral legislature; by 1999, in addition to the
existing National Assembly, a Senate of 80 seats is to be elected

Judicial branch: High Court; Supreme Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders:
ruling party: United Democratic Front or UDF [Bakili MULUZI]
opposition groups: Alliance for Democracy or AFORD [Chakufwa CHIHANA];
Congress for the Second Republic or CSR [Kanyama CHIUME]; Malawi
Congress Party or MCP [Hastings KAMURU BANDA, president/Gwanda
CHAKAUMBA, vice president]; Malawi Democratic Party or MDP [Kampelo
KALUA, president]; People Democratic Party or PDP [Rolf PATEL]; Social
Democratic Party or SDP [Eston KAKHOME, president]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAU, SADC, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Willie CHOKANI
chancery: 2408 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 797-1007

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Peter R. CHAVEAS
embassy : address NA, in new capital city development area in Lilongwe
mailing address: P. O. Box 30016, Lilongwe 3, Malawi
telephone: [265] 783 166
FAX: [265] 780 471

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of black (top), red,
and green with a radiant, rising, red sun centered in the black band

Economy

Economy - overview: Landlocked Malawi ranks among the world's least
developed countries. The economy is predominately agricultural, with
about 90% of the population living in rural areas. Agriculture
accounts for 45% of GDP and 90% of export revenues. The economy
depends on substantial inflows of economic assistance from the IMF,
the World Bank, and individual donor nations. The new government faces
strong challenges, e.g., to spur exports, to improve educational and
health facilities, and to deal with environmental problems of
deforestation and erosion.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $7.5 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 45%
industry: 30%
services: 25% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 83.3% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 3.5 million
by occupation : agriculture 86%, wage earners 14% (1990 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $530 million
expenditures: $674 million, including capital expenditures of $129
million (1993)

Industries: tea, tobacco, sugar, sawmill products, cement, consumer
goods

Industrial production growth rate: 1% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 190,000 kW (1993)

Electricity - production: 782 million kWh (1993)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 67 kWh (1993)

Agriculture - products: tobacco, sugarcane, cotton, tea, corn,
potatoes, cassava (tapioca), sorghum, pulses; cattle, goats

Exports:
total value : $431 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: tobacco, tea, sugar, coffee, peanuts, wood products
partners: US, South Africa, Germany, Japan

Imports:
total value: $348 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: food, petroleum products, semimanufactures, consumer
goods, transportation equipment
partners : South Africa, Zimbabwe, Japan, US, UK, Germany

Debt - external: $2.2 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: donor pledges, $332 million (1996)

Currency: 1 Malawian kwacha (MK) = 100 tambala

Exchange rates: Malawian kwacha (MK) per US$1 - 15.3118 (September
1996), 15.2837 (1995), 8.7364 (1994), 4.4028 (1993), 3.6033 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Malawi:Communications

Telephones: 43,000 (1985 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : fair system of open-wire lines, microwave radio relay
links, and radiotelephone communications stations
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
and 1 Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 10, FM 17, shortwave 0

Radios: 1.011 million (1995)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1987 est.)

Televisions: NA

@Malawi:Transportation

Railways:
total: 789 km
narrow gauge: 789 km 1.067-m gauge

Highways:
total: 49,837 km
paved : 5,731 km
unpaved: 44,106 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: Lake Nyasa (Lake Malawi); Shire River, 144 km

Ports and harbors: Chipoka, Monkey Bay, Nkhata Bay, Nkhotakota

Airports: 41 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 26
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 4
under 914 m: 20 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 15
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 14 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army (includes Air Wing and Naval Detachment),
Police (includes paramilitary Mobile Force Unit)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,163,056 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,106,487 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $10.4 million (FY94/95)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: dispute with Tanzania over the boundary in
Lake Nyasa (Lake Malawi)
______________________________________________________________________

MALAYSIA

@Malaysia:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, peninsula and northern one-third of the
island of Borneo, bordering Indonesia and the South China Sea, south
of Vietnam

Geographic coordinates: 2 30 N, 112 30 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 329,750 sq km
land : 328,550 sq km
water: 1,200 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than New Mexico

Land boundaries:
total: 2,669 km
border countries: Brunei 381 km, Indonesia 1,782 km, Thailand 506 km

Coastline: 4,675 km (Peninsular Malaysia 2,068 km, East Malaysia 2,607
km)

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation;
specified boundary in the South China Sea
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; annual southwest (April to October) and northeast
(October to February) monsoons

Terrain: coastal plains rising to hills and mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Kinabalu 4,100 m

Natural resources: tin, petroleum, timber, copper, iron ore, natural
gas, bauxite

Land use:
arable land: 3%
permanent crops: 12%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 68%
other : 17% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 3,400 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding, landslides

Environment - current issues: air pollution from industrial and
vehicular emissions; water pollution from raw sewage; deforestation

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

Geography - note: strategic location along Strait of Malacca and
southern South China Sea

@Malaysia:People

Population: 20,491,303 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 36% (male 3,776,400; female 3,587,445)
15-64 years: 60% (male 6,153,173; female 6,171,287)
65 years and over: 4% (male 350,523; female 452,475) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.15% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 26.94 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.43 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.78 male(s)/female
total population : 1.01 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 23.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 70.06 years
male: 67.08 years
female: 73.22 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.4 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Malaysian(s)
adjective: Malaysian

Ethnic groups: Malay and other indigenous 58%, Chinese 26%, Indian 7%,
others 9%

Religions: Peninsular Malaysia - Muslim (Malays), Buddhist (Chinese),
Hindu (Indians); Sabah - Muslim 38%, Christian 17%, other 45%; Sarawak
- tribal religion 35%, Buddhist and Confucianist 24%, Muslim 20%,
Christian 16%, other 5%

Languages: Peninsular Malaysia - Malay (official), English, Chinese
dialects, Tamil; Sabah - English, Malay, numerous tribal dialects,
Chinese (Mandarin and Hakka dialects predominate); Sarawak - English,
Malay, Mandarin, numerous tribal languages

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 83.5%
male: 89.1%
female : 78.1% (1995 est.)

@Malaysia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Malaysia
former : Malayan Union

Data code: MY

Government type: constitutional monarchy
note: Federation of Malaysia formed 9 July 1963; nominally headed by
the paramount ruler (king) and a bicameral Parliament; Peninsular
Malaysian states - hereditary rulers in all but Melaka, where
governors are appointed by Malaysian Government; powers of state
governments are limited by the federal constitution; Sabah -
self-governing state, holds 20 seats in House of Representatives, with
foreign affairs, defense, internal security, and other powers
delegated to federal government; Sarawak - self-governing state, holds
27 seats in House of Representatives, with foreign affairs, defense,
internal security, and other powers delegated to federal government

National capital: Kuala Lumpur

Administrative divisions: 13 states (negeri-negeri, singular - negeri)
and 2 federal territories* (wilayah-wilayah persekutuan, singular -
wilayah persekutuan); Johor, Kedah, Kelantan, Labuan*, Melaka, Negeri
Sembilan, Pahang, Perak, Perlis, Pulau Pinang, Sabah, Sarawak,
Selangor, Terengganu, Wilayah Persekutuan*

Independence: 31 August 1957 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 31 August (1957)

Constitution: 31 August 1957, amended 16 September 1963

Legal system: based on English common law; judicial review of
legislative acts in the Supreme Court at request of supreme head of
the federation; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Paramount Ruler TUANKU JA'AFAR ibni Al-Marhum Tuanku
Abdul Rahman (since 26 April 1994) and Deputy Paramount Ruler Sultan
TUNKU SALAHUDDIN Abdul Aziz Shah ibni Al-Marhum Sultan Hisammuddin
Alam Shah (since 26 April 1994)
head of government : Prime Minister Dr. MAHATHIR bin Mohamad (since 16
July 1981); Deputy Prime Minister ANWAR bin Ibrahim (since 1 December
1993)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the paramount ruler from among the
members of Parliament
elections: paramount ruler and deputy paramount ruler elected by and
from the hereditary rulers of nine of the states for five-year terms;
election last held 4 February 1994 (next to be held NA 1999); prime
minister appointed by the paramount ruler
election results: TUANKU JA'AFAR ibni Al-Marhum Tuanku Abdul Rahman
elected paramount ruler; percent of vote - NA; Sultan TUNKU SALAHUDDIN
Abdul Aziz Shah ibni Al-Marhum Sultan Hisammuddin Alam Shah elected
deputy paramount ruler; percent of vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Parlimen consists of the
Senate or Dewan Negara (69 seats; 43 appointed by the paramount ruler,
26 elected by the state legislatures; elected members serve six-year
terms) and the House of Representatives or Dewan Rakyat (192 seats;
members elected by popular vote directly weighted toward the rural
Malay population to serve five-year terms)
elections : Senate - last held NA April 1995 (next to be held by
2000); House of Representatives - last held 24-25 April 1995 (next to
be held by 2000)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - NA; House of Representatives - percent of vote by party -
National Front 63%, other 37%; seats by party - National Front 162,
DAP 9, PBS 8, PAS 7, Spirit of '46 6

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed by the paramount
ruler

Political parties and leaders:
Peninsular Malaysia: National Front, a confederation of 14 political
parties dominated by United Malays National Organization Baru (UMNO
Baru), MAHATHIR bin Mohamad; Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA), LING
Liong Sik; Gerakan Rakyat Malaysia, LIM Keng Yaik; Malaysian Indian
Congress (MIC), S. Samy VELLU; major opposition parties are Parti
Islam SeMalaysia (PAS), Ustaz Fadzil Mohamed NOOR and the Democratic
Action Party (DAP), CHEN Man Hin
Sabah : National Front, dominated by the UMNO; Sabah Progressive Party
(SAPP), Datuk YONG Teck Lee; Parti Democratic Sabah (PDS), Bernard
DOMPOK; Parti Bersatu Rakyat Sabah (PBRS), Datuk Joseph KURUP
Sarawak: National Front, composed of the Party Pesaka Bumiputra
Bersatu (PBB), Datuk Patinggi Haji Abdul TAIB Mahmud; Sarawak United
People's Party (SUPP), Datuk Amar Stephen YONG Kuat Tze; Sarawak
National Party (SNAP), Datuk Amar James WONG; Parti Bansa Dayak
Sarawak (PBDS), Datuk Leo MOGGIE; major opposition party is Democratic
Action Party (DAP), LIM Kit Siang
note: subsequent to the election, the following parties were dissolved
- Spirit of '46 (Semangat '46), Tengku Tan Sri RAZALEIGH, president,
and Sabah United Party (Parti Bersatu Sabah, PBS), Datuk Seri Joseph
PAIRIN Kitingan

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, C, CCC,
CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-15, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol,
IOC, ISO, ITU, Mekong Group, MINURSO, NAM, OIC, UN, UNAVEM III,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNOMIL, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador DALI Mahmud Hashim
chancery: 2401 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 328-2700
FAX : [1] (202) 483-7661
consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador John R. MALOTT
embassy: 376 Jalan Tun Razak, 50400 Kuala Lumpur
mailing address: P. O. Box No. 10035, 50700 Kuala Lumpur or American
Embassy Kuala Lumpur, APO AP 96535-8152
telephone: [60] (3) 248-9011
FAX : [60] (3) 242-2207

Flag description: 14 equal horizontal stripes of red (top) alternating
with white (bottom); there is a blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side
corner bearing a yellow crescent and a yellow fourteen-pointed star;
the crescent and the star are traditional symbols of Islam; the design
was based on the flag of the US

Economy

Economy - overview: The Malaysian economy, a mixture of private
enterprise and public management, has posted a remarkable record of 9%
average annual growth in 1988-96. This growth has resulted in a
substantial reduction in poverty and a marked rise in real wages. In
1996 manufactured goods exports expanded less rapidly than in previous
years because of the global slump in electronics; nonetheless, foreign
investors continue to commit large sums in the economy. The government
is aware of the inflationary potential of this rapid development and
is closely monitoring fiscal and monetary policies.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $214.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 8.2% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $10,750 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 14%
industry: 45%
services: 41% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3.5% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 8.398 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: manufacturing 25%, agriculture, forestry, and fisheries
21%, local trade and tourism 17%, services 12%, government 11%,
construction 8% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 2.6% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $22.6 billion
expenditures: $22 billion, including capital expenditures of $5.3
billion (1996 est.)

Industries: Peninsular Malaysia - rubber and oil palm processing and
manufacturing, light manufacturing industry, electronics, tin mining
and smelting, logging and processing timber; Sabah - logging,
petroleum production; Sarawak - agriculture processing, petroleum
production and refining, logging

Industrial production growth rate: 12% (1994)

Electricity - capacity: 7.83 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 37.85 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,983 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: Peninsular Malaysia - natural rubber, palm
oil, rice; Sabah - subsistence crops, rubber, timber, coconut, rice;
Sarawak - rubber, pepper; timber

Exports:
total value: $84.6 billion (1996)
commodities: electronic equipment, petroleum and petroleum products,
palm oil, wood and wood products, rubber, textiles
partners : US 21%, Singapore 20%, Japan 12%, Hong Kong 5%, UK 4%,
Thailand 4%, Germany 3% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $83.2 billion (1996)
commodities: machinery and equipment, chemicals, food
partners: Japan 27%, US 16%, Singapore 12%, Taiwan 5%, Germany 4%,
South Korea 4% (1995)

Debt - external: $27.5 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $45 million (1993)

Currency: 1 ringgit (M$) = 100 sen

Exchange rates: ringgits (M$) per US$1 - 2.4914 (January 1997), 2.5158
(1996), 2.5044 (1995), 2.6243 (1994), 2.5741 (1993), 2.5474 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Malaysia:Communications

Telephones: 2,550,957 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: international service good
domestic: good intercity service provided on Peninsular Malaysia
mainly by microwave radio relay; adequate intercity microwave radio
relay network between Sabah and Sarawak via Brunei; domestic satellite
system with 2 earth stations
international: submarine cables to India, Hong Kong and Singapore;
satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 1 Pacific
Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 28, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 8.08 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 33

Televisions: 2 million (1993 est.)

@Malaysia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,806 km (Peninsular Malaysia 1,672 km; Sabah 134 km; Sarawak 0
km)
narrow gauge: 1,806 km 1.000-m gauge (Peninsular Malaysia 1,672 km;
Sabah 134 km)

Highways:
total: 93,975 km
paved: 70,481 km (including 575 km of expressways)
unpaved: 23,494 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 7,296 km (Peninsular Malaysia 3,209 km, Sabah 1,569 km,
Sarawak 2,518 km)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,307 km; natural gas 379 km

Ports and harbors: Kota Kinabalu, Kuantan, Kuching, Kudat, Labuan,
Lahad Datu, Lumut, Miri, Pasir Gudang, Penang, Port Dickson, Port
Kelang, Sandakan, Sibu, Tanjong Berhala, Tanjong Kidurong, Tawau

Merchant marine:
total: 299 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,904,915 GRT/5,860,095
DWT
ships by type: bulk 51, cargo 103, chemical tanker 16, combination
bulk 3, container 35, liquefied gas tanker 16, oil tanker 62,
refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 5, short-sea passenger 1,
vehicle carrier 6 (1996 est.)

Airports: 106 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 99
over 3,047 m: 4
2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
1,524 to 2,437 m: 11
914 to 1,523 m : 6
under 914 m: 73 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 7
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Malaysian Army, Royal Malaysian Navy, Royal
Malaysian Air Force, Royal Malaysian Police Force, Marine Police,
Sarawak Border Scouts

Military manpower - military age: 21 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 5,280,741 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 3,201,235 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 184,351 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $2.5 billion (1997)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.6% (1997)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: involved in a complex dispute over the
Spratly Islands with China, Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam, and possibly
Brunei; State of Sabah claimed by the Philippines; Brunei may wish to
purchase the Malaysian salient that divides Brunei into two parts; two
islands in dispute with Singapore; two islands in dispute with
Indonesia

Illicit drugs: transit point for Golden Triangle heroin going to
Western markets despite severe penalties for drug trafficking
______________________________________________________________________

MALDIVES

@Maldives:Geography

Location: Southern Asia, group of atolls in the Indian Ocean,
south-southwest of India

Geographic coordinates: 3 15 N, 73 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total: 300 sq km
land: 300 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 1.7 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 644 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone : 35-310 nm as defined by geographic
coordinates; segment of zone coincides with maritime boundary with
India
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; dry, northeast monsoon (November to
March); rainy, southwest monsoon (June to August)

Terrain: flat, with white sandy beaches

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point : unnamed location on Wilingili 24 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
arable land: 10%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 3%
forests and woodland : 3%
other: 84% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: low level of islands makes them very sensitive to sea
level rise

Environment - current issues: depletion of freshwater aquifers
threatens water supplies

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer
Protection
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography - note: 1,190 coral islands grouped into 26 atolls;
archipelago of strategic location astride and along major sea lanes in
Indian Ocean

@Maldives:People

Population: 280,391 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 47% (male 67,967; female 64,643)
15-64 years : 50% (male 71,316; female 67,993)
65 years and over: 3% (male 4,534; female 3,938) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.47% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 40.98 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.3 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.05 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.15 male(s)/female
total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 44.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 66.86 years
male: 65.23 years
female: 68.58 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.95 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Maldivian(s)
adjective: Maldivian

Ethnic groups: Sinhalese, Dravidian, Arab, African

Religions: Sunni Muslim

Languages: Maldivian Divehi (dialect of Sinhala, script derived from
Arabic), English spoken by most government officials

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 93.2%
male: 93.3%
female: 93% (1995 est.)

@Maldives:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Maldives
conventional short form: Maldives
local long form : Dhivehi Raajjeyge Jumhooriyyaa
local short form: Dhivehi Raajje

Data code: MV

Government type: republic

National capital: Male (Maale)

Administrative divisions: 19 atolls (atholhu, singular and plural) and
1 other first-order administrative division*; Alifu, Baa, Dhaalu,
Faafu, Gaafu Alifu, Gaafu Dhaalu, Gnaviyani, Haa Alifu, Haa Dhaalu,
Kaafu, Laamu, Lhaviyani, Maale*, Meemu, Noonu, Raa, Seenu, Shaviyani,
Thaa, Vaavu

Independence: 26 July 1965 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 26 July (1965)

Constitution: 4 June 1968

Legal system: based on Islamic law with admixtures of English common
law primarily in commercial matters; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM (since 11 November
1978); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
head of government: President Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM (since 11 November
1978); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
cabinet: Ministry of Atolls appointed by the president; note - need
not be members of Majilis
elections : president elected by secret ballot of the Majlis for a
five-year term; election last held 1 October 1993 (next to be held NA
October 1998)
election results: President Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM reelected; percent of
Majlis vote - Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM 92.76%

Legislative branch: unicameral Citizens' Council or Majlis (48 seats;
40 elected by popular vote, 8 appointed by the president; members
serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 2 December 1994 (next to be held NA December
1999)
election results : percent of vote - NA; seats - independents 40

Judicial branch: High Court

Political parties and leaders: although political parties are not
banned, none exist

International organization participation: AsDB, C, CCC, CP, ESCAP,
FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IMF, IMO, Intelsat
(nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OIC, SAARC, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: Maldives does not have an embassy
in the US, but does have a Permanent Mission to the UN in New York,
headed by Ahmed ZAKI

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Maldives; the US Ambassador to Sri Lanka is accredited to Maldives
and makes periodic visits there

Flag description: red with a large green rectangle in the center
bearing a vertical white crescent; the closed side of the crescent is
on the hoist side of the flag

Economy

Economy - overview: During the 1980s tourism became one of the most
important and highest growth sectors of the economy. In 1994, tourism,
Maldives largest industry, accounted for about 18% of GDP and more
than 60% of the Maldives' foreign exchange receipts. Fishing is a
second leading growth sector. Over 90% of government tax revenue comes
from import duties and tourism-related taxes. The Maldivian Government
initiated an economic reform program in 1989 initially by lifting
import quotas and opening some exports to the private sector.
Subsequently, it has liberalized regulations to allow more foreign
investment. Agriculture and manufacturing continue to play a minor
role in the economy, constrained by the limited availability of
cultivable land and the shortage of domestic labor. Most staple foods
must be imported. In 1994, industry which consisted mainly of garment
production, boat building, and handicrafts accounted for about 15% of
GDP.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $423 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.8% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,620 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 21.5%
industry: 15.3%
services: 63.2% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7.7% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 56,435 (1990 est.)
by occupation: fishing industry and agriculture 25%, services 21%,
manufacturing and construction 21%, trade, restaurants, and hotels
16%, transportation and communication 10%, other 7%

Unemployment rate: NEGL%

Budget:
revenues: $88 million (excluding foreign grants)
expenditures: $141 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: fish processing, tourism, shipping, boat building, coconut
processing, garments, woven mats, rope, handicrafts, coral and sand
mining

Industrial production growth rate: 6.3% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 18,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 40 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 163 kWh (1994 est.)

Agriculture - products: coconuts, corn, sweet potatoes; fishing

Exports:
total value: $50 million (f.o.b., 199)
commodities: fish, clothing
partners: Sri Lanka, US, Germany, Singapore, UK

Imports:
total value : $268 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: consumer goods, intermediate and capital goods, petroleum
products
partners : Singapore, India, Sri Lanka, Hong Kong, Japan, Thailand

Debt - external: $137.5 million (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 rufiyaa (Rf) = 100 laari

Exchange rates: rufiyaa (Rf) per US$1 - 11.770 (January 1997), 11.770
(1996), 11.770 (1995), 11.586 (1994), 10.957 (1993), 10.569 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Maldives:Communications

Telephones: 8,523 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: minimal domestic and international facilities
domestic: inter-atoll communication primarily through HF transceivers
and VHF/UHF telephones
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 28,284 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 7,309 (1992 est.)

@Maldives:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: NA km
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km; note - Male has 9.6 km of coral highways within the
city (1988 est.)

Ports and harbors: Gan, Male

Merchant marine:
total: 19 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 70,079 GRT/108,455 DWT
ships by type: cargo 17, oil tanker 1, short-sea passenger 1 (1996
est.)

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 0

Military

Military branches: National Security Service (paramilitary police
force)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 61,408 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 34,245 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

MALI

@Mali:Geography

Location: Western Africa, southwest of Algeria

Geographic coordinates: 17 00 N, 4 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total : 1.24 million sq km
land: 1.22 million sq km
water: 20,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
total : 7,243 km
border countries: Algeria 1,376 km, Burkina Faso 1,000 km, Guinea 858
km, Cote d'Ivoire 532 km, Mauritania 2,237 km, Niger 821 km, Senegal
419 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: subtropical to arid; hot and dry February to June; rainy,
humid, and mild June to November; cool and dry November to February

Terrain: mostly flat to rolling northern plains covered by sand;
savanna in south, rugged hills in northeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Senegal River 23 m
highest point: Hombori Tondo 1,155 m

Natural resources: gold, phosphates, kaolin, salt, limestone, uranium,
bauxite, iron ore, manganese, tin, and copper deposits are known but
not exploited

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 25%
forests and woodland: 6%
other: 67% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 780 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dust-laden harmattan haze common during dry
seasons; recurring droughts

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion;
desertification; inadequate supplies of potable water; poaching

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Nuclear Test Ban

Geography - note: landlocked

@Mali:People

Population: 9,788,904 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 47% (male 2,329,669; female 2,307,248)
15-64 years: 50% (male 2,287,769; female 2,546,981)
65 years and over : 3% (male 150,732; female 166,505) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.18% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 50.26 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 19.52 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.1 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.9 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.9 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 124 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 46.56 years
male: 45.25 years
female : 47.9 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 7.09 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Malian(s)
adjective: Malian

Ethnic groups: Mande 50% (Bambara, Malinke, Sarakole), Peul 17%,
Voltaic 12%, Songhai 6%, Tuareg and Moor 10%, other 5%

Religions: Muslim 90%, indigenous beliefs 9%, Christian 1%

Languages: French (official), Bambara 80%, numerous African languages

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 31%
male: 39.4%
female: 23.1% (1995 est.)

@Mali:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Mali
conventional short form: Mali
local long form: Republique de Mali
local short form: Mali
former: French Sudan

Data code: ML

Government type: republic

National capital: Bamako

Administrative divisions: 8 regions (regions, singular - region); Gao,
Kayes, Kidal, Koulikoro, Mopti, Segou, Sikasso, Tombouctou

Independence: 22 September 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Proclamation of the Republic, 22
September (1960)

Constitution: adopted 12 January 1992

Legal system: based on French civil law system and customary law;
judicial review of legislative acts in Constitutional Court (which was
formally established on 9 March 1994); has not accepted compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Alpha Oumar KONARE (since 8 June 1992)
head of government: Prime Minister Ibrahima Boubacar KEITA (since NA
March 1994)
cabinet : Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 11 May 1997 (next to be held NA May 2002); prime
minister appointed by the president
election results: Alpha Oumar KONARE reelected president; percent of
vote - Alpha Oumar KONARE 85.15%, Mamadou DIABY 4.09%, other 10.76%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (116 seats; members
are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 8 March 1992 (next to be held in two rounds on 20
July and 3 August 1997)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
ADEMA 76, CNID 9, US/RAD 8, Popular Movement for the Development of
the Republic of West Africa 6, RDP 4, UDD 4, RDT 3, UFDP 3, PDP 2,
UMDD 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders: Alliance for Democracy or ADEMA
[Ibrahim N'DIAYE]; National Congress for Democratic Initiative or CNID
[Mountaga TALL]; Sudanese Union/African Democratic Rally or US/RDA
[Mamadou Madeira KEITA]; Popular Movement for the Development of the
Republic of West Africa; Rally for Democracy and Progress or RDP
[Almamy SYLLA]; Union for Democracy and Development or UDD [Moussa
Balla COULIBALY]; Rally for Democracy and Labor or RDT; Union of
Democratic Forces for Progress or UFDP [Dembo DIALLO]; Party for
Democracy and Progress or PDP [Idrissa TRAORE]; Malian Union for
Democracy and Development or UMDD; Movement for the Independence,
Renaissance and Integration of Africa or MIRIA [Mohammed Lamine
TRAORE]

Political pressure groups and leaders: United Movement and Fronts of
Azawad or MFUA; Patriotic Movement of the Ghanda Kaye or MPGK

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA,
ECOWAS, FAO, FZ, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN,
UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Cheick Oumar DIARRAH
chancery : 2130 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 332-2249, 939-8950
FAX: [1] (202) 332-6603

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador David P. RAWSON
embassy: Rue Rochester NY and Rue Mohamed V, Bamako
mailing address: B. P. 34, Bamako
telephone: [223] 22 54 70
FAX : [223] 22 37 12

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side),
yellow, and red; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia

Economy

Economy - overview: Mali is among the poorest countries in the world,
with 65% of its land area desert or semidesert. Economic activity is
largely confined to the riverine area irrigated by the Niger. About
10% of the population is nomadic and some 80% of the labor force is
engaged in farming and fishing. Industrial activity is concentrated on
processing farm commodities. Mali is heavily dependent on foreign aid
and vulnerable to fluctuations in world prices for cotton, its main
export. Nonetheless the government has successfully implemented an
IMF-recommended structural adjustment program that is helping the
economy grow, diversify, and attract foreign investment. Mali's
adherence to economic reform, and the 50% devaluation of the African
Franc in January 1994, has pushed up economic growth. Several
multinational corporations increased gold mining operations in 1996
and the government projects that Mali will become a major Sub-Saharan
gold exporter in the next few years.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $5.8 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.2% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $600 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 49%
industry: 17%
services: 34% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 12.7% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 2.666 million (1986 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 80%, services 19%, industry and commerce 1%
(1981)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $730 million
expenditures: $770 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: minor local consumer goods production and food processing;
construction; phosphate and gold mining

Industrial production growth rate: 1% (1994)

Electricity - capacity: 84,100 kW (1990)

Electricity - production: 235 million kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 28 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: cotton, millet, rice, corn, vegetables,
peanuts; cattle, sheep, goats

Exports:
total value: $320 million (f.o.b., 1994)
commodities: cotton, livestock, gold
partners: mostly franc zone and Western Europe

Imports:
total value : $422 million (f.o.b., 1994)
commodities: machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, construction
materials, petroleum, textiles
partners: mostly franc zone and Western Europe

Debt - external: $2.8 billion (1995)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note: beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF
100 per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since
1948

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Mali:Communications

Telephones: 11,000 (1982 est.)

Telephone system: domestic system poor but improving; provides only
minimal service
domestic: network consists of microwave radio relay, open wire, and
radiotelephone communications stations; expansion of microwave radio
relay in progress
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
and 1 Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 430,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 11,000 (1992 est.)

@Mali:Transportation

Railways:
total: 641 km; (linked to Senegal's rail system through Kayes)
narrow gauge: 641 km 1.000-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 14,776 km
paved : 1,773 km
unpaved: 13,003 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,815 km navigable

Ports and harbors: Koulikoro

Airports: 24 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 13
2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m : 7 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 11
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 8 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Air Force, Gendarmerie, Republican Guard,
National Guard, National Police (Surete Nationale)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,976,414 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,129,765 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $66 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.2% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

MALTA

@Malta:Geography

Location: Southern Europe, islands in the Mediterranean Sea, south of
Sicily (Italy)

Geographic coordinates: 35 50 N, 14 35 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total : 320 sq km
land: 320 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Washington,
DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 140 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone : 25 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: Mediterranean with mild, rainy winters and hot, dry summers

Terrain: mostly low, rocky, flat to dissected plains; many coastal
cliffs

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
highest point: Dingli Cliffs 245 m

Natural resources: limestone, salt

Land use:
arable land: 38%
permanent crops: 3%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland : NA%
other: 59% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: very limited natural fresh water
resources; increasing reliance on desalination

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine
Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified : Biodiversity, Desertification

Geography - note: the country comprises an archipelago, with only the
three largest islands (Malta, Gozo, and Comino) being inhabited;
numerous bays provide good harbors

@Malta:People

Population: 377,177 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 21% (male 41,207; female 39,041)
15-64 years: 67% (male 127,553; female 126,355)
65 years and over: 12% (male 18,202; female 24,819) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.68% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 12.47 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.34 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.65 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.73 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.44 years
male: 75.16 years
female: 79.87 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.84 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Maltese (singular and plural)
adjective: Maltese

Ethnic groups: Maltese (descendants of ancient Carthaginians and
Phoenicians, with strong elements of Italian and other Mediterranean
stock)

Religions: Roman Catholic 98%

Languages: Maltese (official), English (official)

Literacy:
definition: age 10 and over can read and write
total population: 88%
male: 88%
female: 88% (1985)

@Malta:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Malta
conventional short form: Malta

Data code: MT

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Valletta

Administrative divisions: none (administered directly from Valletta)

Independence: 21 September 1964 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 21 September (1964)

Constitution: 1964 constitution substantially amended on 13 December
1974

Legal system: based on English common law and Roman civil law; has
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Ugo MIFSUD BONNICI (since 4 April 1994)
head of government : Prime Minister Dr. Alfred SANT (since 28 October
1996); Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Dr. George VELLA
(since 29 October 1996)
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the president on the advice of the
prime minister
elections: president elected by the House of Representatives for a
five-year term; election last held NA April 1994 (next to be held by
NA April 1999); following House of Representatives elections, the
leader of the majority party or leader of a majority coalition is
usually appointed prime minister by the president for a five-year term
election results: Ugo MIFSUD BONNICI elected president; percent of
House of Representatives vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Representatives (usually 65
seats; note - additional seats are given to the party with the largest
popular vote to ensure a legislative majority; current total: 69
seats; members are elected by proportional representation to serve
five-year terms)
elections : last held 26 October 1996 (next to be held by October
2001)
election results: percent of vote by party - MLP 50.7%, NP 46.5%;
seats by party - NP 34, MLP 31 (MLP 35, NP 34 after adjustment)

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, judges are appointed by the
president on the advice of the prime minister; Court of Appeal, judges
are appointed by the president on the advice of the prime minister

Political parties and leaders: Nationalist Party or NP [Edward FENECH
ADAMI]; Malta Labor Party or MLP [Alfred SANT]

International organization participation: C, CCC, CE, EBRD, ECE, EU
(applicant), FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO
(correspondent), ITU, NACC (observer), NAM, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Albert Borg Olivier DE PUGET
chancery: 2017 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 462-3611, 3612
FAX : [1] (202) 387-5470
consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Charles N.
PATTERSON, Jr.
embassy: 2nd Floor, Development House, Saint Anne Street, Floriana,
Malta
mailing address: P. O. Box 535, Valletta
telephone : [356] 235960
FAX: [356] 223322

Flag description: two equal vertical bands of white (hoist side) and
red; in the upper hoist-side corner is a representation of the George
Cross, edged in red

Economy

Economy - overview: Significant resources are limestone, a favorable
geographic location, and a productive labor force. Malta produces only
about 20% of its food needs, has limited freshwater supplies, and has
no domestic energy sources. The economy is dependent on foreign trade,
industry (especially electronics and textiles), and tourism; the
state-owned Malta drydocks employs about 3,800 people. In 1995, over
1.1 million tourists visited the island. Per capita GDP of $12,600
places Malta in the range of the less affluent EU countries. The
island is divided politically over the question of joining the EU.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $4.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $12,600 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 5%
industry: 34%
services : 61% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3% (1996)

Labor force:
total : 148,085 (September 1996)
by occupation: public services 37%, other services 28%, manufacturing
and construction 25%, agriculture 2% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 3.7% (September 1996)

Budget:
revenues : $1.66 billion
expenditures: $1.69 billion, including capital expenditures of $633
million (1996 est.)

Industries: tourism; electronics, ship building and repair,
construction; food and beverages, textiles, footwear, clothing,
tobacco

Industrial production growth rate: -5% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 405,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 1.41 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: potatoes, cauliflower, grapes, wheat, barley,
tomatoes, citrus, cut flowers, green peppers; pork, milk, poultry,
eggs

Exports:
total value: $1.9 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment, clothing and footware,
printed matter
partners: Italy 32%, Germany 16%, UK 8%

Imports:
total value: $3 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: food, petroleum, machinery and semimanufactured goods
partners: Italy 27%, Germany 14%, UK 13%, US 9%

Debt - external: $134 million (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Maltese lira (LM) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Maltese liri (LM) per US$1 - 0.3677 (January 1997),
0.3604 (1996), 0.3529 (1995), 0.3776 (1994), 0.3821 (1993), 0.3178
(1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Malta:Communications

Telephones: 191,876 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: automatic system satisfies normal requirements
domestic: submarine cable and microwave radio relay between islands
international : 2 submarine cables; satellite earth station - 1
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 8, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 189,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1996 est.)

Televisions: 300,000 (1996 est.)

@Malta:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 1,582 km
paved: 1,471 km
unpaved: 111 km (1993 est.)

Ports and harbors: Marsaxlokk, Valletta

Merchant marine:
total : 1,128 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 18,806,358
GRT/31,554,713 DWT
ships by type: bulk 314, cargo 353, chemical tanker 32, combination
bulk 27, combination ore/oil 13, container 43, liquefied gas tanker 2,
livestock carrier 1, multifunction large-load carrier 3, oil tanker
224, passenger 7, passenger-cargo 3, railcar carrier 1, refrigerated
cargo 31, roll-on/roll-off cargo 37, short-sea passenger 22,
specialized tanker 3, vehicle carrier 12
note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 46 countries
among which are Greece 478, Croatia 52, Switzerland 48, Russia 46,
Italy 44, Norway 37, Turkey 28, Germany 23, UK 22, and Ukraine 20
(1996 est.)

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
over 3,047 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Armed Forces, Maltese Police Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 99,032 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 78,710 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $65.5 million (FY96/97)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.7% (FY96/97)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Malta and Tunisia are discussing the
commercial exploitation of the continental shelf between their
countries, particularly for oil exploration

Illicit drugs: minor transshipment point for hashish from North Africa
to Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

MAN, ISLE OF

(British crown dependency)

@Man, Isle of:Geography

Location: Western Europe, island in the Irish Sea, between Great
Britain and Ireland

Geographic coordinates: 54 15 N, 4 30 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
total : 588 sq km
land: 588 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than three times the size of
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 113 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 12 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: cool summers and mild winters; humid; overcast about half the
time

Terrain: hills in north and south bisected by central valley

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Irish Sea 0 m
highest point: Snaefell 620 m

Natural resources: lead, iron ore

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures : NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: NA% (extensive arable land and forests)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: one small islet, the Calf of Man, lies to the
southwest, and is a bird sanctuary

@Man, Isle of:People

Population: 74,504 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 18% (male 6,681; female 6,427)
15-64 years: 65% (male 24,225; female 24,102)
65 years and over : 17% (male 5,198; female 7,871) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.86% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 12.48 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 11.89 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 8.05 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.66 male(s)/female
total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 2.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.36 years
male: 73.79 years
female : 81.09 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.67 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Manxman, Manxwoman
adjective: Manx

Ethnic groups: Manx (Norse-Celtic descent), Briton

Religions: Anglican, Roman Catholic, Methodist, Baptist, Presbyterian,
Society of Friends

Languages: English, Manx Gaelic

Literacy: NA

@Man, Isle of:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Isle of Man

Data code: IM

Dependency status: British crown dependency

Government type: NA

National capital: Douglas

Administrative divisions: none (British crown dependency)

Independence: none (British crown dependency)

National holiday: Tynwald Day, 5 July

Constitution: 1961, Isle of Man Constitution Act

Legal system: English law and local statute

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Lord of Mann Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6
February 1952), represented by Lieutenant Governor His Excellency Sir
Timothy DAUNT (since NA 1995)
head of government: President of the Legislative Council Sir Charles
KERRUISH (since NA 1990)
cabinet : Council of Ministers
elections: the queen is a hereditary monarch; lieutenant governor
appointed by the queen for a five-year term; president of the
Legislative Council elected by the Tynwald for a NA-year term;
election last held NA (next to be held NA)
election results: Sir Charles KERRUISH elected president of the
Legislative Council; percent of legislative vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Tynwald consists of the Legislative
Council (a 10-member body composed of the Lord Bishop of Sodor and
Man, a nonvoting attorney general, and 8 others named by the House of
Keys) and the House of Keys (24 seats; members are elected by popular
vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: House of Keys - last held NA November 1991 (next to be held
NA 1996)
election results: House of Keys - percent of vote by party - NA; seats
by party - independents 24

Judicial branch: High Court of Justice, justices are appointed by the
Lord Chancellor of England on the nomination of the lieutenant
governor

Political parties and leaders: there is no party system; members sit
as independents

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (British crown dependency)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (British crown dependency)

Flag description: red with the Three Legs of Man emblem (Trinacria),
in the center; the three legs are joined at the thigh and bent at the
knee; in order to have the toes pointing clockwise on both sides of
the flag, a two-sided emblem is used

Economy

Economy - overview: Offshore banking, manufacturing, and tourism are
key sectors of the economy. The government's policy of offering
incentives to high-technology companies and financial institutions to
locate on the island has paid off in expanding employment
opportunities in high-income industries. As a result, agriculture and
fishing, once the mainstays of the economy, have declined in their
shares of GDP. Banking now contributes about 45% to GDP. Trade is
mostly with the UK. The Isle of Man enjoys free access to EU markets.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $780 million (1994 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $10,800 (1994 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7% (1992 est.)

Labor force:
total: 33,189 (1991)
by occupation: manufacturing 11%, construction 11%, transport and
communication 6%, retail distribution 9%, professional and scientific
services 17%, public administration 7%, banking and finance 8%

Unemployment rate: 1% (1992 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $333.7 million
expenditures: $333.5 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY94/95 est.)

Industries: financial services, light manufacturing, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: cereals, vegetables; cattle, sheep, pigs,
poultry

Exports: $NA
commodities: tweeds, herring, processed shellfish, beef, lamb
partners : UK

Imports: $NA
commodities : timber, fertilizers, fish
partners: UK

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Manx pound (£M) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Manx pounds (£M) per US$1 - 0.6023 (January 1997),
0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995), 0.6529 (1994), 0.6658 (1993), 0.5664
(1992); the Manx pound is at par with the British pound

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Man, Isle of:Communications

Telephones: 41,000 (1995)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 4

Televisions: NA

@Man, Isle of:Transportation

Railways:
total : 52 km (27 km electrified)

Highways:
total: 640 km
paved: 320 km
unpaved: 320 km

Ports and harbors: Castletown, Douglas, Peel, Ramsey

Merchant marine:
total: 106 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,679,710 GRT/4,450,358
DWT
ships by type: bulk 21, cargo 9, chemical tanker 6, combination bulk
1, container 14, liquefied gas tanker 9, oil tanker 22, passenger 2,
refrigerated cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 16, short-sea passenger
1, vehicle carrier 3
note: a flag of convenience registry; UK owns 11 ships, Switzerland 2,
South Africa 1, Denmark 1, and Netherlands 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

MARSHALL ISLANDS

@Marshall Islands:Geography

Location: Oceania, group of atolls and reefs in the North Pacific
Ocean, about one-half of the way from Hawaii to Papua New Guinea

Geographic coordinates: 9 00 N, 168 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 181.3 sq km
land: 181.3 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes the atolls of Bikini, Enewetak, and Kwajalein

Area - comparative: about the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 370.4 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: wet season from May to November; hot and humid; islands
border typhoon belt

Terrain: low coral limestone and sand islands

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location on Likiep 10 m

Natural resources: phosphate deposits, marine products, deep seabed
minerals

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops: 60%
permanent pastures : NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: 40%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons

Environment - current issues: inadequate supplies of potable water

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: two archipelagic island chains of 30 atolls and
1,152 islands; Bikini and Enewetak are former US nuclear test sites;
Kwajalein, the famous World War II battleground, is now used as a US
missile test range

@Marshall Islands:People

Population: 60,652 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 50% (male 15,550; female 14,926)
15-64 years : 48% (male 14,732; female 14,032)
65 years and over: 2% (male 662; female 750) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.85% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 45.54 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.07 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.05 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.88 male(s)/female
total population: 1.04 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 45.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 64.14 years
male: 62.57 years
female: 65.79 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.78 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Marshallese (singular and plural)
adjective: Marshallese

Ethnic groups: Micronesian

Religions: Christian (mostly Protestant)

Languages: English (universally spoken and is the official language),
two major Marshallese dialects from the Malayo-Polynesian family,
Japanese

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 93%
male: 100%
female: 88% (1980 est.)

@Marshall Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of the Marshall Islands
conventional short form : Marshall Islands
former: Marshall Islands District (Trust Territory of the Pacific
Islands)

Data code: RM

Government type: constitutional government in free association with
the US; the Compact of Free Association entered into force 21 October
1986

National capital: Majuro

Administrative divisions: none

Independence: 21 October 1986 (from the US-administered UN
trusteeship)

National holiday: Proclamation of the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, 1 May (1979)

Constitution: 1 May 1979

Legal system: based on adapted Trust Territory laws, acts of the
legislature, municipal, common, and customary laws

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Imata KABUA (since 14 January 1997); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Imata KABUA (since 14 January 1997);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet selected by the president from among the members of
Parliament
elections: president elected by Parliament from among its own members
for a four-year term; election last held 14 January 1997 (next to be
held NA January 2000); note - Imata KABUA elected to succeed and
complete the term of the late President Amata KABUA
election results : Imata KABUA elected president; percent of
Parliament vote - 63%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Nitijela (33 seats;
members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : last held 14 January 1997 (next to be held NA 2000; note -
new elections will be held upon the completion of the term of the late
President Amata KABUA)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - NA
note : the Council of Chiefs is a 12-member body that advises on
matters affecting customary law and practice

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; High Court

Political parties and leaders: traditionally there have been no
formally organized political parties; what has existed more closely
resembles factions or interest groups because they do not have party
headquarters, formal platforms, or party structures; the following two
"groupings" have competed in legislative balloting in recent years -
Our Islands Party, leader NA, and Ralik/Ratak Democratic Party (RRDP),
Ramsey REIMERS

International organization participation: AsDB, ESCAP, G-77, IAEA,
IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, IMF, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol,
ITU, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, WHO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Banny DE BRUM
chancery: 2433 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 234-5414
FAX: [1] (202) 232-3236
consulate(s) general : Honolulu

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Joan M. PLAISTED
embassy: Oceanside, Long Island, Majuro
mailing address: P. O. Box 1379, Majuro, Republic of the Marshall
Islands 96960-1379; Majuro, 20521-4380 (pouch)
telephone : [692] 247-4011
FAX: [692] 247-4012

Flag description: blue with two stripes radiating from the lower
hoist-side corner - orange (top) and white; there is a white star with
four large rays and 20 small rays on the hoist side above the two
stripes

Economy

Economy - overview: Agriculture and tourism are the mainstays of the
economy. Agricultural production is concentrated on small farms, and
the most important commercial crops are coconuts, tomatoes, melons,
and breadfruit. Small-scale industry is limited to handicrafts, fish
processing, and copra. The tourist industry is the primary source of
foreign exchange, employs about 10% of the labor force, and remains
the best hope for future added income. The islands have few natural
resources, and imports far exceed exports. The government is drafting
economic reforms designed to increase revenue and compensate for
reductions in US Government grants - in 1994, the US Government
provided grants of $50 million, equal to 55% of the Marshall Islands'
GDP. About 25% of the government's FY95/96 budget was devoted to debt
repayment. In 1996, efforts to stabilize the economy included a 27%
reduction in the government's work force and a 10% cut in the budget.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $94 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.5% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,680 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 16%
industry: 14%
services : 70% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total : 4,800 (1986)
by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: 16% (1991 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $67.2 million
expenditures: $79.6 million, including capital expenditures of $21.6
million (FY94/95 est.)

Industries: copra, fish, tourism, craft items from shell, wood, and
pearls, offshore banking (embryonic)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 16,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 57 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: coconuts, cacao, taro, breadfruit, fruits;
pigs, chickens

Exports:
total value: $21.3 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: fish, coconut oil, live animals, trochus shells
partners: US, Japan, Australia

Imports:
total value: $69.9 million (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, fuels, beverages and
tobacco
partners: US, Japan, Australia

Debt - external: $170 million (1994)

Economic aid:
recipient: under the terms of the Compact of Free Association, the US
is to provide approximately $40 million in aid annually

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September

@Marshall Islands:Communications

Telephones: 800 (1988 est.)

Telephone system: telex services
domestic: islands interconnected by shortwave radiotelephone (used
mostly for government purposes)
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean);
US Government satellite communications system on Kwajalein

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 2, shortwave 1

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: NA

@Marshall Islands:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : NA km
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km
note: paved roads on major islands (Majuro, Kwajalein), otherwise
stone-, coral-, or laterite-surfaced roads and tracks

Ports and harbors: Majuro

Merchant marine:
total: 94 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,040,788 GRT/6,780,092
DWT
ships by type: bulk carrier 44, cargo 5, combination ore/oil 1,
container 21, oil tanker 21, refrigerated cargo 1, vehicle carrier 1
(1996 est.)

Airports: 16 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 9
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 5 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 7
914 to 1,523 m: 7 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: no regular military forces (a coast guard may be
established); Police Force

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims US territory of Wake Island
______________________________________________________________________

MARTINIQUE

(overseas department of France)

@Martinique:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, north of Trinidad
and Tobago

Geographic coordinates: 14 40 N, 61 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total : 1,100 sq km
land: 1,060 sq km
water: 40 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than six times the size of
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 350 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by trade winds; rainy season (June to
October); vulnerable to devastating cyclones (hurricanes) every eight
years on average; average temperature 17.3 degrees C; humid

Terrain: mountainous with indented coastline; dormant volcano

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Montagne Pelee 1,397 m

Natural resources: coastal scenery and beaches, cultivable land

Land use:
arable land: 8%
permanent crops: 8%
permanent pastures: 17%
forests and woodland: 44%
other : 23% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 40 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hurricanes, flooding, and volcanic activity (an
average of one major natural disaster every five years)

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

@Martinique:People

Population: 402,984 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 23% (male 46,906; female 45,800)
15-64 years: 67% (male 133,500; female 136,773)
65 years and over : 10% (male 16,890; female 23,115) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.07% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 16.69 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.88 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.09 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.02 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.73 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.98 years
male: 76.21 years
female: 81.83 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.81 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Martiniquais (singular and plural)
adjective: Martiniquais

Ethnic groups: African and African-white-Indian mixture 90%, white 5%,
East Indian, Lebanese, Chinese less than 5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%, Hindu and pagan African 5%

Languages: French, Creole patois

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 93%
male: 92%
female: 93% (1982 est.)

@Martinique:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Department of Martinique
conventional short form: Martinique
local long form : Departement de la Martinique
local short form: Martinique

Data code: MB

Dependency status: overseas department of France

Government type: NA

National capital: Fort-de-France

Administrative divisions: none (overseas department of France)

Independence: none (overseas department of France)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French legal system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President of France Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May
1995); Prefect Jean-Francois CORDET (since NA)
head of government : President of the General Council Claude LISE
(since 22 March 1992); President of the Regional Council Emile CAPGRAS
(since 22 March 1992)
cabinet: NA
elections: prefect appointed by the president of France on the advice
of the French Ministry of Interior; the presidents of the General and
Regional Councils are elected by the members of those councils

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council or Conseil General (45
seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms)
and a unicameral Regional Assembly or Conseil Regional (41 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms)
elections: General Council - last held NA March 1994 (next to be held
NA 2000); Regional Assembly - last held on 22 March 1992 (next to be
held by March 1998)
election results: General Council - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - NA; note - the PPM won a plurality; Regional Assembly
- percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - RPR-UDF 16, MIM 9,
PPM 9, PCM 5, independents 2
note: Martinique elects 2 seats to the French Senate; elections last
held 24 September 1995 (next to be held September 1998); results -
percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PS 2; Martinique also
elects 4 seats to the French National Assembly; elections last held 21
March 1993 (next to be held 25 May-1 June 1997 - special election);
results - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - RPR 3, PS 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel

Political parties and leaders: Rally for the Republic or RPR [Andre
LESUEUR]; Union for a Martinique of Progress or UMP; Martinique
Progressive Party or PPM [Ernest WAN-AJOUHU]; Socialist Federation of
Martinique or FSM [Jean CRUSOL]; Martinique Communist Party or PCM
[George ERICHOT]; Martinique Patriots or PM; Union for French
Democracy or UDF [Miguel LAVENTURE]; Martinique Independence Movement
or MIM [Alfred MARIE-JEANNE]; Republican Party or PR [Jean BAILLY]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Proletarian Action Group or
GAP; Alhed Marie-Jeanne Socialist Revolution Group or GRS; Caribbean
Revolutionary Alliance or ARC; Central Union for Martinique Workers or
CSTM [Marc PULVAR]; Frantz Fanon Circle; League of Workers and
Peasants; Parti Martiniquais Socialiste or PMS; Association for the
Protection of Martinique's Heritage (ecologist)

International organization participation: FZ, WCL, WFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas department of
France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas department of
France)

Flag description: a light blue background is divided into four
quadrants by a white cross; in the center of each rectangle is a white
snake; the flag of France is used for official occasions

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is based on sugarcane, bananas,
tourism, and light industry. Agriculture accounts for about 6% of GDP
and the small industrial sector for 11%. Sugar production has
declined, with most of the sugarcane now used for the production of
rum. Banana exports are increasing, going mostly to France. The bulk
of meat, vegetable, and grain requirements must be imported,
contributing to a chronic trade deficit that requires large annual
transfers of aid from France. Tourism has become more important than
agricultural exports as a source of foreign exchange. The majority of
the work force is employed in the service sector and in
administration.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $3.95 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $10,000 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 6%
industry: 11%
services: 83% (1992 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3.9% (1990)

Labor force:
total: 160,000
by occupation: agriculture 10%, industry 17%, services 73% (1992)

Unemployment rate: 23.5% (1993)

Budget:
revenues: $620 million
expenditures: $2.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $170
million (1992)

Industries: construction, rum, cement, oil refining, sugar, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: pineapples, avocados, bananas, flowers,
vegetables, sugarcane for rum

Exports:
total value: $220 million (f.o.b., 1994)
commodities: refined petroleum products, bananas, rum, pineapples
partners: France 57%, Guadeloupe 31%, French Guiana (1991)

Imports:
total value : $1.6 billion (c.i.f., 1994)
commodities: petroleum products, crude oil, foodstuffs, construction
materials, vehicles, clothing and other consumer goods
partners: France 62%, UK, Italy, Germany, Japan, US (1991)

Debt - external: $180 million (1994)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note: substantial annual French aid

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.4169 (January 1997),
5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520 (1994), 5.6632 (1993), 5.2938
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Martinique:Communications

Telephones: 209,672 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: domestic facilities are adequate
domestic: NA
international: microwave radio relay to Guadeloupe, Dominica, and
Saint Lucia; satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: 74,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 10

Televisions: 65,000 (1993 est.)

@Martinique:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 2,724 km
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km (1994)

Ports and harbors: Fort-de-France, La Trinite

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
over 3,047 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: French forces (Army, Navy, Air Force), Gendarmerie

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana bound for
the US and Europe
______________________________________________________________________

MAURITANIA

@Mauritania:Geography

Location: Northern Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean, between
Senegal and Western Sahara

Geographic coordinates: 20 00 N, 12 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total : 1,030,700 sq km
land: 1,030,400 sq km
water: 300 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than three times the size of New
Mexico

Land boundaries:
total: 5,074 km
border countries : Algeria 463 km, Mali 2,237 km, Senegal 813 km,
Western Sahara 1,561 km

Coastline: 754 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: desert; constantly hot, dry, dusty

Terrain: mostly barren, flat plains of the Sahara; some central hills

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Sebkha de Ndrhamcha -3 m
highest point: Kediet Ijill 910 m

Natural resources: iron ore, gypsum, fish, copper, phosphate

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 38%
forests and woodland : 4%
other: 58% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 490 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dust/sand-laden sirocco wind blows
primarily in March and April; periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: overgrazing, deforestation, and soil
erosion aggravated by drought are contributing to desertification;
very limited natural fresh water resources away from the Senegal which
is the only perennial river

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: most of the population concentrated along the
Senegal River in the southern part of the country

@Mauritania:People

Population: 2,411,317 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 49% (male 586,972; female 580,408)
15-64 years: 49% (male 579,071; female 612,343)
65 years and over : 2% (male 22,098; female 30,425) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.17% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 46.55 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 14.82 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.04 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.73 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 80 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 49.49 years
male : 46.52 years
female: 52.58 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.76 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Mauritanian(s)
adjective: Mauritanian

Ethnic groups: mixed Maur/black 40%, Maur 30%, black 30%

Religions: Muslim 100%

Languages: Hasaniya Arabic (official), Pular, Soninke, Wolof
(official)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 37.7%
male: 49.6%
female: 26.3% (1995 est.)

@Mauritania:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Islamic Republic of Mauritania
conventional short form: Mauritania
local long form: Al Jumhuriyah al Islamiyah al Muritaniyah
local short form: Muritaniyah

Data code: MR

Government type: republic

National capital: Nouakchott

Administrative divisions: 12 regions (regions, singular - region);
Adrar, Assaba, Brakna, Dakhlet Nouadhibou, Gorgol, Guidimaka, Hodh ech
Chargui, Hodh el Gharbi, Inchiri, Tagant, Tiris Zemmour, Trarza
note: there may be a new capital district of Nouakchott

Independence: 28 November 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 28 November (1960)

Constitution: 12 July 1991

Legal system: three-tier system: Islamic (Shari'a) courts, special
courts, and state security courts (in the process of being eliminated)

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Col. Maaouya Ould Sid Ahmed TAYA (since 12
December 1984)
head of government: Prime Minister Cheikh El Afia Ould Mohamed KHOUNA
(since 2 January 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers
elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
election last held 17 January 1992 (next to be held NA January 1998);
prime minister appointed by the president
election results: President Col. Maaouya Ould Sid Ahmed TAYA
reelected; percent of vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral legislature consists of the Senate or
Majlis al-Shuyukh (56 seats; 17 up for election every two years;
members elected by municipal leaders to serve six-year terms) and the
National Assembly or Majlis al-Watani (79 seats; members elected by
popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 12 April 1996 (next to be held NA 1998);
National Assembly - last held 11 and 18 October 1996 (next to be held
NA 2001)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - PRDS 16, UFD/NE 1; National Assembly - percent of vote by
party - NA; seats by party - PRDS 71, AC 1, independents and other 7

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders: legalized by constitution passed 12
July 1991, however, politics continue to be tribally based; emerging
parties include Democratic and Social Republican Party (PRDS), led by
President Col. Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed TAYA; Union of Democratic
Forces-New Era (UFD/NE), headed by Ahmed Ould DADDAH; Assembly for
Democracy and Unity (RDU), Ahmed Ould SIDI BABA; Popular Social and
Democratic Union (UPSD), Mohamed Mahmoud Ould MAH; Mauritanian Party
for Renewal (PMR), Hameida BOUCHRAYA; National Avant-Garde Party
(PAN), Khattry Ould JIDDOU; Mauritanian Party of the Democratic Center
(PCDM), Bamba Ould SIDI BADI; Action for Change (AC), Messoud Ould
BOULKHEIR

Political pressure groups and leaders: Mauritanian Workers Union (UTM)

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACCT (associate),
ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, CAEU, CCC, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-77,
IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member),
ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Bilal Ould WERZEG
chancery: 2129 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 232-5700

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Dorothy Myers SAMPAS
embassy: address NA, Nouakchott
mailing address: B. P. 222, Nouakchott
telephone: [222] (2) 526-60, 526-63
FAX: [222] (2) 515-92

Flag description: green with a yellow five-pointed star above a
yellow, horizontal crescent; the closed side of the crescent is down;
the crescent, star, and color green are traditional symbols of Islam

Economy

Economy - overview: A majority of the population still depends on
agriculture and livestock for a livelihood, even though most of the
nomads and many subsistence farmers were forced into the cities by
recurrent droughts in the 1970s and 1980s. Mauritania has extensive
deposits of iron ore, which account for almost 50% of total exports.
The decline in world demand for this ore, however, has led to cutbacks
in production. The nation's coastal waters are among the richest
fishing areas in the world, but overexploitation by foreigners
threatens this key source of revenue. The country's first deepwater
port opened near Nouakchott in 1986. In recent years, drought and
economic mismanagement have resulted in a substantial buildup of
foreign debt. The government has begun the second stage of an economic
reform program in consultation with the World Bank, the IMF, and major
donor countries. Short-term growth prospects are gloomy because of the
heavy debt service burden, rapid population growth, and vulnerability
to climatic conditions.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $2.8 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6% (1995)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,200 (1995)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 25%
industry: 31%
services: 44% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 6.5% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 465,000 (1981 est.); 45,000 wage earners (1980)
by occupation: agriculture 47%, services 29%, industry and commerce
14%, government 10%

Unemployment rate: 20% (1991 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $256 million
expenditures : $269 million, including capital expenditures of $54
million (1995)

Industries: fish processing, mining of iron ore and gypsum

Industrial production growth rate: 7.2% (1994)

Electricity - capacity: 105,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 135 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: dates, millet, sorghum, root crops; cattle,
sheep; fish products

Exports:
total value: $483 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: fish and fish products, iron ore, gold
partners : Japan 27%, Italy, Belgium, Luxembourg

Imports:
total value: $365 million (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, consumer goods, petroleum products, capital
goods
partners: Algeria 15%, China 6%, US 3%, France, Germany, Spain, Italy

Debt - external: $2.3 billion (1994)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 ouguiya (UM) = 5 khoums

Exchange rates: ouguiyas (UM) per US$1 - 141.230 (December 1996),
137.222 (1996), 129.768 (1995), 123.575 (1994), 120.806 (1993), 87.027
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Mauritania:Communications

Telephones: 17,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: poor system of cable and open-wire lines, minor
microwave radio relay links, and radiotelephone communications
stations (improvements being made)
domestic : mostly cable and open-wire lines
international: satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)
and 2 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 300,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 50,000 (1992 est.)

@Mauritania:Transportation

Railways:
total: 704 km (single track); note - owned and operated by government
mining company
standard gauge : 704 km 1.435-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 7,600 km
paved: 851 km
unpaved: 6,749 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: mostly ferry traffic on the Senegal River

Ports and harbors: Bogue, Kaedi, Nouadhibou, Nouakchott, Rosso

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 24 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 10
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 14
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 9 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Gendarmerie,
National Guard, National Police, Presidential Guard

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 518,212 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 253,047 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $33 million (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.5% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

MAURITIUS

@Mauritius:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, island in the Indian Ocean, east of
Madagascar

Geographic coordinates: 20 17 S, 57 33 E

Map references: World

Area:
total: 1,860 sq km
land: 1,850 sq km
water: 10 sq km
note: includes Agalega Islands, Cargados Carajos Shoals (Saint
Brandon), and Rodrigues

Area - comparative: almost 11 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 177 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, modified by southeast trade winds; warm, dry winter
(May to November); hot, wet, humid summer (November to May)

Terrain: small coastal plain rising to discontinuous mountains
encircling central plateau

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point : Piton de la Petite Riviere Noire 828 m

Natural resources: arable land, fish

Land use:
arable land: 49%
permanent crops: 3%
permanent pastures: 3%
forests and woodland: 22%
other: 23% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 170 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: cyclones (November to April); almost completely
surrounded by reefs that may pose maritime hazards

Environment - current issues: water pollution

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Ship Pollution, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

@Mauritius:People

Population: 1,154,272 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 27% (male 155,779; female 151,964)
15-64 years : 67% (male 387,406; female 391,167)
65 years and over: 6% (male 27,719; female 40,237) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.21% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 18.81 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.68 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.69 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 16.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 70.71 years
male: 66.88 years
female : 74.53 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.23 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Mauritian(s)
adjective: Mauritian

Ethnic groups: Indo-Mauritian 68%, Creole 27%, Sino-Mauritian 3%,
Franco-Mauritian 2%

Religions: Hindu 52%, Christian 28.3% (Roman Catholic 26%, Protestant
2.3%), Muslim 16.6%, other 3.1%

Languages: English (official), Creole, French, Hindi, Urdu, Hakka,
Bojpoori

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 82.9%
male : 87.1%
female: 78.8% (1995 est.)

@Mauritius:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Mauritius
conventional short form : Mauritius

Data code: MP

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Port Louis

Administrative divisions: 9 districts and 3 dependencies*; Agalega
Islands*, Black River, Cargados Carajos*, Flacq, Grand Port, Moka,
Pamplemousses, Plaines Wilhems, Port Louis, Riviere du Rempart,
Rodrigues*, Savanne

Independence: 12 March 1968 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 12 March (1968)

Constitution: 12 March 1968; amended 12 March 1992

Legal system: based on French civil law system with elements of
English common law in certain areas

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Cassam UTEEM (since 1 July 1992) and Vice
President Rabindranath GHURBURRUN (since 1 July 1992)
head of government: Prime Minister Navin RAMGOOLAM (since 27 December
1995) and Deputy Prime Minister Paul BERENGER (since 27 December 1995)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
recommendation of the prime minister
elections: president and vice president elected by the National
Assembly for five-year terms; election last held NA June 1992 (next to
be held NA 1997); prime minister and deputy prime minister appointed
by the president and are responsible to the National Assembly
election results : Cassam UTEEM elected president and Rabindranath
GHURBURRUN elected vice president; percent of vote by the National
Assembly - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (66 seats - 62
popularly elected, 4 appointed; members serve five-year terms); note -
the election commission appoints four members from the losing
political parties to give representation to various ethnic minorities
elections: last held on 20 December 1995 (next to be held by December
2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - MLP/MMM 65%, MSM/RMM 20%,
other 15%; seats by party - MLP 35, MMM 25, allies of MLP and MMM on
Rodrigues Island 2; appointed were Rodrigues Movement 2, PMSD 1,
Hizbullah 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders:
government coalition : MLP/MMM alliance, consisting of Mauritian Labor
Party or MLP [Navin RAMGOOLAM] and Mauritian Militant Movement or MMM
[Paul BERENGER]
opposition: MSM/MSR alliance consisting of the Militant Socialist
Movement or MSM [Sir Anerood JUGNAUTH] and the Mauritian Militant
Renaissance or MMR [Dr. Paramhansa NABABSING]; Organization of the
People of Rodrigues or OPR [Louis Serge CLAIR]; Mauritius Social
Democrat Party or PMSD [Xavier-Luc DUVAL]; Hizbullah [Imam Mustapha
BEEHARRY]

Political pressure groups and leaders: various labor unions

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, C, CCC,
ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAU,
PCA, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Chitmansing JESSERAMSING
chancery: Suite 441, 4301 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 244-1491, 1492
FAX: [1] (202) 966-0983

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Harold Walter GEISEL (8 July 1996)
embassy: 4th Floor, Rogers House, John Kennedy Street, Port Louis
mailing address: International Mail: P.O. Box 544, Port Louis; US
Mail: American Embassy, Port Louis, Department of State, Washington,
DC 20521-2450
telephone : [230] 208-2347, 208-2354, 208-9763 through 9767
FAX: [230] 208-9534

Flag description: four equal horizontal bands of red (top), blue,
yellow, and green

Economy

Economy - overview: Since independence in 1968, Mauritius has
developed from a low income, agriculturally based economy to a middle
income diversified economy with growing industrial, financial
services, and tourist sectors. For most of the period, annual growth
has been of the order of 5% to 6%. This remarkable achievement has
been reflected in increased life expectancy, lowered infant mortality,
and a much improved infrastructure. Sugarcane is grown on about 90% of
the cultivated land area and accounts for 25% of export earnings. The
government's development strategy centers on industrialization (with a
view to modernization and to exports), agricultural diversification,
and tourism. Economic performance in 1991-96 continued strong with
solid growth and low unemployment.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $11.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $10,300 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 9.3%
industry : 31.6%
services: 59.1% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 6% (1995)

Labor force:
total : 479,500 (1993 est.)
by occupation: construction and industry 37%, services 24%,
agriculture and fishing 15%, trade, restaurants, hotels 14%,
transportation and communication 7%, finance 3%

Unemployment rate: 2.4% (1991 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $732 million
expenditures: $550 million, including capital expenditures of $123
million (FY94/95 est.)

Industries: food processing (largely sugar milling), textiles, wearing
apparel; chemicals, metal products, transport equipment, nonelectrical
machinery; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 5.8% (1992)

Electricity - capacity: 235,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 425 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 393 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: sugarcane, tea, corn, potatoes, bananas,
pulses; cattle, goats; fish

Exports:
total value: $1.57 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: clothing and textiles 67%, sugar 25%
partners: UK 34%, France 21%, US 15%, Germany 6%, Italy 4%

Imports:
total value: $1.98 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities : manufactured goods 50%, capital equipment 17%,
foodstuffs 13%, petroleum products 8%, chemicals 7%
partners: France 20%, India 8%, Hong Kong 7%, UK 6%, Germany 5%

Debt - external: $996.8 million (1993 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Mauritian rupee (MauR) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Mauritian rupees (MauRs) per US$1 - 18.528 (January
1997), 17.948 (1996), 17.386 (1995), 17.960 (1994), 17.648 (1993),
15.563 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Mauritius:Communications

Telephones: 65,000 (1985 est.)

Telephone system: small system with good service
domestic: primarily microwave radio relay
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean);
new microwave link to Reunion; HF radiotelephone links to several
countries

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 395,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1987 est.)
note: two new subscription channels began operation in 1995

Televisions: 151,096 (1991 est.)

@Mauritius:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 1,877 km
paved: 1,746 km (including 29 km of expressways)
unpaved : 131 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Port Louis

Merchant marine:
total: 17 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 221,147 GRT/309,513 DWT
ships by type : bulk 1, cargo 9, container 4, liquefied gas tanker 1,
oil tanker 1, refrigerated cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 4 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 4
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 1
under 914 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: National Police Force (includes the paramilitary
Special Mobile Force or SMF, Special Support Units or SSU, and
National Coast Guard)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 333,029 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 169,129 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $11.2 million (FY92/93)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 0.4% (FY92/93)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims the island of Diego Garcia in
UK-administered British Indian Ocean Territory; claims
French-administered Tromelin Island

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis for the international drug
trade; heroin consumption and transshipment are growing problems
______________________________________________________________________

MAYOTTE

(territorial collectivity of France)

@Mayotte:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, island in the Mozambique Channel, about
one-half of the way from northern Madagascar to northern Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 12 50 S, 45 10 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total : 375 sq km
land: 375 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Washington,
DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 185.2 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; marine; hot, humid, rainy season during
northeastern monsoon (November to May); dry season is cooler (May to
November)

Terrain: generally undulating, with deep ravines and ancient volcanic
peaks

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Benara 660 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other : NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: cyclones during rainy season

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: part of Comoro Archipelago

@Mayotte:People

Population: 104,715 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 50% (male 26,101; female 25,877)
15-64 years: 48% (male 25,684; female 24,661)
65 years and over: 2% (male 1,171; female 1,221) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.76% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 47.42 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.78 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.96 male(s)/female
total population : 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 73.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 59.14 years
male: 56.82 years
female: 61.53 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.56 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Mahorais (singular and plural)
adjective: Mahoran

Ethnic groups: NA

Religions: Muslim 99%, Christian (mostly Roman Catholic)

Languages: Mahorian (a Swahili dialect), French

Literacy: NA

@Mayotte:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Territorial Collectivity of Mayotte
conventional short form: Mayotte

Data code: MF

Dependency status: territorial collectivity of France

Government type: NA

National capital: Mamoutzou

Administrative divisions: none (territorial collectivity of France)

Independence: none (territorial collectivity of France)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President of France Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May
1995), represented by Prefect Philippe BOISADAM (since NA)
head of government: President of the General Council Younoussa BAMANA
(since NA 1977)
cabinet: NA
elections: prefect appointed by the president of France on the advice
of the French Ministry of the Interior; president of the General
Council elected by the members of the General Council for a six-year
term

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council or Conseil General (19
seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve three-year terms)
elections: last held NA March 1994 (next to be held NA 1997)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - MPM
12, RPR 4, independents 3
note: Mayotte elects 1 member of the French Senate; elections last
held 24 September 1995 (next to be held 24 September 2001); results -
percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - MPM 1; Mayotte also
elects 1 member to the French National Assembly; elections last held
21 and 28 March 1993 (next to be held as a special election on 25 May
- 1 June 1997); results - percent of vote by party - UDF-CDS 54.3%,
RPR 44.3%; seats by party - DF-CDS 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Tribunal Superieur d'Appel)

Political parties and leaders: Mahoran Popular Movement or MPM
[Younoussa BAMANA]; Mahoran Rally for the Republic or RPR [Soibahadine
Ibrahim RAMADAM]; Democratic Front or Front Democrate [Youssouf
MOUSSA]; Association for French Mayotte or Association Pour Mayotte
Francaise [Didier BEOUTIS]

International organization participation: FZ

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territorial collectivity of
France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territorial collectivity
of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used

Economy

Economy - overview: Economic activity is based primarily on the
agricultural sector, including fishing and livestock raising. Mayotte
is not self-sufficient and must import a large portion of its food
requirements, mainly from France. The economy and future development
of the island are heavily dependent on French financial assistance.
Mayotte's remote location is an obstacle to the development of
tourism.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $54 million (1993 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $600 (1993 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $NA
expenditures: $37.3 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1985 est.)

Industries: newly created lobster and shrimp industry

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: vanilla, ylang-ylang, coffee, copra

Exports:
total value: $3.64 million (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: ylang-ylang (perfume essence), vanilla, copra
partners : France 80%, Comoros 15%, Reunion

Imports:
total value: $131.5 million (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: building materials, machinery and transportation
equipment, metals, chemicals, rice, clothing, flour
partners : France 66%, Africa 14%, Southeast Asia 20%

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note : exhaustive French financial assistance

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.4169 (January 1997),
5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520 (1994), 5.6632 (1993), 5.2938
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Mayotte:Communications

Telephones: 450

Telephone system: small system administered by French Department of
Posts and Telecommunications
domestic : NA
international: microwave radio relay and HF radiotelephone
communications to Comoros and other international connections

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 30,000 (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: 3,500 (1994 est.)

@Mayotte:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 93 km
paved: 72 km
unpaved: 21 km

Ports and harbors: Dzaoudzi

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claimed by Comoros
______________________________________________________________________

MEXICO

@Mexico:Geography

Location: Middle America, bordering the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of
Mexico, between Belize and the US and bordering the North Pacific
Ocean, between Guatemala and the US

Geographic coordinates: 23 00 N, 102 00 W

Map references: North America

Area:
total: 1,972,550 sq km
land: 1,923,040 sq km
water : 49,510 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 4,538 km
border countries : Belize 250 km, Guatemala 962 km, US 3,326 km

Coastline: 9,330 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: varies from tropical to desert

Terrain: high, rugged mountains, low coastal plains, high plateaus,
and desert

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Laguna Salada -10 m
highest point: Volcan Pico de Orizaba 5,700 m

Natural resources: petroleum, silver, copper, gold, lead, zinc,
natural gas, timber

Land use:
arable land: 12%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 39%
forests and woodland: 26%
other: 22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 61,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: tsunamis along the Pacific coast, volcanoes and
destructive earthquakes in the center and south, and hurricanes on the
Gulf and Caribbean coasts

Environment - current issues: natural fresh water resources scarce and
polluted in north, inaccessible and poor quality in center and extreme
southeast; raw sewage and industrial effluents polluting rivers in
urban areas; deforestation; widespread erosion; desertification;
serious air pollution in the national capital and urban centers along
US-Mexico border

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: strategic location on southern border of US

@Mexico:People

Population: 97,563,374 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 36% (male 17,849,251; female 17,236,639)
15-64 years: 60% (male 28,241,361; female 29,883,766)
65 years and over: 4% (male 1,982,329; female 2,370,028) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.84% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 25.8 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.52 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.92 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.84 male(s)/female
total population : 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 23.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 74 years
male: 70.39 years
female: 77.78 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.97 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Mexican(s)
adjective: Mexican

Ethnic groups: mestizo (Amerindian-Spanish) 60%, Amerindian or
predominantly Amerindian 30%, white 9%, other 1%

Religions: nominally Roman Catholic 89%, Protestant 6%

Languages: Spanish, various Mayan dialects

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 89.6%
male : 91.8%
female: 87.4% (1995 est.)

@Mexico:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : United Mexican States
conventional short form: Mexico
local long form: Estados Unidos Mexicanos
local short form: Mexico

Data code: MX

Government type: federal republic operating under a centralized
government

National capital: Mexico

Administrative divisions: 31 states (estados, singular - estado) and 1
federal district* (distrito federal); Aguascalientes, Baja California,
Baja California Sur, Campeche, Chiapas, Chihuahua, Coahuila de
Zaragoza, Colima, Distrito Federal*, Durango, Guanajuato, Guerrero,
Hidalgo, Jalisco, Mexico, Michoacan de Ocampo, Morelos, Nayarit, Nuevo
Leon, Oaxaca, Puebla, Queretaro de Arteaga, Quintana Roo, San Luis
Potosi, Sinaloa, Sonora, Tabasco, Tamaulipas, Tlaxcala,
Veracruz-Llave, Yucatan, Zacatecas

Independence: 16 September 1810 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 16 September (1810)

Constitution: 5 February 1917

Legal system: mixture of US constitutional theory and civil law
system; judicial review of legislative acts; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory (but not enforced)

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Ernesto ZEDILLO Ponce de Leon (since 1
December 1994); note - the president is both the chief of state and
head of government
head of government : President Ernesto ZEDILLO Ponce de Leon (since 1
December 1994); note - the president is both the chief of state and
head of government
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
election last held 21 August 1994 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results: Ernesto ZEDILLO Ponce de Leon elected president;
percent of vote - Ernesto ZEDILLO Ponce de Leon (PRI) 50.18%,
Cuauhtemoc CARDENAS Solorzano (PRD) 17.08%, Diego FERNANDEZ DE
CEVALLOS (PAN) 26.69%, other 6.049%

Legislative branch: bicameral National Congress or Congreso de la
Union consists of the Senate or Camara de Senadores (128 seats,
expanded from 64 seats at the last election; members are elected by
popular vote to serve six-year terms) and the Chamber of Deputies or
Camara de Diputados (500 seats; members are directly elected by
popular vote to serve three-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 21 August 1994 (next to be held 6 July
1997 for one-quarter of the seats); Chamber of Deputies - last held 24
August 1994 (next to be held 6 July 1997)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party in expanded Senate - PRI 93, PRD 25, PAN 10; Chamber of Deputies
- percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PRI 300, PAN 119,
PRD 71, PT 10

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justicia),
judges are appointed by the president with consent of the Senate

Political parties and leaders: (recognized parties) Institutional
Revolutionary Party (PRI), Humberto ROQUE Villanueva; National Action
Party (PAN), Felipe CALDERON Hinojosa; Popular Socialist Party (PPS),
Indalecio SAYAGO Herrera; Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD), Andres
Manuel LOPEZ Obrador; Cardenist Front for the National Reconstruction
Party (PFCRN), Rafael AGUILAR Talamantes; Democratic Forum Party
(PFD), Pablo Emilio MADERO; Mexican Green Ecologist Party (PVEM),
Jorge GONZALEZ Torres; Workers Party (PT), Alberto ANYA Gutierrez

Political pressure groups and leaders: Roman Catholic Church;
Confederation of Mexican Workers (CTM); Confederation of Industrial
Chambers (CONCAMIN); Confederation of National Chambers of Commerce
(CONCANACO); National Peasant Confederation (CNC); Revolutionary
Workers Party (PRT); Revolutionary Confederation of Workers and
Peasants (CROC); Regional Confederation of Mexican Workers (CROM);
Confederation of Employers of the Mexican Republic (COPARMEX);
National Chamber of Transformation Industries (CANACINTRA);
Coordinator for Foreign Trade Business Organizations (COECE);
Federation of Unions Providing Goods and Services (FESEBES)

International organization participation: AG (observer), APEC, BCIE,
BIS (pending member), Caricom (observer), CCC, CDB, EBRD, ECLAC, FAO,
G- 6, G-11, G-15, G-19, G-24, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA, NAM (observer),
OAS, OECD, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WCL,
WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Jesus SILVA Herzog Flores
chancery: 1911 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20006
telephone: [1] (202) 728-1600
consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, El Paso,
Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, Phoenix, San
Antonio, San Diego, San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico)
consulate(s): Albuquerque, Austin, Boston, Brownsville (Texas),
Calexico (California), Corpus Christi, Del Rio (Texas), Detroit, Eagle
Pass (Texas), Fresno (California), Laredo, McAllen (Texas), Midland
(Texas), Nogales (Arizona), Oxnard (California), Philadelphia,
Sacramento, St. Louis, Salt Lake City, San Bernardino, San Jose, Santa
Ana, Seattle

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador James R. JONES
embassy: Paseo de la Reforma 305, Colonia Cuauhtemoc, 06500 Mexico,
Distrito Federal
mailing address: P. O. Box 3087, Laredo, TX 78044-3087
telephone : [52] (5) 211-0042
FAX: [52] (5) 511-9980, 208-3373
consulate(s) general: Ciudad Juarez, Guadalajara, Monterrey, Tijuana
consulate(s): Hermosillo, Matamoros, Merida, Nuevo Laredo

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side),
white, and red; the coat of arms (an eagle perched on a cactus with a
snake in its beak) is centered in the white band

Economy

Economy - overview: Mexico has a free market economy with a mixture of
modern and outmoded industry and agriculture, increasingly dominated
by the private sector. The Mexican economy enters 1997 in the midst of
an economic recovery that began to pick up steam in mid-1996. After
plummeting more than 6% in 1995 in the aftermath of the peso crisis,
economic activity in Mexico grew by an estimated 5.1% in 1996. Many
private forecasters who had scoffed at the ZEDILLO administration's 3%
growth target for 1996 are now projecting economic expansion of 4-5%
for 1997. Strong export growth continues to drive the economy; total
exports were up roughly 16% in 1996 compared to 1995. By the end of
1996, however, Mexican government statistics showed that increased
domestic consumption and investment spending were also beginning to
contribute to the recovery. Despite these positive economic trends,
structural problems and vulnerabilities remain. Low savings rates will
keep Mexico dependent on foreign capital; national savings as a share
of GDP plunged from a peak of 25% in 1983 to less than 14% in 1994.
Additionally, Mexico City is still struggling to bail out a banking
sector burdened with bad debts. Mexico's international trade continues
to be highly dependent on the US market. The US/Mexico trade balance
has shifted over the last two years because of the peso's rapid
devaluation in late 1994, which made Mexican exports much more
attractive. In 1995 and 1996, the US ran trade deficits with Mexico, a
large turnaround from 1994's trade surplus of about $1.3 billion.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $777.3 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.1% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $8,100 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 8%
industry: 28%
services: 63% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 28% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 36.3 million (November 1996)
by occupation: services 31.7%, agriculture, forestry, hunting, and
fishing 28%, commerce 14.6%, manufacturing 11.1%, construction 8.4%,
transportation 4.7%, mining and quarrying 1.5%

Unemployment rate: 10% (1996 est.) plus considerable underemployment

Budget:
revenues: $73.8 billion
expenditures: $74 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1996
est.)

Industries: food and beverages, tobacco, chemicals, iron and steel,
petroleum, mining, textiles, clothing, motor vehicles, consumer
durables, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 11% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 40.502 million kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 142.344 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,206 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: corn, wheat, soybeans, rice, beans, cotton,
coffee, fruit, tomatoes; beef, poultry, dairy products; wood products

Exports:
total value: $95 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.), includes in-bond
industries
commodities: crude oil, oil products, coffee, silver, engines, motor
vehicles, cotton, consumer electronics
partners: US 80%, Canada 5.2%, Japan 1.8% (1996 est.)

Imports:
total value : $88.5 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.), includes in-bond
industries
commodities: metal-working machines, steel mill products, agricultural
machinery, electrical equipment, car parts for assembly, repair parts
for motor vehicles, aircraft, and aircraft parts
partners : US 74.8%, Japan 5.1%, Germany 3.65%, Canada 1.4%, France
1.1% (1996 est.)

Debt - external: $170 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $85 million (1993)
note : US commitments, (Emergency Stabilization Fund), $13.5 billion;
IMF, $13 billion (1995-96)

Currency: 1 New Mexican peso (Mex$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: market rate of Mexican pesos (Mex$) per US$1 - 7.8270
(January 1997), 7.6009 (1996), 6.4194 (1995), 3.3751 (1994), 3.1156
(1993), 3,094.9 (1992)
note: the new peso replaced the old peso on 1 January 1993; 1 new peso
= 1,000 old pesos

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Mexico:Communications

Telephones: 11,890,868 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: highly developed system with extensive microwave
radio relay links; privatized in December 1990
domestic: adequate telephone service for business and government, but
the population is poorly served; domestic satellite system with 120
earth stations; extensive microwave radio relay network
international : satellite earth stations - 5 Intelsat (4 Atlantic
Ocean and 1 Pacific Ocean); launched Solidaridad I satellite in
November 1993 and Solidaridad II in October 1994, giving Mexico
improved access to South America, Central America and much of the US
as well as enhancing domestic communications; linked to Central
American Microwave System of trunk connections

Radio broadcast stations: AM 679, FM 0, shortwave 22

Radios: 22.5 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 238

Televisions: 13.1 million (1992 est.)

@Mexico:Transportation

Railways:
total: 20,567 km
standard gauge: 20,477 km 1.435-m gauge (246 km electrified)
narrow gauge : 90 km 0.914-m gauge (1994)

Highways:
total : 249,520 km
paved: 93,071 km (including 5,920 km of expressways)
unpaved: 156,449 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 2,900 km navigable rivers and coastal canals

Pipelines: crude oil 28,200 km; petroleum products 10,150 km; natural
gas 13,254 km; petrochemical 1,400 km

Ports and harbors: Acapulco, Altamira, Coatzacoalcos, Ensenada,
Guaymas, La Paz, Lazaro Cardenas, Manzanillo, Mazatlan, Progreso,
Salina Cruz, Tampico, Topolobampo, Tuxpan, Veracruz

Merchant marine:
total: 51 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 899,032 GRT/1,297,346 DWT
ships by type: cargo 1, chemical tanker 4, combination bulk 1,
container 4, liquefied gas tanker 7, oil tanker 29, roll-on/roll-off
cargo 2, short-sea passenger 3 (1996 est.)

Airports: 1,415 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1,003
over 3,047 m : 9
2,438 to 3,047 m: 26
1,524 to 2,437 m: 92
914 to 1,523 m: 71
under 914 m : 805 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 412
1,524 to 2,437 m: 50
914 to 1,523 m: 362 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: National Defense (includes Army and Air Force),
Navy (includes Naval Air and Marines)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 24,518,142 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 17,857,361 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 1,062,640 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.56 billion (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.5% (1997 est.)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: illicit cultivation of opium poppy and cannabis
continues in spite of increased government eradication; major supplier
of heroin and marijuana to the US market; continues as the primary
transshipment country for US-bound cocaine from South America;
increasingly involved in the production and distribution of
methamphetamines
______________________________________________________________________

MICRONESIA, FEDERATED STATES OF
States of]

@Micronesia, Federated States of:Geography

Location: Oceania, island group in the North Pacific Ocean, about
three-quarters of the way from Hawaii to Indonesia

Geographic coordinates: 6 55 N, 158 15 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 702 sq km
land : 702 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Pohnpei (Ponape), Truk (Chuuk) Islands, Yap Islands,
and Kosrae

Area - comparative: four times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 6,112 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; heavy year-round rainfall, especially in the
eastern islands; located on southern edge of the typhoon belt with
occasionally severe damage

Terrain: islands vary geologically from high mountainous islands to
low, coral atolls; volcanic outcroppings on Pohnpei, Kosrae, and Truk

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Totolom 791 m

Natural resources: forests, marine products, deep-seabed minerals

Land use:
arable land : NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons (June to December)

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: four major island groups totaling 607 islands

@Micronesia, Federated States of:People

Population: 127,616 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years : 35% (est.)
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 3.33% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 27.75 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.14 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 11.65 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years : NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 35.11 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 68.18 years
male: 66.21 years
female: 70.18 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.93 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Micronesian(s)
adjective: Micronesian; Kosrae(s), Pohnpeian(s), Trukese, Yapese

Ethnic groups: nine ethnic Micronesian and Polynesian groups

Religions: Roman Catholic 50%, Protestant 47%, other and none 3%

Languages: English (official and common language), Trukese, Pohnpeian,
Yapese, Kosrean

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 89%
male : 91%
female: 88% (1980 est.)

@Micronesia, Federated States of:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Federated States of Micronesia
conventional short form: none
former: Kosrae, Ponape, Truk, and Yap Districts (Trust Territory of
the Pacific Islands)
abbreviation: FSM

Data code: FM

Government type: constitutional government in free association with
the US; the Compact of Free Association entered into force 3 November
1986

National capital: Kolonia (on the island of Pohnpei)
note: a new capital is being built about 10 km southwest in the
Palikir valley

Administrative divisions: 4 states; Kosrae, Pohnpei, Chuuk (Truk), Yap

Independence: 3 November 1986 (from the US-administered UN
Trusteeship)

National holiday: Proclamation of the Federated States of Micronesia,
10 May (1979)

Constitution: 10 May 1979

Legal system: based on adapted Trust Territory laws, acts of the
legislature, municipal, common, and customary laws

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Jacob NENA (acting president since NA July
1996, president since 9 May 1997); Vice President Leo A. SALCAM (since
9 May 1997); note - the president is both the chief of state and head
of government; Vice President Jacob NENA became acting president in
July 1996 after President Bailey OLTER suffered a stroke; OLTER was
declared incapacitated in November 1996; as provided for by the
constitution, 180 days later, with OLTER still unable to resume his
duties, NENA was sworn in as the new president; he will serve for the
remaining two years of OLTER's term
head of government: President Jacob NENA (acting president since NA
July 1996, president since 9 May 1997); Vice President Leo A. SALCAM
(since 9 May 1997); note - the president is both the chief of state
and head of government; Vice President Jacob NENA became acting
president in July 1996 after President Bailey OLTER suffered a stroke;
OLTER was declared incapacitated in November 1996; as provided for by
the constitution, 180 days later, with OLTER still unable to resume
his duties, NENA was sworn in as the new president; he will serve for
the remaining two years of OLTER's term
cabinet: Cabinet
elections: president and vice president elected by Congress from among
the four senators-at-large for four-year terms; election last held 11
May 1995 (next to be held NA May 1999); note - because of the vacancy
to the post of vice president created after NENA left to become acting
president, a new election to fill the position for the remaining two
years of the term was held on 9 May 1997 (next to be held NA May 1999)
election results: Bailey OLTER reelected president; percent of
Congress vote - NA; Leo A. SALCAM elected vice president; percent of
Congress vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Congress (14 seats; members elected by
popular vote; four - one elected from each of state - to serve
four-year terms and 10 - elected from single-member districts
delineated by population - to serve two-year terms)
elections: last held 7 March 1995 (next to be held NA March 1999)
election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - independents 14

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: no formal parties

International organization participation: AsDB, ESCAP, G-77, IBRD,
ICAO, IDA, IFC, IMF, Intelsat, ITU, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD,
WHO, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Jesse B. MAREHALAU
chancery : 1725 N Street NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 223-4383
FAX: [1] (202) 223-4391
consulate(s) general: Honolulu and Tamuning (Guam)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Cheryl MARTIN
embassy: address NA, Kolonia
mailing address : P. O. Box 1286, Pohnpei, Federated States of
Micronesia 96941
telephone: [691] 320-2187
FAX: [691] 320-2186

Flag description: light blue with four white five-pointed stars
centered; the stars are arranged in a diamond pattern

Economy

Economy - overview: Economic activity consists primarily of
subsistence farming and fishing. The islands have few mineral deposits
worth exploiting, except for high-grade phosphate. The potential for a
tourist industry exists, but the remoteness of the location and a lack
of adequate facilities hinder development. Financial assistance from
the US is the primary source of revenue, with the US pledged to spend
$1 billion in the islands in the 1990s. Geographical isolation and a
poorly developed infrastructure are major impediments to long-term
growth.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $205 million (1994 est.)
note: GDP is supplemented by grant aid, averaging perhaps $100 million
annually

GDP - real growth rate: 1.4% (1994 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,700 (1994 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4% (1994 est.)

Labor force: NA
by occupation: two-thirds are government employees

Unemployment rate: 27% (1989)

Budget:
revenues: $45 million
expenditures: $31 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY94/95 est.)

Industries: tourism, construction, fish processing, craft items from
shell, wood, and pearls

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 38,500 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: black pepper, tropical fruits and vegetables,
coconuts, cassava (tapioca), sweet potatoes; pigs, chickens

Exports:
total value: $29.1 million (f.o.b., 1994 est.)
commodities : fish, garments, bananas, black pepper
partners: Japan, US, Guam

Imports:
total value: $141.1 million (c.i.f., 1994 est.)
commodities: food, manufactured goods, machinery and equipment,
beverages
partners: US, Japan, Australia

Debt - external: $129 million

Economic aid:
recipient: under terms of the Compact of Free Association, the US will
provide $1.3 billion in grant aid during the period 1986-2001

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September

@Micronesia, Federated States of:Communications

Telephones: 960

Telephone system:
domestic: islands interconnected by shortwave radiotelephone (used
mostly for government purposes)
international: satellite earth stations - 4 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 1, shortwave 1

Radios: 17,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 6

Televisions: 1,290 (1993 est.)

@Micronesia, Federated States of:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 235 km
paved: 41 km
unpaved: 194 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Colonia (Yap), Kolonia (Pohnpei), Lele, Moen

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 5 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m : 4 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

MIDWAY ISLANDS

(territory of the US)

@Midway Islands:Geography

Location: Oceania, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, about one-third
of the way from Honolulu to Tokyo

Geographic coordinates: 28 13 N, 177 22 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 5.2 sq km
land : 5.2 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Eastern Island and Sand Island

Area - comparative: about nine times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 15 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, but moderated by prevailing easterly winds

Terrain: low, nearly level

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 4 m

Natural resources: fish, wildlife

Land use:
arable land : 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: a coral atoll; closed to the public

@Midway Islands:People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants
note: there are 453 US military personnel (July 1995 est.)

@Midway Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Midway Islands

Data code: MQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US; formerly
administered by the US Navy, under Naval Facilities Engineering
Command, Pacific Division; this facility has been operationally closed
since 10 September 1993 and is currently undergoing transfer of
accountability and responsibility to the US Department of the
Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service

National capital: none; administered from Washington, DC

Flag description: the flag of the US is used

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is based on providing support services
for remaining activities located on the islands. All food and
manufactured goods must be imported.

Electricity - capacity: NA kW
note: electricity supplied by the US military

Electricity - production: NA kWh
note : electricity supplied by the US military

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

@Midway Islands:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

@Midway Islands:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 32 km
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km

Pipelines: 7.8 km

Ports and harbors: Sand Island

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

MOLDOVA

@Moldova:Geography

Location: Eastern Europe, northeast of Romania

Geographic coordinates: 47 00 N, 29 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
total: 33,700 sq km
land : 33,700 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Hawaii

Land boundaries:
total: 1,389 km
border countries: Romania 450 km, Ukraine 939 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: moderate winters, warm summers

Terrain: rolling steppe, gradual slope south to Black Sea

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Nistru River 2 m
highest point: Mount Balaneshty 430 m

Natural resources: lignite, phosphorites, gypsum

Land use:
arable land: 53%
permanent crops: 14%
permanent pastures: 13%
forests and woodland: 13%
other : 7% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 3,110 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: heavy use of agricultural chemicals,
including banned pesticides such as DDT, has contaminated soil and
groundwater; extensive soil erosion from poor farming methods

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Ozone Layer
Protection
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked

@Moldova:People

Population: 4,457,206 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 26% (male 580,839; female 560,784)
15-64 years: 65% (male 1,384,380; female 1,503,831)
65 years and over: 9% (male 158,886; female 268,486) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.02% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 14.32 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 12.33 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.15 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.59 male(s)/female
total population: 0.91 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 43.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 64.25 years
male : 59.46 years
female: 69.29 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.89 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Moldovan(s)
adjective: Moldovan

Ethnic groups: Moldavian/Romanian 64.5%, Ukrainian 13.8%, Russian 13%,
Gagauz 3.5%, Jewish 1.5%, Bulgarian 2%, other 1.7% (1989 figures)
note : internal disputes with ethnic Russians and Ukrainians in the
Nistru region and Gagauz Turks in the south

Religions: Eastern Orthodox 98.5%, Jewish 1.5%, Baptist (only about
1,000 members) (1991)
note: the large majority of churchgoers are ethnic Moldavian

Languages: Moldovan (official, virtually the same as the Romanian
language), Russian, Gagauz (a Turkish dialect)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 96%
male: 99%
female: 94% (1989 est.)

@Moldova:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Moldova
conventional short form: Moldova
local long form: Republica Moldova
local short form : none
former: Soviet Socialist Republic of Moldova; Moldavia

Data code: MD

Government type: republic

National capital: Chisinau

Administrative divisions: previously divided into 40 rayons; new
districts possible under new constitution of 1994

Independence: 27 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 August 1991

Constitution: new constitution adopted 28 July 1994; replaces old
Soviet constitution of 1979

Legal system: based on civil law system; Constitutional Court reviews
legality of legislative acts and governmental decisions of resolution;
it is unclear if Moldova accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction but
accepts many UN and OSCE documents

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Petru LUCINSCHI (since 15 January 1997)
head of government: Prime Minister Ion CIUBUC (since 15 January 1997);
First Deputy Prime Minister Ion GUTU (since NA April 1994)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
recommendation of the prime minister
elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
election last held 17 November 1996; runoff election 1 December 1996
(next to be held NA November 2000); following legislative elections,
the leader of the majority party or leader of the majority coalition
is usually elected prime minister by Parliament
election results: Petru LUCINSCHI ran against Mircea SNEGUR and was
elected president; percent of vote - LUCINSCHI 54%, SNEGUR 46%; Prime
Minister Ion CIUBU was appointed by the president 15 January 1997 and
was elected by a parliamentary vote of 75-15 on 24 January 1997

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (104 seats; members are
directly elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : last held 27 February 1994 (next to be held NA February
1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PDAM
56, Socialist/Yedinstvo Bloc 28, Peasants and Intellectuals Bloc 11,
FPCDM 9; note - seats as of June-July 1995 were as follows: PDAM 45,
PSM/UN 28, Peasants and Intellectuals Bloc 11, PRCM 11, FPCDM 9
note : the comparative breakdown of seats by faction is approximate

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Christian Democratic Popular Front or
FPCDM (formerly Moldovan Popular Front) [Iurie ROSCA, chairman];
Socialist Unity Faction or US of the Socialist Party of Moldova or
PSM; Social Democratic Party of Moldova or PSDM [Anatol TARAN,
chairman]; Agrarian Democratic Party of Moldova or PDAM [Dumitru
MOTPAN, chairman]; Peasants and Intellectuals Bloc [Lidia ISTRATI,
chairwoman]; Liberal Party of Modova or PLM [Mircea RUSU, chairman];
Socialist Party of Moldova or PSM [Valeriu SENIC and Victor MOREV,
cochairmen]; Party of Rivival and Conciliation of Moldova or PRCM
[Mircea SNEGUR, chairman]; Moldovan Party of Democratic Forces or PFDM
[Valeriu MATEI, chairman]; Party for Social Progress or PPSM [Eugen
SOBOR, chairman]; Communist Party or PCM [Vladimir VORONIN, first
chairman]; Civic Unity [Vladimir SOLONARI]

Political pressure groups and leaders: The Ecology Movement of Moldova
or EMM [Alecu RENITSA, chairman]; The Christian Democratic League of
Women of Moldova or CDLWM [Lidia ISTRATI, chairwoman]; National
Christian Party of Moldova or NCPM [V. NIKU, leader]; The Peoples
Movement Gagauz Khalky or GKh [S. GULGAR, leader]; The Democratic
Party of Gagauzia or DPG [G. SAVOSTIN, chairman]; The Alliance of
Working People of Moldova or AWPM [G. POLOGOV, president]; Liberal
Convention of Moldova (now the Liberal Party); Association of Victims
of Repression [Alexander USATIUC]; Christian Democratic Youth
Organization [Valeriu BARBA]; National Youth League [Valeriu
STRELETS]; Union of Youth of Moldova [Petru GAVTON]

International organization participation: BIS, BSEC, CCC, CE, CEI,
CIS, EBRD, ECE, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, Intelsat
(nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NACC, OSCE,
PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
(applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Nicolae TAU
chancery: 2101 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 667-1130
FAX: [1] (202) 667-1204

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador John Todd STEWART
embassy : Strada Alexei Mateevicie #103, Chisinau 277014
mailing address: use embassy street address; pouch address - American
Embassy Chisinau, Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-7080
telephone: [373] (2) 23-37-72, RNX (plus extension)
FAX: [373] (2) 23-30-44

Flag description: same color scheme as Romania - three equal vertical
bands of blue (hoist side), yellow, and red; emblem in center of flag
is of a Roman eagle of gold outlined in black with a red beak and
talons carrying a yellow cross in its beak and a green olive branch in
its right talons and a yellow scepter in its left talons; on its
breast is a shield divided horizontally red over blue with a stylized
ox head, star, rose, and crescent all in black-outlined yellow

Economy

Economy - overview: Moldova enjoys a favorable climate and good
farmland but has no major mineral deposits. As a result, the economy
depends heavily on agriculture, featuring fruits, vegetables, wine,
and tobacco. Moldova must import all of its supplies of oil, coal, and
natural gas, largely from Russia. Energy shortages contributed to
sharp production declines after the breakup of the Soviet Union in
1991. The Moldovan Government has recently been making progress on an
ambitious economic reform agenda, and the IMF has called Moldova a
model for the region. As part of its reform efforts, Moldova
introduced a stable convertible currency, freed all prices, stopped
issuing preferential credits to state enterprises and backed their
steady privatization, removed export controls, and freed interest
rates. With the election of President LUCINSCHI in December 1996, it
is unclear how rapidly the reforms will be pushed.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $10.8 billion (1996 estimate
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 48%
industry: 28%
services: 24% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 15% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 2.03 million (January 1994)
by occupation: agriculture 39.5%, industry 12.0%, other 48.5% (1994)

Unemployment rate: 1.4% (includes only officially registered
unemployed; large numbers of underemployed workers) (January 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $570 million
expenditures: $645 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: food processing, agricultural machinery, foundry
equipment, refrigerators and freezers, washing machines, hosiery,
sugar, vegetable oil, shoes, textiles

Industrial production growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 3.222 million kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 1.4 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 324 kWh (1996 est.)

Agriculture - products: vegetables, fruits, wine, grain, sugar beets,
sunflower seed, tobacco; meat, milk

Exports:
total value: $775 million (1996)
commodities: foodstuffs, wine, tobacco, textiles and footwear,
machinery
partners : Russia, Kazakstan, Ukraine, Romania, Germany

Imports:
total value: $1.048 billion (1996)
commodities: oil, gas, coal, steel, machinery, foodstuffs,
automobiles, and other consumer durables
partners: Russia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Romania, Germany

Debt - external: $950.7 million (of which $240 million to Russia)
(1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note: commitments, $1,335 million ($500 million disbursements),
1992-95

Currency: the Moldovan leu (MLD) (plural lei) was introduced in late
1993

Exchange rates: lei (MLD) per US$1 (end of period) - 4.6870 (January
1997), 4.6743 (1996), 4.4990 (1995), 4.2700 (1994), 3.6400 (1993),
0.4145 (1992); period average - 4.6121 (August 1996), 4.4958 (1995)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Moldova:Communications

Telephones: 600,000 (1996 est.)

Telephone system: telecommunication system not well developed; 215,000
unsatisfied requests for telephone service (1991 est.); in early 1997,
Chisinau was considering privatizing its state-owned telephone company
domestic: NA
international: international connections to other former Soviet
republics by landline and microwave radio relay through Ukraine and to
other countries by leased connections to the Moscow international
gateway switch; satellite earth stations - 1 Eutelsat and 1 Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 5, shortwave NA (1994)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2 (one national and one private) (1995)

Televisions: NA

@Moldova:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,328 km
broad gauge: 1,328 km 1.520-m gauge (1992)

Highways:
total: 12,259 km
paved: 10,690 km
unpaved: 1,569 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 424 km (1994)

Pipelines: natural gas 310 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 26 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 8
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
under 914 m : 3 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 18
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m : 5
under 914 m: 8 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Ground Forces, Air and Air Defense Forces, Republic
Security Forces (internal and border troops)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,134,619 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 894,337 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 37,689 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 203 million lei (1995); note -
conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the current
exchange rate could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: certain territory of Moldova and Ukraine -
including Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina - are considered by
Bucharest as historically a part of Romania; this territory was
incorporated into the former Soviet Union following the
Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact in 1940

Illicit drugs: limited cultivation of opium poppy and cannabis, mostly
for CIS consumption; transshipment point for illicit drugs to Western
Europe and Russia
______________________________________________________________________

MONACO

@Monaco:Geography

Location: Western Europe, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, on the
southern coast of France, near the border with Italy

Geographic coordinates: 43 44 N, 7 24 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total : 1.9 sq km
land: 1.9 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about three times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
total: 4.4 km
border countries: France 4.4 km

Coastline: 4.1 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: Mediterranean with mild, wet winters and hot, dry summers

Terrain: hilly, rugged, rocky

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
highest point: Mont Agel 140 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100% (urban area)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: second smallest independent state in world (after
Holy See); almost entirely urban

@Monaco:People

Population: 31,892 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 17% (male 2,731; female 2,671)
15-64 years : 63% (male 9,856; female 10,392)
65 years and over: 20% (male 2,288; female 3,954) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.49% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 10.66 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 12.01 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 6.27 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.95 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.58 male(s)/female
total population: 0.87 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.24 years
male: 74.59 years
female: 82.07 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.7 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Monegasque(s) or Monacan(s)
adjective: Monegasque or Monacan

Ethnic groups: French 47%, Monegasque 16%, Italian 16%, other 21%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%

Languages: French (official), English, Italian, Monegasque

Literacy: NA

@Monaco:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Principality of Monaco
conventional short form: Monaco
local long form: Principaute de Monaco
local short form : Monaco

Data code: MN

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: Monaco

Administrative divisions: 4 quarters (quartiers, singular - quartier);
Fontvieille, La Condamine, Monaco-Ville, Monte-Carlo

Independence: 1419 (rule by the House of Grimaldi)

National holiday: National Day, 19 November

Constitution: 17 December 1962

Legal system: based on French law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Prince RAINIER III (since 9 May 1949); Heir Apparent
Prince ALBERT Alexandre Louis Pierre (born 14 March 1958)
head of government: Minister of State Michel LEVEQUE (since 3 February
1997)
cabinet: Council of Government is under the authority of the prince
elections: none; the prince is a hereditary monarch; minister of state
appointed by the prince from a list of three French national
candidates presented by the French Government

Legislative branch: unicameral National Council or Conseil National
(18 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year
terms)
elections: last held 24 and 31 January 1993 (next to be held NA
January 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
National and Democratic Union 15, other 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Tribunal Supreme

Political parties and leaders: National and Democratic Union or UND
[Jean-Louis CAMPORA]

International organization participation: ACCT, ECE, IAEA, ICAO, ICRM,
IFRCS, IHO, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, OSCE, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US: Monaco does not have an embassy
in the US
consulate(s) general: New York
honorary consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, New
Orleans, San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico)
honorary consulate(s): Dallas, Palm Beach, Philadelphia, and
Washington, DC

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Monaco; the US Consul General in Marseille (France) is accredited
to Monaco

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and white;
similar to the flag of Indonesia which is longer and the flag of
Poland which is white (top) and red

Economy

Economy - overview: Monaco, situated on the French Mediterranean
coast, is a popular resort, attracting tourists to its casino and
pleasant climate. The Principality has successfully sought to
diversify into services and small, high-value-added, nonpolluting
industries. The state has no income tax and low business taxes and
thrives as a tax haven both for individuals who have established
residence and for foreign companies that have set up businesses and
offices. About 55% of Monaco's annual revenue comes from value-added
taxes on hotels, banks, and the industrial sector; about 25% of
revenue comes from tourism. Living standards are high, roughly
comparable to those in prosperous French metropolitan areas.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $800 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $25,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 30,540 (1 January 1994)

Unemployment rate: 3.1% (1994)

Budget:
revenues: $570.4 million
expenditures: $570.1 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1994 est.)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 10,000 kW standby
note: electricity imported from France

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: none

Exports: $NA; full customs integration with France, which collects and
rebates Monegasque trade duties; also participates in EU market system
through customs union with France

Imports: $NA; full customs integration with France, which collects and
rebates Monegasque trade duties; also participates in EU market system
through customs union with France

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.4169(January 1997),
5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520 (1994), 5.6632 (1993), 5.2938
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Monaco:Communications

Telephones: 53,180 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: automatic telephone system
domestic : NA
international: no satellite earth stations; connected by cable into
the French communications system

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 30,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 5 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 22,000 (1992 est.)

@Monaco:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1.7 km
standard gauge: 1.7 km 1.435-m gauge

Highways:
total : 43 km
paved: 43 km
unpaved : 0 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Monaco

Merchant marine: none

Airports: linked to airport in Nice, France, by helicopter service

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

MONGOLIA

@Mongolia:Geography

Location: Northern Asia, between China and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 46 00 N, 105 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total : 1.565 million sq km
land: 1.565 million sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Alaska

Land boundaries:
total: 8,114 km
border countries: China 4,673 km, Russia 3,441 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: desert; continental (large daily and seasonal temperature
ranges)

Terrain: vast semidesert and desert plains; mountains in west and
southwest; Gobi Desert in southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Hoh Nuur 518 m
highest point: Tavan Bogd Uul 4,374 m

Natural resources: oil, coal, copper, molybdenum, tungsten,
phosphates, tin, nickel, zinc, wolfram, fluorspar, gold

Land use:
arable land : 1%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 80%
forests and woodland: 9%
other: 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust storms can occur in the spring; grassland fires

Environment - current issues: limited natural fresh water resources;
policies of the former communist regime promoting rapid urbanization
and industrial growth have raised concerns about their negative
effects on the environment; the burning of soft coal and the
concentration of factories in Ulaanbaatar have severely polluted the
air; deforestation, overgrazing, the converting of virgin land to
agricultural production have increased soil erosion from wind and
rain; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked; strategic location between China and
Russia

@Mongolia:People

Population: 2,538,211 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 38% (male 485,760; female 471,005)
15-64 years: 58% (male 743,194; female 743,529)
65 years and over : 4% (male 40,621; female 54,102) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.62% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 24.57 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.41 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.75 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 68 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 61.1 years
male: 59.1 years
female : 63.2 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.89 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Mongolian(s)
adjective: Mongolian

Ethnic groups: Mongol 90%, Kazak 4%, Chinese 2%, Russian 2%, other 2%

Religions: predominantly Tibetan Buddhist, Muslim 4%
note: previously limited religious activity because of communist
regime

Languages: Khalkha Mongol 90%, Turkic, Russian, Chinese

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 82.9%
male : 88.6%
female: 77.2% (1988 est.)

@Mongolia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form : Mongolia
local long form: none
local short form : Mongol Uls
former: Outer Mongolia

Data code: MG

Government type: republic

National capital: Ulaanbaatar

Administrative divisions: 18 provinces (aymguud, singular - aymag) and
3 municipalities* (hotuud, singular - hot); Arhangay, Bayanhongor,
Bayan-Olgiy, Bulgan, Darhan*, Dornod, Dornogovi, Dundgovi, Dzavhan,
Erdenet*, Govi-Altay, Hentiy, Hovd, Hovsgol, Omnogovi, Ovorhangay,
Selenge, Suhbaatar, Tov, Ulaanbaatar*, Uvs

Independence: 13 March 1921 (from China)

National holiday: National Day, 11 July (1921)

Constitution: 12 February 1992

Legal system: blend of Russian, Chinese, and Turkish systems of law;
no constitutional provision for judicial review of legislative acts;
has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Punsalmaagiyn OCHIRBAT (since 3 September
1990)
head of government: Prime Minister Mendsaihan ENHSAIHAN (since 18 July
1996)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the State Great Hural
elections: president nominated by parties in the State Great Hural and
elected by popular vote for a four-year term; election last held 6
June 1993 (next to be held 19 May 1997); following legislative
elections, the leader of the majority party or majority coalition is
usually elected prime minister by the State Great Hural
election results: Punsalmaagiyn OCHIRBAT (MNDP and MSDP) reelected
president; percent of vote - Punsalmaagiyn OCHIRBAT 57.8%, Lodongiyn
TUDEV (MPRP) NA%; Mendsaihan ENHSAIHAN elected prime minister; percent
of State Great Hural vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral State Great Hural (76 seats; members
elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 30 June 1996 (next to be held NA June 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - DUC 66%, MPRP 33%, MCP
1%; seats by party - DUC 50 (MNDP 34, MSDP 13, independents 3), MPRP
25, MCP 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, serves as appeals court for people's
and provincial courts, but to date rarely overturns verdicts of lower
courts, judges are nominated by the General Council of Courts for
approval by the Great Hural

Political parties and leaders: Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party
(MPRP), N. ENHBAYAR, general secretary; Democratic Union Coalition
(DUC), Mendsaihan ENHSAIHAN, general secretary (includes Mongolian
National Democratic Party or MNDP, M. ENHSAIHAN, chairman; Mongolian
Social Democratic Party or MSDP, Radnaasumbereliyn GONCHIGDORJI,
chairman; Green Party, leader NA; and Mongolian Democratic Party of
Believers or MDPB, leader NA); Mongolian Conservative Party (MCP),
leader NA; Democratic Power Coalition, D. BYAMBASUREN, chairman
(includes Mongolian Democratic Renaissance Party or MDRP, BYAMBASUREN,
chairman, and Mongolian People's Party or MPP, leader NA); Mongolian
National Solidarity Party (MNSP), leader NA; Bourgeois
Party/Capitalist Party, VARGALSAIHAN, chairman; United Heritage Party
(UHP), B. JAMTSAI (includes United Party of Herdsman and Farmers,
leader NA; Independence Party, leader NA; Traditional United
Conservative Party, leader NA; and Mongolian United Private Property
Owners Party, leader NA); Workers' Party, leader NA

International organization participation: AsDB, CCC, ESCAP, FAO, G-77,
IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM (observer),
UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Jalbuugiyn CHOINHOR
chancery: 2833 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone: [1] (202) 333-7117
FAX : [1] (202) 298-9227
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Llewellyn
HEDGBETH
embassy: inner north side of the Big Ring, just west of the Selbe Gol,
Ulaanbaatar
mailing address: c/o American Embassy Beijing, Micro Region 11, Big
Ring Road; PSC 461, Box 300, FPO AP 96521-0002
telephone : [976] (1) 329095, 329606
FAX: [976] (1) 320776

Flag description: three equal, vertical bands of red (hoist side),
blue, and red, centered on the hoist-side red band in yellow is the
national emblem ("soyombo" - a columnar arrangement of abstract and
geometric representation for fire, sun, moon, earth, water, and the
yin-yang symbol)

Economy

Economy - overview: The new government has embraced free-market
economics, freezing spending, easing price controls, liberalizing
domestic and international trade. Mongolia's severe climate, scattered
population, and wide expanses of unproductive land, however, have
constrained economic development. Economic activity traditionally has
been based on agriculture and the breeding of livestock. In past years
extensive mineral resources had been developed with Soviet support;
total Soviet assistance at its height amounted to 30% of GDP. The
mining and processing of coal, copper, molybdenum, tin, tungsten, and
gold account for a large part of industrial production. The dramatic
drop in the price of copper which accounts for half of the country's
export earnings, has held back economic growth. The Mongolian
leadership also has been soliciting support from international
financial agencies and foreign investors. The economy, however, has
still not recovered from the loss of Soviet aid. The country continues
to suffer substantial economic hardships, with one-fourth of the
population below the poverty line.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $5.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,060 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 28%
industry: 35%
services: 37% (1993 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 53% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1.115 million (mid-1993 est.)
by occupation : primarily herding/agricultural

Unemployment rate: 6% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $1.5 billion
expenditures : $1.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: copper, construction materials, mining (particularly
coal); food and beverage, processing of animal products

Industrial production growth rate: 6% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 900,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 3.07 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,215 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, barley, potatoes, forage crops; sheep,
goats, cattle, camels, horses

Exports:
total value: $400 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities : copper, livestock, animal products, cashmere, wool,
hides, fluorspar, other nonferrous metals
partners: former CMEA countries 30%, China 15%, EU 9% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $473 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities : machinery and equipment, fuels, food products,
industrial consumer goods, chemicals, building materials, sugar, tea
partners: former CMEA countries 56%, China 9%, EU 8% (1995)

Debt - external: $500 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA; US, $9.5 million (1995 est.)

Currency: 1 tughrik (Tug) = 100 mongos

Exchange rates: tughriks (Tug) per US$1 - 709.54 (January 1997),
548.40 (1996), 448.61 (1995), 412.72 (1994), 42.56 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Mongolia:Communications

Telephones: 89,000 (1995 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean
Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 12, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 220,000

Television broadcast stations: 1 (provincial repeaters 18)

Televisions: 120,000 (1993 est.)

@Mongolia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,928 km
broad gauge: 1,928 km 1.524-m gauge (1994)

Highways:
total : 49,200 km
paved: 1,120 km
unpaved: 48,080 km (1995 est.)
note: much of the unpaved rural road system consists of rough
cross-country tracks

Waterways: 397 km of principal routes (1988)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 34 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 8
2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
under 914 m : 1 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 26
over 3,047 m: 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m : 5 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Mongolian People's Army (includes Internal Security
Forces and Frontier Guards), Air Force

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 659,173 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 430,482 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 27,723 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $22.8 million (1992)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1% (1992)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

MONTSERRAT

(dependent territory of the UK)

@Montserrat:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, southeast of Puerto
Rico

Geographic coordinates: 16 45 N, 62 12 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total : 100 sq km
land: 100 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.6 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 40 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical; little daily or seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: volcanic islands, mostly mountainous, with small coastal
lowland

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Chances Peak 914 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land : 20%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 10%
forests and woodland: 40%
other: 30% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: severe hurricanes (June to November); volcanic
eruptions (full-scale eruptions of the Soufriere Hills volcano
occurred during 1996)

Environment - current issues: land erosion occurs on slopes that have
been cleared for cultivation

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified : NA

@Montserrat:People

Population: 12,800 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years : NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 0.23% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 14.47 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.85 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.3 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years : NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 11.87 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 75.62 years
male: 73.85 years
female : 77.42 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.86 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Montserratian(s)
adjective: Montserratian

Ethnic groups: black, white

Religions: Anglican, Methodist, Roman Catholic, Pentecostal,
Seventh-Day Adventist, other Christian denominations

Languages: English

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over has ever attended school
total population: 97%
male: 97%
female: 97% (1970 est.)

@Montserrat:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Montserrat

Data code: MH

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK

Government type: NA

National capital: Plymouth

Administrative divisions: 3 parishes; Saint Anthony, Saint Georges,
Saint Peter's

Independence: none (dependent territory of the UK)

National holiday: Celebration of the Birthday of the Queen (second
Saturday of June)

Constitution: present constitution came into force 19 December 1989

Legal system: English common law and statute law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor Frank J. SAVAGE (since NA February 1993)
head of government : Chief Minister Bertrand OSBORNE (since 13
November 1996)
cabinet: Executive Council consists of the governor, the chief
minister, three other ministries, the attorney general, and the
finance secretary
elections: the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor appointed by
the queen; following legislative elections, the leader of the majority
party usually becomes chief minister; note: as a result of the last
election, a coalition party was formed between NPP, NDP, and one of
the independent candidates

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council (11 seats, 7
popularly elected; members serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 11 November 1996 (next to be held by NA 2001)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PPA
2, MNR 2, NPP 1, independent 2

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (based in Saint
Lucia); one judge of the Supreme Court is a resident of the islands
and presides over the High Court

Political parties and leaders: National Progressive Party (NPP),
Reuben T. MEADE; Movement for National Reconstruction (MNR), Percival
Austin BRAMBLE; People's Progressive Alliance (PPA), Bertrand OSBORNE

International organization participation: Caricom, CDB, ECLAC
(associate), ICFTU, Interpol (subbureau), OECS, WCL

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (dependent territory of
the UK)

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
quadrant and the Montserratian coat of arms centered in the outer half
of the flag; the coat of arms features a woman standing beside a
yellow harp with her arm around a black cross

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy of this volcanic island is small and
open, with economic activity centered on tourism and related services.
Tourism accounts for roughly one-quarter of Montserrat's national
income. The island's main export is electronic components which are
mainly shipped to the US. The agriculture sector is small; cabbages,
carrots, cucumbers, and onions are grown for the domestic market;
additionally, some hot peppers and live plants are exported to the US
and Europe. Volcanic activity in late 1995 led to the repeated
evacuation of Montserrat's capital, Plymouth, and deep ash from the
volcano destroyed much of the yearend crops. These disruptions,
compounded by hurricanes, caused production in 1995 to drop
precipitously. The likely slow recovery of tourism and the continued
danger of an eruption dimmed the prospects for rapid recovery in 1996.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $55.3 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -2.9% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $4,360 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 4.8%
industry: 18.4%
services: 76.8% (1990 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 4,521 (1992)
by occupation : community, social, and personal services 40.5%,
construction 13.5%, trade, restaurants, and hotels 12.3%,
manufacturing 10.5%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing 8.8%, other
14.4% (1983 est.)

Unemployment rate: 6% (1995)

Budget:
revenues: NA
expenditures : NA

Industries: tourism, rum, textiles, electronic appliances

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: cabbages, carrots, cucumbers, tomatoes,
onions, peppers; livestock products

Exports:
total value: $12.1 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities : electronic components, plastic bags, apparel, hot
peppers, live plants, cattle
partners: US, Ireland

Imports:
total value: $29.9 million (f.o.b., 1994 est.)
commodities : machinery and transportation equipment, foodstuffs,
manufactured goods, fuels, lubricants, and related materials
partners: NA

Debt - external: $10.2 million (December 1994)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (February
1997; fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Montserrat:Communications

Telephones: 3,000

Telephone system:
domestic : NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 8, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 6,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 2,000 (1992 est.)

@Montserrat:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 269 km
paved: 203 km
unpaved: 66 km (1995)

Ports and harbors: Plymouth

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Police Force

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

MOROCCO

@Morocco:Geography

Location: Northern Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean and the
Mediterranean Sea, between Algeria and Western Sahara

Geographic coordinates: 32 00 N, 5 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 446,550 sq km
land: 446,300 sq km
water: 250 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries:
total: 2,017.9 km
border countries: Algeria 1,559 km, Western Sahara 443 km, Spain
(Ceuta) 6.3 km, Spain (Melilla) 9.6 km

Coastline: 1,835 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: Mediterranean, becoming more extreme in the interior

Terrain: northern coast and interior are mountainous with large areas
of bordering plateaus, intermontane valleys, and rich coastal plains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Sebkha Tah -55 m
highest point: Jebel Toubkal 4,165 m

Natural resources: phosphates, iron ore, manganese, lead, zinc, fish,
salt

Land use:
arable land: 21%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 47%
forests and woodland: 20%
other : 11% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 12,580 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: northern mountains geologically unstable and subject
to earthquakes; periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: land degradation/desertification (soil
erosion resulting from farming of marginal areas, overgrazing,
destruction of vegetation); water supplies contaminated by raw sewage;
siltation of reservoirs; oil pollution of coastal waters

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: strategic location along Strait of Gibraltar

@Morocco:People

Population: 30,391,423 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 37% (male 5,730,322; female 5,552,490)
15-64 years: 59% (male 8,832,635; female 8,949,126)
65 years and over: 4% (male 629,816; female 697,034) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.02% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 26.83 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.58 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.08 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.9 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 40.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 70.08 years
male : 68.04 years
female: 72.21 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.47 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Moroccan(s)
adjective: Moroccan

Ethnic groups: Arab-Berber 99.1%, other 0.7%, Jewish 0.2%

Religions: Muslim 98.7%, Christian 1.1%, Jewish 0.2%

Languages: Arabic (official), Berber dialects, French often the
language of business, government, and diplomacy

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 43.7%
male : 56.6%
female: 31% (1995 est.)

@Morocco:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Kingdom of Morocco
conventional short form : Morocco
local long form: Al Mamlakah al Maghribiyah
local short form: Al Maghrib

Data code: MO

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: Rabat

Administrative divisions: 36 provinces and 5 wilayas*; Agadir, Al
Hoceima, Assa-Zag, Azilal, Beni Mellal, Ben Slimane, Boulemane,
Casablanca*, Chaouen, El Jadida, El Kelaa des Srarhna, Er Rachidia,
Essaouira, Es Smara, Fes*, Figuig, Guelmim, Ifrane, Kenitra,
Khemisset, Khenifra, Khouribga, Laayoune, Larache, Marrakech*,
Meknes*, Nador, Ouarzazate, Oujda, Rabat-Sale*, Safi, Settat, Sidi
Kacem, Tanger, Tan-Tan, Taounate, Taroudannt, Tata, Taza, Tetouan,
Tiznit
note : decentralization/regionalization law passed by the legislature
in March 1997 creating many new provinces/regions; specific details
and scope of the reorganization not yet available

Independence: 2 March 1956 (from France)

National holiday: National Day, 3 March (1961) (anniversary of King
HASSAN II's accession to the throne)

Constitution: 10 March 1972, revised 4 September 1992, amended (to
create bicameral legislature) September 1996

Legal system: based on Islamic law and French and Spanish civil law
system; judicial review of legislative acts in Constitutional Chamber
of Supreme Court

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: King HASSAN II (since 3 March 1961)
head of government: Prime Minister Abdellatif FILALI (since 29 May
1994)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the king
elections: none; the king is a hereditary monarch; prime minister
appointed by the king

Legislative branch: unicameral Chamber of Representatives or Majlis
Nawab (333 seats; 222 elected by popular vote, 111 indirectly elected
by an electoral college made up of government, professional, and labor
representatives; members serve six-year terms); note - bicameral
legislature to be introduced in September 1997; members of the upper
house will be indirectly elected to serve nine-year terms, with
one-third of the members renewed every three years; members of the
lower house will be directly elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms
elections: popular elections last held 15 June 1993; indirect
elections last held 17 September 1993 (next election will be for the
new bicameral legislature with both indirect and popular elections
scheduled to be held in September 1997)
election results: popular elections - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - USFP 48, IP 43, MP 33, RNI 28, UC 27, PND 14, MNP 14,
PPS 6, PDI 3, SAP 2, PA 2, OADP 2; indirect elections - percent of
vote by party - NA; seats by party - UC 27, MP 18, RNI 13, MNP 11, PND
10, IP 7, Party of Shura and Istiqlal 6, USFP 4, PPS 4, CDT 4, UTM 3,
UGTM 2, SAP 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed on the
recommendation of the Supreme Council of the Judiciary, presided over
by the king

Political parties and leaders:
opposition : Socialist Union of Popular Forces (USFP), Abderrahman
YOUSSFI; Istiqlal Party (IP), M'Hamed BOUCETTA; Party of Progress and
Socialism (PPS), Ali YATA; Organization of Democratic and Popular
Action (OADP), Mohamed Ben SAID; Democratic Socialist Party, Issa
al-OUARDIGHI
pro-government: Constitutional Union (UC), Abdelatif SEMLALI; Popular
Movement (MP), Mohamed LAENSER; National Democratic Party (PND),
Mohamed Arsalane EL-JADIDI; National Popular Movement (MNP), Mahjoubi
AHARDANE; National Democratic Movement, Mohamed AARCHANE
independents: National Rally of Independents (RNI), Ahmed OSMAN;
Democracy and Istiqlal Party (PDI), leader NA; Action Party (PA),
Abdullah SENHAJI; Non-Obedience Candidates (SAP), leader NA
labor unions and community organizations (indirect elections only) :
Democratic Confederation of Labor (CDT), Nabir AMAOUI; General Union
of Moroccan Workers (UGTM), Abderrazzak AFILAL; Moroccan Union of
Workers (UTM), Mahjoub BENSEDIQ; Party of Shura and Istiqlal,
Abdelwaheb MAASH; Labor Union Commissions, leader NA

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACCT (associate),
AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, CCC, EBRD, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD,
ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending
member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO,
ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OIC, OSCE (partner), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Mohamed BENAISSA
chancery: 1601 21st Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone : [1] (202) 462-7979 through 7982
FAX: [1] (202) 265-0161
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Marc C. GINSBERG
embassy : 2 Avenue de Marrakech, Rabat
mailing address: PSC 74, Box 003, APO AE 09718
telephone: [212] (7) 76 22 65
FAX: [212] (7) 76 56 61
consulate(s) general: Casablanca

Flag description: red with a green pentacle (five-pointed, linear
star) known as Solomon's seal in the center of the flag; green is the
traditional color of Islam

Economy

Economy - overview: Morocco faces the typical problems of developing
countries - restraining government spending, reducing constraints on
private activity and foreign trade, and keeping inflation within
manageable bounds. Since the early 1980s the government has pursued an
economic program toward these objectives with the support of the IMF,
the World Bank, and the Paris Club of creditors. The dirham is now
fully convertible for current account transactions; reforms of the
financial sector have been implemented; and 43 state enterprises have
been privatized. Drought conditions in three of the last four years
have depressed activity in the key agricultural sector, holding down
exports and contributing to a 7.5% contraction in real GDP in 1995.
Favorable rainfall in 1996 nurtured a record wheat crop and
contributed to the 9% overall growth. Servicing the large external
debt, preparing the economy for freer trade with the European Union,
and finding jobs for Morocco's youthful population remain long-term
problems.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $97.6 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 9% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,260 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 21%
industry: 30%
services: 49% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 7.4 million
by occupation: agriculture 50%, services 26%, industry 15%, other 9%
(1985)

Unemployment rate: 20% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $10.4 billion
expenditures: $10.75 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: phosphate rock mining and processing, food processing,
leather goods, textiles, construction, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 4.5% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 3.79 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 10.17 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 385 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: barley, wheat, citrus, wine, vegetables,
olives; livestock

Exports:
total value: $7.7 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : food and beverages 30%, semiprocessed goods 23%,
consumer goods 21%, phosphates 17% (1995 est.)
partners : EU 63%, Japan 7.7%, India 6.6%, US 3.4%, Libya 3.4% (1996
est.)

Imports:
total value: $9.8 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: capital goods 24%, semiprocessed goods 22%, raw materials
16%, fuel and lubricants 16%, food and beverages 13%, consumer goods
9% (1995 est.)
partners: EU 57%, US 6.6%, Saudi Arabia 5.3%, Brazil 2.8% (1996 est.)

Debt - external: $23.4 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $297 million (1993)
note : $2.8 billion debt canceled by Saudi Arabia (1991)

Currency: 1 Moroccan dirham (DH) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Moroccan dirhams (DH) per US$1 - 9.018 (January 1997),
8.716 (1996), 8.540 (1995), 9.203 (1994), 9.299 (1993), 8.538 (1992)

Fiscal year: July 1-June 30

@Morocco:Communications

Telephones: 270,100 (1987 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: good system composed of open-wire lines, cables, and
microwave radio relay links; principal centers are Casablanca and
Rabat; secondary centers are Fes, Marrakech, Oujda, Tangier, and
Tetouan
international : 5 submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 2
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) and 1 Arabsat; microwave radio relay to
Gibraltar, Spain, and Western Sahara; coaxial cable and microwave
radio relay to Algeria; participant in Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 20, FM 7, shortwave 0

Radios: 5.527 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 26 (repeaters 26)

Televisions: 1.21 million (1993 est.)

@Morocco:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,907 km
standard gauge: 1,907 km 1.435-m gauge (1003 km electrified; 246 km
double track) (1994)

Highways:
total : 60,513 km
paved: 30,438 km (including 113 km of expressways)
unpaved: 30,075 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 362 km; petroleum products 491 km (abandoned);
natural gas 241 km

Ports and harbors: Agadir, El Jadida, Casablanca, El Jorf Lasfar,
Kenitra, Mohammedia, Nador, Rabat, Safi, Tangier; also
Spanish-controlled Ceuta and Melilla

Merchant marine:
total: 36 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 180,172 GRT/261,213 DWT
ships by type: cargo 7, chemical tanker 7, container 2, oil tanker 3,
refrigerated cargo 10, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6, short-sea passenger 1
(1996 est.)

Airports: 62 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 35
over 3,047 m: 11
2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m : 11 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 27
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 11
914 to 1,523 m : 15 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Armed Forces (includes Army, Navy, Air Force)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 7,779,077 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 4,927,589 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 336,969 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.38 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 4.1% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims and administers Western Sahara, but
sovereignty is unresolved and the UN is attempting to hold a
referendum on the issue; the UN-administered cease-fire has been in
effect since September 1991; Spain controls five places of sovereignty
(plazas de soberania) on and off the coast of Morocco - the coastal
enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla which Morocco contests as well as the
islands of Penon de Alhucemas, Penon de Velez de la Gomera, and Islas
Chafarinas

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of hashish; trafficking on the
increase for both domestic and international drug markets; shipments
of hashish mostly directed to Western Europe; transit point for
cocaine from South America destined for Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

MOZAMBIQUE

@Mozambique:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, bordering the Mozambique Channel, between
South Africa and Tanzania

Geographic coordinates: 18 15 S, 35 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 801,590 sq km
land : 784,090 sq km
water: 17,500 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of California

Land boundaries:
total: 4,571 km
border countries: Malawi 1,569 km, South Africa 491 km, Swaziland 105
km, Tanzania 756 km, Zambia 419 km, Zimbabwe 1,231 km

Coastline: 2,470 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical to subtropical

Terrain: mostly coastal lowlands, uplands in center, high plateaus in
northwest, mountains in west

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Monte Binga 2,436 m

Natural resources: coal, titanium, natural gas

Land use:
arable land: 4%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 56%
forests and woodland: 18%
other: 22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,180 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: severe droughts and floods occur in central and
southern provinces; devastating cyclones

Environment - current issues: a long civil war and recurrent drought
in the hinterlands have resulted in increased migration of the
population to urban and coastal areas with adverse environmental
consequences; desertification; pollution of surface and coastal waters

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Ozone
Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Law of the Sea

@Mozambique:People

Population: 18,165,476 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 45% (male 4,021,791; female 4,136,853)
15-64 years: 53% (male 4,678,819; female 4,910,085)
65 years and over: 2% (male 173,177; female 244,751) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.6% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 44.33 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 18.31 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.71 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 122.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 44.85 years
male: 43.71 years
female: 46.02 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.11 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Mozambican(s)
adjective: Mozambican

Ethnic groups: indigenous tribal groups 99.66% (Shangaan, Chokwe,
Manyika, Sena, Makua, and others), Europeans 0.06%, Euro-Africans
0.2%, Indians 0.08%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 50%, Christian 30%, Muslim 20%

Languages: Portuguese (official), indigenous dialects

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 40.1%
male: 57.7%
female: 23.3% (1995 est.)

@Mozambique:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Mozambique
conventional short form: Mozambique
local long form : Republica Popular de Mocambique
local short form: Mocambique

Data code: MZ

Government type: republic

National capital: Maputo

Administrative divisions: 10 provinces (provincias, singular -
provincia); Cabo Delgado, Gaza, Inhambane, Manica, Maputo, Nampula,
Niassa, Sofala, Tete, Zambezia

Independence: 25 June 1975 (from Portugal)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 June (1975)

Constitution: 30 November 1990

Legal system: based on Portuguese civil law system and customary law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Joaquim Alberto CHISSANO (since 6 November
1986); note - before being popularly elected, CHISSANO was elected
president by FRELIMO's Central Committee 4 November 1986 (reelected by
the Committee 30 July 1989)
head of government: Prime Minister Pascoal MOCUMBI (since NA December
1994)
cabinet : Cabinet
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 27 October 1994 (next to be held NA 1999); prime
minister appointed by the president
election results: Joaquim Alberto CHISSANO elected president; percent
of vote - Joaquim CHISSANO 53.3%, Afonso DHLAKAMA 33.3%

Legislative branch: unicameral Assembly of the Republic or Assembleia
da Republica (250 seats; members are directly elected by popular vote
on a secret ballot to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 27-29 October 1994 (next to be held NA October
1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - Frelimo 44.33%, RENAMO
33.78%, Democratic Union 5.15%, other 16.74%; seats by party - Frelimo
129, RENAMO 112, Democratic Union 9
note: the presidential and legislative elections took place as called
for in the 1992 peace accords; RENAMO participated in the elections

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed by the president and
judges elected by the Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Front for the Liberation of Mozambique
or FRELIMO [Joaquim Alberto CHISSANO, chairman]; Mozambique National
Resistance or RENAMO [Afonso DHLAKAMA, president]; Democratic Union or
DU [Antonio PALANGE, general secretary]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO
(correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Marcos Geraldo NAMASHULUA
chancery: Suite 570, 1990 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 293-7146
FAX: [1] (202) 835-0245

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Peter Michael
McKINLEY
embassy: Avenida Kenneth Kuanda 193, Maputo
mailing address: P. O. Box 783, Maputo
telephone : [258] (1) 492797
FAX: [258] (1) 490114

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top), black,
and yellow with a red isosceles triangle based on the hoist side; the
black band is edged in white; centered in the triangle is a yellow
five-pointed star bearing a crossed rifle and hoe in black
superimposed on an open white book

Economy

Economy - overview: One of Africa's poorest countries, Mozambique has
failed to exploit the economic potential of its sizable agricultural,
hydropower, and transportation resources. Agricultural output is at
only 75% of its 1981 level, and grain has to be imported. Industry
operates at only 20%-40% of capacity. Foreign assistance programs
supply the foreign exchange required to pay for imports of goods and
services. The peace accord, signed in October 1992, has improved
Mozambique's prospects. The restoration of electrical transmission
lines to South Africa and the completion of a new transmission line to
Zimbabwe (permitting the giant Cahora Bassa hydropower plant to export
large amounts of electricity), proposed construction of a natural gas
pipeline to South Africa, and reform of transportation services will
greatly improve foreign exchange receipts. The Mozambique and South
African governments are developing the Maputo corridor, linking the
port of Maputo with Witbank, South Africa. In the past few years, more
than 500 state enterprises have been privatized, including the
country's largest commercial bank and a number of sizable
manufacturing firms. Other pending reform measures are the
privatization of customs operations, the reform of tax collection, and
the facilitation of private enterprise in the transportation, energy,
and telecommunications sectors.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $12.2 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $670 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 33%
industry: 12%
services : 55% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 22% (1996 est.)

Labor force: NA
by occupation: 80% engaged in agriculture
note: in 1993, 47% of the wage earners were employed in industry, 28%
in transportation and communication; traditionally, a large number of
Mozambicans work abroad

Unemployment rate: 50% (1989 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $252 million
expenditures : $607 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1992 est.)

Industries: food, beverages, chemicals (fertilizer, soap, paints),
petroleum products, textiles, cement, glass, asbestos, tobacco

Industrial production growth rate: 5.8% (1993 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 2.36 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 490 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 45 kWh (1993)

Agriculture - products: cotton, cashew nuts, sugarcane, tea, cassava
(tapioca), corn, rice, tropical fruits; beef, poultry

Exports:
total value : $169 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: shrimp 40%, cashews, cotton, sugar, copra, citrus
partners: Spain, South Africa, US, Portugal, Japan

Imports:
total value: $784 million (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities : food, clothing, farm equipment, petroleum
partners: South Africa 44%, UK, France, Japan, Portugal

Debt - external: $5.5 billion (1995)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 metical (Mt) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: meticais (Mt) per US$1 - 11,455.0 (December 1996),
11,293.8 (1996), 9,024.3 (1995), 6,038.6 (1994), 3,874.2 (1993),
2,516.5 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Mozambique:Communications

Telephones: 59,000 (1983 est.)

Telephone system: fair system of tropospheric scatter, open-wire
lines, and microwave radio relay
domestic: microwave radio relay and tropospheric scatter
international : satellite earth stations - 5 Intelsat (2 Atlantic
Ocean and 3 Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 29, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 700,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 44,000 (1992 est.)

@Mozambique:Transportation

Railways:
total: 3,131 km
narrow gauge: 2,988 km 1.067-m gauge; 143 km 0.762-m gauge (1994)

Highways:
total: 29,810 km
paved: 5,545 km
unpaved : 24,265 km (1995 est.)
note: highway traffic impeded by land mines not removed at end of
civil war

Waterways: about 3,750 km of navigable routes

Pipelines: crude oil (not operating) 306 km; petroleum products 289 km

Ports and harbors: Beira, Inhambane, Maputo, Nacala, Pemba

Merchant marine:
total : 4 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,694 GRT/9,724 DWT
(1996 est.)

Airports: 129 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 85
over 3,047 m : 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m : 10
914 to 1,523 m: 5
under 914 m: 65 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 44
1,524 to 2,437 m : 12
914 to 1,523 m: 32 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Naval Command, Air and Air Defense Forces,
Militia

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 4,149,766 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 2,390,791 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $84 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 5.3% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: Southern African transit hub for South American cocaine
probably destined for the European and US markets; producer of hashish
and methaqualone
______________________________________________________________________

NAMIBIA

@Namibia:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean, between
Angola and South Africa

Geographic coordinates: 22 00 S, 17 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 825,418 sq km
land: 825,418 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than half the size of Alaska

Land boundaries:
total: 3,824 km
border countries: Angola 1,376 km, Botswana 1,360 km, South Africa 855
km, Zambia 233 km

Coastline: 1,572 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: desert; hot, dry; rainfall sparse and erratic

Terrain: mostly high plateau; Namib Desert along coast; Kalahari
Desert in east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Konigstein 2,606 m

Natural resources: diamonds, copper, uranium, gold, lead, tin,
lithium, cadmium, zinc, salt, vanadium, natural gas, fish; suspected
deposits of oil, natural gas, coal, iron ore

Land use:
arable land: 1%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 46%
forests and woodland: 22%
other: 31% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 60 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: prolonged periods of drought

Environment - current issues: very limited natural fresh water
resources; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of
the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Biodiversity, Desertification

@Namibia:People

Population: 1,727,183 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 379,158; female 371,008)
15-64 years: 53% (male 444,523; female 465,510)
65 years and over: 4% (male 28,743; female 38,241) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.94% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 37.08 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.72 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.75 male(s)/female
total population : 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 45.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 64.91 years
male : 63.23 years
female: 66.63 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.05 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Namibian(s)
adjective: Namibian

Ethnic groups: black 86%, white 6.6%, mixed 7.4%
note: about 50% of the population belong to the Ovambo tribe and 9% to
the Kavangos tribe; other ethnic groups are: Herero 7%, Damara 7%,
Nama 5%, Caprivian 4%, Bushmen 3%, Baster 2%, Tswana 0.5%

Religions: Christian 80% to 90% (Lutheran 50% at least, other
Christian denominations 30%, native religions 10% to 20%

Languages: English 7% (official), Afrikaans common language of most of
the population and about 60% of the white population, German 32%,
indigenous languages: Oshivambo, Herero, Nama

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 38%
male: 45%
female: 31% (1960 est.)

@Namibia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Namibia
conventional short form: Namibia

Data code: WA

Government type: republic

National capital: Windhoek

Administrative divisions: 13 regions; Caprivi, Erongo, Hardap, Karas,
Khomas, Kunene, Ohangwena, Okavango, Omaheke, Omusati, Oshana,
Oshikoto, Otjozondjupa

Independence: 21 March 1990 (from South African mandate)

National holiday: Independence Day, 21 March (1990)

Constitution: ratified 9 February 1990; effective 12 March 1990

Legal system: based on Roman-Dutch law and 1990 constitution

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Sam NUJOMA (since 21 March 1990); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Sam NUJOMA (since 21 March 1990); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members of
the National Assembly
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 7-8 December 1994 (next to be held NA December
1999)
election results : Sam NUJOMA elected president; percent of vote - 76%

Legislative branch: bicameral legislature consists of the National
Council (26 seats; two members are chosen from each regional council
to serve six-year terms) and the National Assembly (72 seats; members
are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: National Council - last held 30 November-3 December 1992
(next to be held by December 1998); National Assembly - last held 7-8
December 1994 (next to be held NA December 1999)
election results: National Council - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - SWAPO 19, DTA 6, UDF 1; National Assembly - percent
of vote by party - SWAPO 73.89%, DTA 20.78%, UDF 2.72%, DCN 0.83%, MAG
0.82%; seats by party - SWAPO 53, DTA 15, UDF 2, MAG 1, DCN 1
note: the National Council is a purely advisory body

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: South West Africa People's Organization
or SWAPO [Sam NUJOMA]; National Democratic Party for Justice or NDPFJ
[Nbhwete NDJOBA]; Democratic Turnhalle Alliance of Namibia or DTA
[Mishake MUYONGO, president]; United Democratic Front or UDF [Justus
GAROEB]; Monitor Action Group or MAG [Kosie PRETORIUS]; Democratic
Coalition of Namibia or DCN [Moses K. KATJIUONGUA]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO,
G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NAM, OAU, SACU, SADC,
UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO,
WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Veiccoh NGHIWETE
chancery: 1605 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 986-0540
FAX: [1] (202) 986-0443

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador George F. WARD, Jr. (24 July 1996)
embassy: Ausplan Building, 14 Lossen St., Windhoek
mailing address: Private Bag 12029 Ausspannplatz, Windhoek
telephone: [264] (61) 221601
FAX: [264] (61) 229792

Flag description: a large blue triangle with a yellow sunburst fills
the upper left section and an equal green triangle (solid) fills the
lower right section; the triangles are separated by a red stripe that
is contrasted by two narrow white-edge borders

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is heavily dependent on the extraction
and processing of minerals for export. Mining accounts for almost 25%
of GDP. Namibia is the fourth-largest exporter of nonfuel minerals in
Africa and the world's fifth-largest producer of uranium. Rich
alluvial diamond deposits make Namibia a primary source for
gem-quality diamonds. Namibia also produces large quantities of lead,
zinc, tin, silver, and tungsten. Half of the population depends on
agriculture (largely subsistence agriculture) for its livelihood.
Namibia must import some of its food.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $6.2 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,700 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 15%
industry: 20%
services: 65% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 8% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 500,000
by occupation: agriculture 49%, industry and commerce 25%, services
5%, government 18%, mining 3% (1994 est.)

Unemployment rate: 21.8% (1993)

Budget:
revenues : $1.1 billion
expenditures: $1.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $193
million (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: meat packing, fish processing, dairy products; mining
(diamond, lead, zinc, tin, silver, tungsten, uranium, copper)

Industrial production growth rate: 10% (1994)

Electricity - capacity: 406,000 kW (1993)

Electricity - production: 994 million kWh (1993)
note: imports electricity from South Africa

Electricity - consumption per capita: 925 kWh (1993)

Agriculture - products: millet, sorghum, peanuts; livestock; fish
catch potential of over 1 million metric tons not being fulfilled

Exports:
total value: $1.45 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: diamonds, copper, gold, zinc, lead, uranium, cattle,
processed fish, karakul skins
partners : UK, South Africa, Spain, Japan (1994)

Imports:
total value: $1.55 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, petroleum products and fuel, machinery and
equipment, chemicals
partners: South Africa 85%, Germany, US, Japan (1994 est.)

Debt - external: about $315 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Namibian dollar (N$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Nambian dollars (N$) per US$1 - 4.64152 (January
1997), 4.29935 (1996), 3.62709 (1995), 3.55080 (1994), 3.26774 (1993),
2.85201 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Namibia:Communications

Telephones: 89,722 (1992 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: good urban services; fair rural service; microwave radio
relay links major towns; connections to other populated places are by
open wire
international: NA
note: a fully automated digital network is to be operational by 1997

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 40, shortwave 0

Radios: 195,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3

Televisions: 27,000 (1993 est.)

@Namibia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,382 km
narrow gauge: 2,382 km 1.067-m gauge; single track (1995)

Highways:
total: 40,450 km
paved: 5,299 km
unpaved: 35,151 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Luderitz, Walvis Bay

Merchant marine:
total : 1 roll-on/roll-off ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,330
GRT/2,233 DWT

Airports: 111 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 32
over 3,047 m : 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 15
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m : 10 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 79
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 18
914 to 1,523 m: 59 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: National Defense Force (Army), Police

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 392,228 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 233,336 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $64 million (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.1% (FY95/96)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: quadripoint with Botswana, Zambia, and
Zimbabwe is in disagreement; dispute with Botswana over uninhabited
Kasikili (Sidudu) Island in Linyanti (Chobe) River remained unresolved
in December 1995, and the parties agreed to refer the matter to the
ICJ
______________________________________________________________________

NAURU

@Nauru:Geography

Location: Oceania, island in the South Pacific Ocean, south of the
Marshall Islands

Geographic coordinates: 0 32 S, 166 55 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 21 sq km
land: 21 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.1 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 30 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; monsoonal; rainy season (November to February)

Terrain: sandy beach rises to fertile ring around raised coral reefs
with phosphate plateau in center

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location along plateau rim 61 m

Natural resources: phosphates

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other : 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: limited natural fresh water resources,
roof storage tanks collect rainwater; phosphate mining threatens
limited remaining land resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Marine
Dumping
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: Nauru is one of the three great phosphate rock
islands in the Pacific Ocean - the others are Banaba (Ocean Island) in
Kiribati and Makatea in French Polynesia; only 53 km south of Equator

@Nauru:People

Population: 10,390 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years : NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : NA years
male: NA years
female: NA years

Nationality:
noun: Nauruan(s)
adjective: Nauruan

Ethnic groups: Nauruan 58%, other Pacific Islander 26%, Chinese 8%,
European 8%

Religions: Christian (two-thirds Protestant, one-third Roman Catholic)

Languages: Nauruan (official, a distinct Pacific Island language),
English widely understood, spoken, and used for most government and
commercial purposes

Literacy: NA

@Nauru:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Nauru
conventional short form: Nauru
former: Pleasant Island

Data code: NR

Government type: republic

National capital: no official capital; government offices in Yaren
District

Administrative divisions: 14 districts; Aiwo, Anabar, Anetan, Anibare,
Baiti, Boe, Buada, Denigomodu, Ewa, Ijuw, Meneng, Nibok, Uaboe, Yaren

Independence: 31 January 1968 (from the Australia-, New Zealand-, and
UK-administered UN trusteeship)

National holiday: Independence Day, 31 January (1968)

Constitution: 29 January 1968

Legal system: acts of the Nauru Parliament and British common law

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Kinza CLODUMAR (since 8 February 1997); note
- the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government : President Kinza CLODUMAR (since 8 February 1997);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members of
Parliament
elections: president elected by Parliament for a three-year term;
election last held 8 February 1997 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results : Kinza CLODUMAR elected president; percent of
Parliament vote - NA
note: President CLODUMAR is the country's fifth president in five
months

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (18 seats; members elected
by popular vote to serve three-year terms)
elections: last held 18 November 1995 (next to be held NA November
1998)
election results : percent of vote - NA; seats - independents 18

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: AsDB, C (special), ESCAP,
ICAO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, Sparteca, SPC,
SPF, UNESCO, UPU, WHO

Diplomatic representation in the US: Nauru does not have an embassy in
the US
consulate(s) : Agana (Guam)

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Nauru; the US Ambassador to Fiji is accredited to Nauru

Flag description: blue with a narrow, horizontal, yellow stripe across
the center and a large white 12-pointed star below the stripe on the
hoist side; the star indicates the country's location in relation to
the Equator (the yellow stripe) and the 12 points symbolize the 12
original tribes of Nauru

Economy

Economy - overview: Revenues come from the export of phosphates, the
reserves of which are expected to be exhausted by the year 2000.
Phosphates have given Nauruans one of the highest per capita incomes
in the Third World, but incomes probably will drop sharply in the
future. Few other resources exist, so most necessities must be
imported, including fresh water from Australia. The rehabilitation of
mined land and the replacement of income from phosphates are serious
long-term problems. Substantial amounts of phosphate income are
invested in trust funds to help cushion the transition. However,
dividends from the trusts have declined sharply since 1990 and the
government has been borrowing heavily from the trusts to finance
fiscal deficits. In an effort to stem further escalation of fiscal
problems, the FY96/97 budget calls for a freeze on government wages
for two years, a reduction of over-staffed public service departments,
drastic cutbacks in hiring new government staff, privatization of
numerous government agencies, and closure of some overseas consulates.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $100 million (1993 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $10,000 (1993 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services : NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: -3.6% (1993)

Labor force:
by occupation : employed in mining phosphates, public administration,
education, and transportation

Unemployment rate: 0%

Budget:
revenues : $23.4 million
expenditures: $64.8 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY95/96)

Industries: phosphate mining, financial services, coconut products

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 13,250 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 48 million kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: coconuts predominate

Exports:
total value: $25.3 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: phosphates
partners : Australia, NZ

Imports:
total value: $21.1 million (c.i.f., 1991)
commodities: food, fuel, manufactures, building materials, machinery
partners: Australia, UK, NZ, Japan

Debt - external: $33.3 million

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $2.25 million from Australia (FY96/97 est.)

Currency: 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.2835 (January
1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995), 1.3667 (1994), 1.4704 (1993),
1.3600 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Nauru:Communications

Telephones: 2,000 (1989 est.)

Telephone system: adequate local and international radiotelephone
communications provided via Australian facilities
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 4,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1991 est.)

Televisions: NA

@Nauru:Transportation

Railways:
total: 3.9 km; note - used to haul phosphates from the center of the
island to processing facilities on the southwest coast

Highways:
total: 28 km
paved: 22 km
unpaved: 6 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Nauru

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: no regular armed forces; Directorate of the Nauru
Police Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

NAVASSA ISLAND

(territory of the US)

@Navassa Island:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, about one-fourth of
the way from Haiti to Jamaica

Geographic coordinates: 18 25 N, 75 02 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total : 5.2 sq km
land: 5.2 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about nine times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 8 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: marine, tropical

Terrain: raised coral and limestone plateau, flat to undulating;
ringed by vertical white cliffs (9 to 15 meters high)

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: unnamed location on southwest side 77 m

Natural resources: guano

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 10%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 90%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: strategic location 160 km south of the US Naval Base
at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba; mostly exposed rock, but enough grassland to
support goat herds; dense stands of fig-like trees, scattered cactus

@Navassa Island:People

Population: uninhabited
note: transient Haitian fishermen and others camp on the island

@Navassa Island:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Navassa Island

Data code: BQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US; administered by
the US Coast Guard; in September 1996, the Coast Guard ceased
operations and maintenance of Navassa Island Light, a 46 meter tall
lighthouse located on the southern side of the island; negotiations
are currently underway between the Coast Guard, General Services
Administration, and Department of Interior for transfer of
administration of the island; there has also been a private claim
advanced against the island

National capital: none; administered from Washington, DC

Flag description: the flag of the US is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Navassa Island:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claimed by Haiti
______________________________________________________________________

NEPAL

@Nepal:Geography

Location: Southern Asia, between China and India

Geographic coordinates: 28 00 N, 84 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total: 140,800 sq km
land: 136,800 sq km
water: 4,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Arkansas

Land boundaries:
total: 2,926 km
border countries: China 1,236 km, India 1,690 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: varies from cool summers and severe winters in north to
subtropical summers and mild winters in south

Terrain: Terai or flat river plain of the Ganges in south, central
hill region, rugged Himalayas in north

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Kanchan Kalan 70 m
highest point: Mount Everest 8,848 m

Natural resources: quartz, water, timber, hydropower potential, scenic
beauty, small deposits of lignite, copper, cobalt, iron ore

Land use:
arable land: 17%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 15%
forests and woodland: 42%
other : 26% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 8,500 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: severe thunderstorms, flooding, landslides, drought,
and famine depending on the timing, intensity, and duration of the
summer monsoons

Environment - current issues: the almost total dependence on wood for
fuel and cutting down trees to expand agricultural land without
replanting has resulted in widespread deforestation; soil erosion;
water pollution (use of contaminated water presents human health
risks)

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
Conservation

Geography - note: landlocked; strategic location between China and
India; contains eight of world's 10 highest peaks

@Nepal:People

Population: 23,107,464 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 42% (male 4,994,992; female 4,692,691)
15-64 years: 55% (male 6,458,616; female 6,205,947)
65 years and over: 3% (male 376,962; female 378,256) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.53% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 35.99 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.71 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1 male(s)/female
total population : 1.05 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 78.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 57.38 years
male: 57.61 years
female: 57.13 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.96 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Nepalese (singular and plural)
adjective: Nepalese

Ethnic groups: Newars, Indians, Tibetans, Gurungs, Magars, Tamangs,
Bhotias, Rais, Limbus, Sherpas

Religions: Hindu 90%, Buddhist 5%, Muslim 3%, other 2% (1981)
note: only official Hindu state in the world, although no sharp
distinction between many Hindu and Buddhist groups

Languages: Nepali (official), 20 other languages divided into numerous
dialects

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 27.5%
male: 40.9%
female : 14% (1995 est.)

People - note: refugee issue over the presence in Nepal of
approximately 100,000 Bhutanese refugees, 90% of whom are in seven
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
camps

@Nepal:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Kingdom of Nepal
conventional short form: Nepal

Data code: NP

Government type: parliamentary democracy as of 12 May 1991

National capital: Kathmandu

Administrative divisions: 14 zones (anchal, singular and plural);
Bagmati, Bheri, Dhawalagiri, Gandaki, Janakpur, Karnali, Kosi,
Lumbini, Mahakali, Mechi, Narayani, Rapti, Sagarmatha, Seti

Independence: 1768 (unified by Prithvi Narayan Shah)

National holiday: Birthday of His Majesty the King, 28 December (1945)

Constitution: 9 November 1990

Legal system: based on Hindu legal concepts and English common law;
has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: King BIRENDRA Bir Bikram Shah Dev (succeeded to the
throne 31 January 1972 following the death of his father King MAHENDRA
Bir Bikram Shah Dev, crowned king 24 February 1975); Heir Apparent
Crown Prince DIPENDRA Bir Bikram
head of government: Prime Minister Lokendra Bahadur CHAND (since 12
March 1997); note - in 1995, the king appointed Sher Bahadur DEUBA to
be prime minister; DEUBA's parliamentary coalition fell apart when two
Nepali Congress Party (NCP) members did not show up at a parliamentary
confidence vote; a coalition of the Communist Party of Nepal/United
Marxist-Leninist (CPN/UML) and the National Democratic Party (NDP) of
Prime Minister CHAND was subsequently approved by the king
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the king on the recommendation of the
prime minister
elections: none; the king is a constitutional monarch; following
legislative elections, the leader of the majority party or leader of a
majority coalition is usually appointed prime minister by the king

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the National
Council (60 seats; 35 appointed by the House of Representatives, 10 by
the king, and 15 elected by an electoral college; one-third of the
members elected every two years to serve six-year terms) and the House
of Representatives (205 seats; members elected by popular vote to
serve five-year terms)
elections: House of Representatives - last held 15 November 1994 (next
to be held by 15 November 1999)
election results : House of Representatives - percent of vote by party
- NCP 33%, CPN/UML 31%, NDP 18%, Sadbhavana (Goodwill) Party 3%, NWPP
1%; seats by party - CPN/UML 88, NCP 83, NDP 20, NWPP 4, Sadbhavana
(Goodwill) Party 3, independents 7; note - subsequent to the election,
there was a change in the distribution of seats; the new distribution
is as follows - CPN/UML 90, NCP 87, NDP 19, NWPP 3, Sadbhavana Party
3, independents 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Sarbochha Adalat), chief justice is
appointed by the king on recommendation of the Constitutional Council,
the other judges are appointed by the king on the recommendation of
the Judicial Council

Political parties and leaders: Communist Party of Nepal/United
Marxist-Leninist (CPN/UML), Man Mohan ADHIKARI, party president;
Nepali Congress Party (NCP), Krishna Prasad BHATTARAI, Girija Prasad
KOIRALA, party president; National Democratic Party (NDP; also called
Rastriya Prajantra Party or RPP), Surya Bahadur THAPA; Sadbhavana
(Goodwill) Party, Gajendra Narayan SINGH, president; Nepal Workers and
Peasants Party (NWPP), Narayan Man BIJUKCHHE, party chair

Political pressure groups and leaders: numerous small, left-leaning
student groups in the capital; several small, radical Nepalese
antimonarchist groups

International organization participation: AsDB, CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFCTU, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, SAARC, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UPU,
WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Bekh Bahadur THAPA
chancery: 2131 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 667-4550
consulate(s) general : New York
FAX: [1] (202) 667-5534

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Sandra L. VOGELGESANG
embassy: Pani Pokhari, Kathmandu
mailing address : use embassy street address
telephone: [977] (1) 411179
FAX: [977] (1) 419963

Flag description: red with a blue border around the unique shape of
two overlapping right triangles; the smaller, upper triangle bears a
white stylized moon and the larger, lower triangle bears a white
12-pointed sun

Economy

Economy - overview: Nepal is among the poorest and least developed
countries in the world with about 60% of the population living below
the poverty line. Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy,
providing a livelihood for over 80% of the population and accounting
for more than 40% of GDP. Industrial activity is limited, mainly
involving the processing of agricultural produce including jute,
sugarcane, tobacco, and grain. Production of textiles and carpets has
expanded recently and accounted for about 80% of foreign exchange
earnings in the past two years. Apart from agricultural land and
forests, exploitable natural resources are mica, hydropower, and
tourism. Agricultural production is growing about 5% on average as
compared with annual population growth of 2.5%. Since May 1991, the
government has been moving forward with economic reforms particularly
those that encourage trade and foreign investment, e.g., by
eliminating business licenses and registration requirements in order
to simplify investment procedures. The government has also been
cutting expenditures by reducing subsidies, privatizing state
industries, and laying off civil servants. The government made some
progress in 1996, signing trade agreements with countries including
India, and attracting substantial foreign investment in hydropower.
Prospects for foreign trade and investment in areas besides hydropower
and tourism will continue to remain poor because of the small size of
the economy, its technological backwardness, its remoteness, and its
landlocked geographic location highly susceptible to natural disaster.
The international community provides funding for more than 60% of
Nepal's development budget and more than 30% of total budgetary
expenditures.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $26.5 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.9% (FY95/96 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,200 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 42%
industry: 22%
services: 36% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 9.2% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 9.2 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 90%, services 7%, industry 3%
note : severe lack of skilled labor

Unemployment rate: NA%; substantial underemployment (1996)

Budget:
revenues: $645 million
expenditures: $1.05 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY94/95 est.)

Industries: tourism, carpet, textile; small rice, jute, sugar, and
oilseed mills; cigarette; cement and brick production

Industrial production growth rate: 14.7% (FY94/95 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 280,000 kW 000 kW

Electricity - production: 980 million kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: 48 kWh (1996 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, corn, wheat, sugarcane, root crops;
milk, water buffalo meat

Exports:
total value: $343 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.) but does not include
unrecorded border trade with India
commodities: carpets, clothing, leather goods, jute goods, grain
partners : India, US, Germany, UK

Imports:
total value: $1.3 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: petroleum products 20%, fertilizer 11%, machinery 10%
partners: India, Singapore, Japan, Germany

Debt - external: $2.85 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $310 million (1993)
note: total bilateral and multilateral aid of $217 million in 1996

Currency: 1 Nepalese rupee (NR) = 100 paisa

Exchange rates: Nepalese rupees (NRs) per US$1 - 57.030 (January
1997), 56.692 (1996), 51.890 (1995), 49.398 (1994), 48.607 (1993),
42.718 (1992)

Fiscal year: 16 July - 15 July

@Nepal:Communications

Telephones: 115,911 (1996 est.)

Telephone system: poor telephone and telegraph service; fair
radiotelephone communication service
domestic: NA
international: radiotelephone communications; satellite earth station
- 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 88, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 690,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 9 (1996 est.)

Televisions: 45,000 (1992 est.)

@Nepal:Transportation

Railways:
total: 101 km; note - all in Kosi close to Indian border
narrow gauge: 101 km 0.762-m gauge

Highways:
total: 7,550 km
paved: 3,126 km
unpaved: 4,424 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 43 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 32
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m : 27 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 11
1,524 to 2,437 m : 1
914 to 1,523 m: 10 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Nepalese Army, Royal Nepalese Army Air
Service, Nepalese Police Force

Military manpower - military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 5,556,791 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 2,888,628 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 268,085 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $36 million (FY92/93)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.2% (FY92/93)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis for the domestic and
international drug markets; transit point for heroin from Southeast
Asia to the West
______________________________________________________________________

NETHERLANDS

@Netherlands:Geography

Location: Western Europe, bordering the North Sea, between Belgium and
Germany

Geographic coordinates: 52 30 N, 5 45 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 37,330 sq km
land: 33,920 sq km
water: 3,410 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of New Jersey

Land boundaries:
total: 1,027 km
border countries : Belgium 450 km, Germany 577 km

Coastline: 451 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: temperate; marine; cool summers and mild winters

Terrain: mostly coastal lowland and reclaimed land (polders); some
hills in southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Prins Alexanderpolder -7 m
highest point : Vaalserberg 321 m

Natural resources: natural gas, petroleum, fertile soil

Land use:
arable land : 27%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 31%
forests and woodland: 10%
other: 31% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 5,600 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: the extensive system of dikes and dams, protects
nearly one-half of the total area from being flooded

Environment - current issues: water pollution in the form of heavy
metals, organic compounds, and nutrients such as nitrates and
phosphates; air pollution from vehicles and refining activities; acid
rain

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile
Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity

Geography - note: located at mouths of three major European rivers
(Rhine, Maas or Meuse, and Schelde)

@Netherlands:People

Population: 15,649,729 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 18% (male 1,466,463; female 1,401,507)
15-64 years : 68% (male 5,432,512; female 5,248,823)
65 years and over: 14% (male 848,853; female 1,251,571) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.53% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 11.84 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.69 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.18 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.68 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.87 years
male: 75 years
female : 80.88 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.5 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Dutchman(men), Dutchwoman(women)
adjective: Dutch

Ethnic groups: Dutch 96%, Moroccans, Turks, and other 4% (1988)

Religions: Roman Catholic 34%, Protestant 25%, Muslim 3%, other 2%,
unaffiliated 36% (1991)

Languages: Dutch

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99% (1979 est.)
male : NA%
female: NA%

@Netherlands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Kingdom of the Netherlands
conventional short form : Netherlands
local long form: Koninkrijk der Nederlanden
local short form: Nederland

Data code: NL

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: Amsterdam; The Hague is the seat of government

Administrative divisions: 12 provinces (provincien, singular -
provincie); Drenthe, Flevoland, Friesland, Gelderland, Groningen,
Limburg, Noord-Brabant, Noord-Holland, Overijssel, Utrecht, Zeeland,
Zuid-Holland

Dependent areas: Aruba, Netherlands Antilles

Independence: 1579 (from Spain)

National holiday: Queen's Day, 30 April (1938)

Constitution: 17 February 1983

Legal system: civil law system incorporating French penal theory;
judicial review in the Supreme Court of legislation of lower order
rather than Acts of the States General; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : Queen BEATRIX Wilhelmina Armgard (since 30 April
1980); Heir Apparent WILLEM-ALEXANDER (born 27 April 1967), Prince of
Orange, son of Queen BEATRIX
head of government: Prime Minister Wim KOK (since 22 August 1994) and
Vice Prime Ministers Hans DIJKSTAL (since 22 August 1994) and Hans VAN
MIERLO (since 22 August 1994)
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the prime minister
elections: none; the queen is a constitutional monarch; following
Second Chamber elections, the leader of the majority party or leader
of a majority coalition is usually appointed prime minister by the
queen; vice prime ministers appointed by the queen

Legislative branch: bicameral States General or Staten Generaal
consists of the First Chamber or Eerste Kamer (75 seats; members
indirectly elected by the country's 12 provincial councils for
four-year terms) and the Second Chamber or Tweede Kamer (150 seats;
members directly elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: First Chamber - last held 9 June 1995 (next to be held 9
June 1999); Second Chamber - last held 3 May 1994 (next to be held in
1998)
election results: First Chamber - percent of vote by party - NA; seats
by party - NA; Second Chamber - percent of vote by party - PvdA 24.3%,
CDA 22.3%, VVD 20.4%, D'66 16.5%, other 16.5%; seats by party - PvdA
37, CDA 34, VVD 31, D'66 24, other 24

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or De Hoge Raad, justices are nominated
for life by the crown from a list compiled by the Second Chamber of
the States General

Political parties and leaders: Christian Democratic Appeal or CDA
[Hans HELGERS]; Labor or PvdA [Wim KOK]; Liberal or VVD [Frits
BOLKESTEIN]; Democrats '66 or D'66 [Hans VAN MIERLO]; a host of minor
parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: large multinational firms;
Federation of Netherlands Trade Union Movement (comprising Socialist
and Catholic trade unions) and a Protestant trade union; Federation of
Catholic and Protestant Employers Associations; the nondenominational
Federation of Netherlands Enterprises; and Interchurch Peace Council
or IKV

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB,
Australia Group, Benelux, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, EIB,
ESA, ESCAP, EU, FAO, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM,
IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NACC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG,
OAS (observer), OECD, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNHCR, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Adriaan Pieter Roetert JACOBOVITS DE
SZEGED
chancery : 4200 Linnean Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 244-5300
FAX: [1] (202) 362-3430
consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Kirk Terry DORNBUSH
embassy: Lange Voorhout 102, 2514 EJ The Hague
mailing address: PSC 71, Box 1000, APO AE 09715
telephone: [31] (70) 310-9209
FAX: [31] (70) 361-4688
consulate(s) general: Amsterdam

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and blue; similar to the flag of Luxembourg, which uses a lighter blue
and is longer

Economy

Economy - overview: This highly developed and affluent economy is
based on private enterprise. The government makes its presence felt,
however, through many regulations, permit requirements, and welfare
programs affecting most aspects of economic activity. Industrial
activity features food-processing, oil-refining, and metalworking. The
highly mechanized agricultural sector employs only 4% of the labor
force but provides large surpluses for export and the domestic
food-processing industry. Indeed, the Netherlands ranks third
worldwide in value of agricultural exports, behind the US and France.
Sharp cuts in subsidy and social security spending have been
accompanied by sustained growth in output and employment. The Dutch
will almost certainly qualify for the first wave of countries entering
the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) in 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $317.8 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.7% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $20,500 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 3%
industry: 26%
services: 71% (1993)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 6.4 million (1993)
by occupation: services 73%, manufacturing and construction 23%,
agriculture 4% (1994)

Unemployment rate: 6.5% (November 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $107.2 billion
expenditures: $118.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: agroindustries, metal and engineering products, electrical
machinery and equipment, chemicals, petroleum, fishing, construction,
microelectronics

Industrial production growth rate: 2.9% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 18.65 million kW

Electricity - production: 78 billion kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: 5,140 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grains, potatoes, sugar beets, fruits,
vegetables; livestock

Exports:
total value: $176.2 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: manufactures and machinery, chemicals; processed food and
tobacco, agricultural products
partners: EU 75% (Germany 29%, Belgium-Luxembourg 13%, UK 9%), Central
and Eastern Europe 3%, US 4% (1994)

Imports:
total value: $159.7 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities : raw materials and semifinished products, consumer goods,
transportation equipment, crude oil, food products
partners: EU 61% (Germany 24%, Belgium-Luxembourg 12%, UK 9%), US 8%
(1994)

Debt - external: $0

Economic aid:
donor : ODA, $3.4 billion (1996)

Currency: 1 Netherlands guilder, gulden, or florin (f.) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Netherlands guilders, gulden, or florins (f.) per US$1
- 1.8009 (January 1997), 1.6859 (1996), 1.6057 (1995), 1.8200 (1994),
1.8573 (1993), 1.7585 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Netherlands:Communications

Telephones: 8.272 million (1983 est.)

Telephone system: highly developed and well maintained; extensive
redundant system of multiconductor cables, supplemented by microwave
radio relay
domestic: nationwide cellular telephone system; microwave radio relay
international: 5 submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 3
Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 2 Atlantic Ocean), 1 Eutelsat, and 1
Inmarsat (Atlantic and Indian Ocean Regions)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3 (relays 3), FM 12 (repeaters 39),
shortwave 0

Radios: 13.755 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 8 (repeaters 7)

Televisions: 7.4 million (1992 est.)

@Netherlands:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,791 km
standard gauge: 2,791 km 1.435-m gauge; 2,757 km are in common carrier
service (1,991 km electrified) and 34 km serve tourists

Highways:
total: 120,800 km
paved: 108,720 km (including 2,300 km of expressways)
unpaved : 12,080 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 6,340 km, of which 35% is usable by craft of 1,000 metric
ton capacity or larger

Pipelines: crude oil 418 km; petroleum products 965 km; natural gas
10,230 km

Ports and harbors: Amsterdam, Delfzijl, Dordrecht, Eemshaven,
Groningen, Haarlem, IJmuiden, Maastricht, Rotterdam, Terneuzen,
Utrecht

Merchant marine:
total: 406 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,333,353 GRT/3,880,155
DWT
ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 237, chemical tanker 32, combination bulk
3, container 40, liquefied gas tanker 15, livestock carrier 1,
multifunction large-load carrier 4, oil tanker 34, passenger 7,
refrigerated cargo 16, roll-on/roll-off cargo 11, short-sea passenger
3, specialized tanker 2
note: many Dutch-owned ships are operating under the registry of
Netherlands Antilles (1996 est.)

Airports: 28 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 25
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m : 9
1,524 to 2,437 m: 6
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 3
914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Netherlands Army, Royal Netherlands Navy
(includes Naval Air Service and Marine Corps), Royal Netherlands Air
Force, Royal Constabulary

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 4,160,723 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 3,642,218 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 95,006 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $8.2 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.1% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: important gateway for cocaine, heroin, and hashish
entering Europe; European producer of illicit amphetamines and other
synthetic drugs
______________________________________________________________________

NETHERLANDS ANTILLES

(part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands)

@Netherlands Antilles:Geography

Location: Caribbean, two island groups in the Caribbean Sea - one
includes Curacao and Bonaire north of Venezuela and the other is east
of the Virgin Islands

Geographic coordinates: 12 15 N, 68 45 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 960 sq km
land: 960 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Bonaire, Curacao, Saba, Sint Eustatius, and Sint
Maarten (Dutch part of the island of Saint Martin)

Area - comparative: more than five times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
total: 10.2 km
border countries: Guadeloupe (Saint Martin) 10.2 km

Coastline: 364 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 12 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical; ameliorated by northeast trade winds

Terrain: generally hilly, volcanic interiors

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Mount Scenery 862 m

Natural resources: phosphates (Curacao only), salt (Bonaire only)

Land use:
arable land: 10%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other : 90% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: Curacao and Bonaire are south of Caribbean hurricane
belt, so are rarely threatened; Sint Maarten, Saba, and Sint Eustatius
are subject to hurricanes from July to October

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Whaling (extended from Netherlands)
signed, but not ratified: NA

@Netherlands Antilles:People

Population: 211,093 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 24% (male 26,496; female 25,267)
15-64 years : 68% (male 70,087; female 73,300)
65 years and over: 8% (male 6,694; female 9,249) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.99% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 15.61 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.33 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.36 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.72 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 8.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.18 years
male: 74.89 years
female: 79.59 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.86 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Netherlands Antillean(s)
adjective: Netherlands Antillean

Ethnic groups: mixed black 85%, Carib Amerindian, white, East Asian

Religions: Roman Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, Seventh-Day Adventist

Languages: Dutch (official), Papiamento, a
Spanish-Portuguese-Dutch-English dialect predominates, English widely
spoken, Spanish

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98%
male: 98%
female: 99% (1981 est.)

@Netherlands Antilles:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Netherlands Antilles
local long form: none
local short form : Nederlandse Antillen

Data code: NT

Dependency status: part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands; full
autonomy in internal affairs granted in 1954

Government type: NA

National capital: Willemstad

Administrative divisions: none (part of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands)
note: each island has its own government

Independence: none (part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands)

National holiday: Queen's Day, 30 April (1938)

Constitution: 29 December 1954, Statute of the Realm of the
Netherlands, as amended

Legal system: based on Dutch civil law system, with some English
common law influence

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen BEATRIX Wilhelmina Armgard of the Netherlands
(since 30 April 1980), represented by Governor General Jaime SALEH
(since NA October 1989)
head of government: Prime Minister Miguel POURIER (since 25 February
1994)
cabinet: Council of Ministers elected by the Staten
elections: the queen is a constitutional monarch; governor general
appointed by the queen for a six-year term; following legislative
elections, the leader of the majority party is usually elected prime
minister by the Staten; election last held 31 March 1994 (next to be
held NA 1998)
election results: Miguel POURIER elected prime minister; percent of
legislative vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral States or Staten (23 seats; members are
elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 25 February 1994 (next to be held NA March 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PAR
8, PNP 3, SPA 2, PDB 2, UPB 1, MAN 2, DP 1, WIPM 1, DP-St.E 1, DP-St.M
1, Nos Patria 1
note: the government of Prime Minister Miguel POURIER is a coalition
of several parties

Judicial branch: Joint High Court of Justice

Political parties and leaders: political parties are indigenous to
each island
Bonaire: Patriotic Union of Bonaire (UPB), Rudy ELLIS; Democratic
Party of Bonaire (PDB), Broertje JANJA
Curacao : Antillean Restructuring Party (PAR), Miguel POURIER;
National People's Party (PNP), Maria LIBERIA-PETERS; New Antilles
Movement (MAN), Domenico Felip Don MARTINA; Workers' Liberation Front
(FOL), Wilson (Papa) GODETT; Socialist Independent (SI), George HUECK
and Nelson MONTE; Democratic Party of Curacao (DP), Augustin DIAZ; Nos
Patria, Chin BEHILIA
Saba : Windward Islands People's Movement (WIPM Saba), Ray HASSELL;
Saba Democratic Labor Movement, Steve HASSELL; Saba Unity Party,
Carmen SIMMONDS
Sint Eustatius: Democratic Party of Sint Eustatius (DP-St.E), Julian
WOODLEY; Windward Islands People's Movement (WIPM); St. Eustatius
Alliance (SEA), Ingrid WHITFIELD
Sint Maarten: Democratic Party of Sint Maarten (DP-St.M), Sarah
WESTCOTT-WILLIAMS; Patriotic Movement of Sint Maarten (SPA), Vance
JAMES; Serious Alternative People's Party (SAPP) Julian ROLLOCKS

International organization participation: Caricom (observer), ECLAC
(associate), Interpol, IOC, UNESCO (associate), UPU, WMO, WToO
(associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (represented by the Kingdom
of the Netherlands)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Consul General James L. WILLIAMS
consulate(s) general: J.B. Gorsiraweg #1, Curacao
mailing address: P. O. Box 158, Willemstad, Curacao
telephone : [599] (9) 461-3066
FAX: [599] (9) 461-6489

Flag description: white with a horizontal blue stripe in the center
superimposed on a vertical red band also centered; five white
five-pointed stars are arranged in an oval pattern in the center of
the blue band; the five stars represent the five main islands of
Bonaire, Curacao, Saba, Sint Eustatius, and Sint Maarten

Economy

Economy - overview: Tourism, petroleum transshipment, and offshore
finance are the mainstays of this small economy, which is closely tied
to the outside world. The islands enjoy a high per capita income and a
well-developed infrastructure as compared with other countries in the
region. Almost all consumer and capital goods are imported, with
Venezuela and the US being the major suppliers. Poor soils and
inadequate water supplies hamper the development of agriculture.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $2.04 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 0% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $9,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 1%
industry: 15%
services: 84% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 89,000
by occupation: government 65%, industry and commerce 28% (1983)

Unemployment rate: 13.4% (1993 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $209 million
expenditures : $232 million, including capital expenditures of $8
million (1992 est.)

Industries: tourism (Curacao, Sint Maarten, and Bonaire), petroleum
refining (Curacao), petroleum transshipment facilities (Curacao and
Bonaire), light manufacturing (Curacao)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 307,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 970 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 4,580 kWh (1994 est.)

Agriculture - products: aloes, sorghum, peanuts, vegetables, tropical
fruit

Exports:
total value: $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: petroleum products 98%
partners: US 39%, Brazil 9%, Colombia 6%

Imports:
total value: $1.8 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities : crude petroleum 64%, food, manufactures
partners: Venezuela 26%, US 18%, Colombia 6%, Netherlands 6%, Japan 5%

Debt - external: $1.95 billion (December 1995)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA; the Netherlands Antilles received a $97 million
Dutch aid package in 1996, making it the Netherlands' second largest
aid recipient behind India

Currency: 1 Netherlands Antillean guilder, gulden, or florin (NAf.) =
100 cents

Exchange rates: Netherlands Antillean guilders, gulden, or florins
(NAf.) per US$1 - 1.790 (fixed rate since 1989)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Netherlands Antilles:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system: generally adequate facilities
domestic: extensive interisland microwave radio relay links
international: 2 submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 2
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 205,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 64,000 (1992 est.)

@Netherlands Antilles:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 600 km
paved : 300 km
unpaved: 300 km (1992 est.)

Ports and harbors: Kralendijk, Philipsburg, Willemstad

Merchant marine:
total: 106 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 971,002 GRT/1,318,064
DWT
ships by type: bulk 3, cargo 33, container 4, liquefied gas tanker 4,
multifunction large-load carrier 20, oil tanker 7, passenger 1,
refrigerated cargo 26, roll-on/roll-off cargo 8 (1996 est.)

Airports: 4 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 4
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Netherlands Navy, Marine Corps, Royal
Netherlands Air Force, National Guard, Police Force

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 57,691 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 32,406 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 1,640 (1997 est.)

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: money-laundering center; transshipment point for South
American drugs bound for the US and Europe
______________________________________________________________________

NEW CALEDONIA

(overseas territory of France)

@New Caledonia:Geography

Location: Oceania, islands in the South Pacific Ocean, east of
Australia

Geographic coordinates: 21 30 S, 165 30 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total : 19,060 sq km
land: 18,575 sq km
water: 485 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 2,254 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; modified by southeast trade winds; hot, humid

Terrain: coastal plains with interior mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mont Panie 1,628 m

Natural resources: nickel, chrome, iron, cobalt, manganese, silver,
gold, lead, copper

Land use:
arable land : 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 12%
forests and woodland: 39%
other: 49% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons most frequent from November to March

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

@New Caledonia:People

Population: 191,003 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 30% (male 29,204; female 28,140)
15-64 years: 65% (male 62,344; female 60,864)
65 years and over: 5% (male 4,972; female 5,479) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.68% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 21.43 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.86 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.23 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.91 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 13.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 74.68 years
male: 71.4 years
female: 78.11 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.5 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: New Caledonian(s)
adjective: New Caledonian

Ethnic groups: Melanesian 42.5%, European 37.1%, Wallisian 8.4%,
Polynesian 3.8%, Indonesian 3.6%, Vietnamese 1.6%, other 3%

Religions: Roman Catholic 60%, Protestant 30%, other 10%

Languages: French, 28 Melanesian-Polynesian dialects

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 91%
male: 92%
female: 90% (1976 est.)

@New Caledonia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Territory of New Caledonia and Dependencies
conventional short form: New Caledonia
local long form : Territoire des Nouvelle-Caledonie et Dependances
local short form: Nouvelle-Caledonie

Data code: NC

Dependency status: overseas territory of France since 1956

Government type: NA

National capital: Noumea

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of France); there
are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
Government, but there are 3 provinces named Iles Loyaute, Nord, and
Sud

Independence: none (overseas territory of France; a referendum on
independence will be held in 1998)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: the 1988 Matignon Accords grant substantial autonomy to
the islands; formerly under French law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President of France Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May
1995), represented by High Commissioner and President of the Council
of Government Dominque BUR (since NA August 1995)
head of government: President of the Territorial Congress Pierre
FROGIER (since 31 July 1995)
cabinet: Consultative Committee
elections: high commissioner appointed by the president of France on
the advice of the French Ministry of Interior; president of the
Territorial Congress elected by the members of the congress

Legislative branch: unicameral Territorial Congress or Congres
Territorial (54 seats; members are members of the three Provincial
Assemblies or Assemblees Provinciales elected by popular vote to serve
six-year terms)
elections: last held 9 July 1995 (next to be held NA July 2001)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - RPCR
22, FLNKS 12, UNCT 7, various left parties 7, various right parties 6
note : New Caledonia elects 1 seat to the French Senate; elections
last held 27 September 1992 (next to be held NA September 2001);
results - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - RPCR 1; New
Caledonia also elects 2 seats to the French National Assembly;
elections last held 21 March 1993 (next to be held 25 May-1 June 1997
- special election); results - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - RPCR 2

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel

Political parties and leaders: white-dominated Rassemblement pour la
Caledonie dans la Republique or RPCR (conservative) [Jacques LAFLEUR,
president] - affiliated to France's Rassemblement pour la Republique
or RPR (also called South Province Party); Melanesian proindependence
Kanaka Socialist National Liberation Front or FLNKS [Rock WAMYTAN];
Melanesian moderate Kanak Socialist Liberation or LKS [Nidoish
NAISSELINE]; National Front or FN (extreme right) [Guy GEORGE];
Caledonie Demain or CD (right-wing) [Bernard MARANT]; Union Oceanienne
or UO (conservative) [Michel HEMA]; Front de Developpement des Iles
Loyautes or FDIL [Cono HAMU]; Union Caledonian or UC [Francois BURCK,
president]; A New Caledonia for All or UNCT [Didier LEROUX]

International organization participation: ESCAP (associate), FZ,
ICFTU, SPC, WFTU, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory of
France)

Flag description: three horizontal bands, blue (top), red, and green,
with a yellow disk enclosing a black symbol centered to the hoist
side; the flag of France is used for official occasions

Economy

Economy - overview: New Caledonia has more than 20% of the world's
known nickel resources. In recent years, the economy has suffered
because of depressed international demand for nickel, the principal
source of export earnings. Only a negligible amount of the land is
suitable for cultivation, and food accounts for about 25% of imports.
In addition to nickel, financial support from France and tourism are
key to the health of the economy.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.5 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $8,000 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 5%
industry: 35%
services: 60% (1992 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.4% (1990)

Labor force:
total : 70,044 (1988)
by occupation: agriculture 32%, industry 20%, services 40%, mining 8%
(1992)

Unemployment rate: 15% (1994)

Budget:
revenues: $755.6 million
expenditures: $755.6 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: nickel mining and smelting

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: 1.12 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 5,744 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: vegetables; beef, other livestock products

Exports:
total value: $528 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: nickel metal 24.5%, nickel ore
partners: France 32.2%, Japan 23.5%, Germany 6.7%, US 3.6%, India 1.2%

Imports:
total value : $980 million (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: foods, fuels, minerals, machines, electrical equipment
partners: France 46.3%, ECE 14.9%, Australia 10.2%, Japan 6.3%, New
Zealand 4.4%

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note: important support from France

Currency: 1 CFP franc (CFPF) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique francs (CFPF) per US$1
- 98.48 (January 1997), 93.00 (1996), 90.75 (1995), 100.93 (1994),
102.96 (1993), 96.24 (1992); note - linked at the rate of 18.18 to the
French franc

Fiscal year: calendar year

@New Caledonia:Communications

Telephones: 38,748 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 97,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 7

Televisions: 47,000 (1992 est.)

@New Caledonia:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 5,562 km
paved: 975 km
unpaved: 4,587 km (1993)

Ports and harbors: Mueo, Noumea, Thio

Merchant marine:
total: 1 roll-on/roll-off ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,079
GRT/724 DWT (1996 est.)

Airports: 28 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 16
over 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m: 12 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 12
914 to 1,523 m: 12 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 7 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: French Armed Forces (Army, Navy, Air Force,
Gendarmerie); Police Force

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Matthew and Hunter Islands claimed by France
and Vanuatu
______________________________________________________________________

NEW ZEALAND

@New Zealand:Geography

Location: Oceania, islands in the South Pacific Ocean, southeast of
Australia

Geographic coordinates: 41 00 S, 174 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 268,680 sq km
land: 268,670 sq km
water: 10 sq km
note: includes Antipodes Islands, Auckland Islands, Bounty Islands,
Campbell Island, Chatham Islands, and Kermadec Islands

Area - comparative: about the size of Colorado

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 15,134 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate with sharp regional contrasts

Terrain: predominately mountainous with some large coastal plains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point : Mount Cook 3,764 m

Natural resources: natural gas, iron ore, sand, coal, timber,
hydropower, gold, limestone

Land use:
arable land: 9%
permanent crops : 5%
permanent pastures: 50%
forests and woodland: 28%
other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 2,850 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: earthquakes are common, though usually not severe;
volcanic activity

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; native
flora and fauna hard-hit by species introduced from outside

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: about 80% of the population lives in cities

@New Zealand:People

Population: 3,587,275 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 23% (male 424,584; female 403,792)
15-64 years: 65% (male 1,174,945; female 1,167,913)
65 years and over: 12% (male 179,853; female 236,188) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.08% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 15.35 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.67 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.12 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.27 years
male: 74.16 years
female: 80.56 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.96 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: New Zealander(s)
adjective: New Zealand

Ethnic groups: European 88%, Maori 8.9%, Pacific Islander 2.9%, other
0.2%

Religions: Anglican 24%, Presbyterian 18%, Roman Catholic 15%,
Methodist 5%, Baptist 2%, other Protestant 3%, unspecified or none 33%
(1986)

Languages: English (official), Maori

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99% (1980 est.)
male: NA%
female: NA%

@New Zealand:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: New Zealand
abbreviation : NZ

Data code: NZ

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Wellington

Administrative divisions: 93 counties, 9 districts*, and 3 town
districts**; Akaroa, Amuri, Ashburton, Bay of Islands, Bruce, Buller,
Chatham Islands, Cheviot, Clifton, Clutha, Cook, Dannevirke, Egmont,
Eketahuna, Ellesmere, Eltham, Eyre, Featherston, Franklin, Golden Bay,
Great Barrier Island, Grey, Hauraki Plains, Hawera*, Hawke's Bay,
Heathcote, Hikurangi**, Hobson, Hokianga, Horowhenua, Hurunui, Hutt,
Inangahua, Inglewood, Kaikoura, Kairanga, Kiwitea, Lake, Mackenzie,
Malvern, Manaia**, Manawatu, Mangonui, Maniototo, Marlborough,
Masterton, Matamata, Mount Herbert, Ohinemuri, Opotiki, Oroua,
Otamatea, Otorohanga*, Oxford, Pahiatua, Paparua, Patea, Piako,
Pohangina, Raglan, Rangiora*, Rangitikei, Rodney, Rotorua*, Runanga,
Saint Kilda, Silverpeaks, Southland, Stewart Island, Stratford,
Strathallan, Taranaki, Taumarunui, Taupo, Tauranga,
Thames-Coromandel*, Tuapeka, Vincent, Waiapu, Waiheke, Waihemo,
Waikato, Waikohu, Waimairi, Waimarino, Waimate, Waimate West, Waimea,
Waipa, Waipawa*, Waipukurau*, Wairarapa South, Wairewa, Wairoa,
Waitaki, Waitomo*, Waitotara, Wallace, Wanganui, Waverley**, Westland,
Whakatane*, Whangarei, Whangaroa, Woodville
note: there may be a new administrative structure of 16 regions
(Auckland, Bay of Plenty, Canterbury, Gisborne, Hawke's Bay,
Marlborough, Nelson, Northland, Otago, Southland, Taranaki, Tasman,
Waikato, Wanganui-Manawatu, Wellington, West Coast) that are
subdivided into 57 districts and 16 cities* (Ashburton, Auckland*,
Banks Peninsula, Buller, Carterton, Central Hawke's Bay, Central
Otago, Christchurch*, Clutha, Dunedin*, Far North, Franklin, Gisborne,
Gore, Grey, Hamilton*, Hastings, Hauraki, Horowhenua, Hurunui, Hutt*,
Invercargill*, Kaikoura, Kaipara, Kapiti Coast, Kawerau, Mackenzie,
Manawatu, Manukau*, Marlborough, Masterton, Matamata Piako, Napier*,
Nelson*, New Plymouth, North Shore*, Opotiki, Otorohanga, Palmerston
North*, Papakura*, Porirua*, Queenstown Lakes, Rangitikei, Rodney,
Rotorua, Ruapehu, Selwyn, Southland, South Taranaki, South Waikato,
South Wairarapa, Stratford, Tararua, Tasman, Taupo, Tauranga, Thames
Coromandel, Timaru, Upper Hutt*, Waikato, Waimakariri, Waimate, Waipa,
Wairoa, Waitakere*, Waitaki, Waitomo, Wanganui, Wellington*, Western
Bay of Plenty, Westland, Whakatane, Whangarei)

Dependent areas: Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau

Independence: 26 September 1907 (from UK)

National holiday: Waitangi Day, 6 February (1840) (Treaty of Waitangi
established British sovereignty)

Constitution: no formal, written constitution; consists of various
documents, including certain acts of the UK and New Zealand
Parliaments; Constitution Act 1986 was to have come into force 1
January 1987, but has not been enacted

Legal system: based on English law, with special land legislation and
land courts for Maoris; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General Sir Michael HARDIE BOYS (since 21
March 1996)
head of government: Prime Minister James BOLGER (since 29 October
1990) and Deputy Prime Minister Winston PETERS (since 16 December
1996)
cabinet : Executive Council appointed by the governor general on the
recommendation of the prime minister
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor general
appointed by the queen; following legislative elections, the leader of
the majority party or the leader of a majority coalition is usually
appointed prime minister by the governor general for a three-year
term; deputy prime minister appointed by the governor general
note: the government is a coalition of the National Party and the New
Zealand First Party

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Representatives - commonly
called Parliament (120 seats; members elected by popular vote in
single-member constituencies to serve three-year terms)
elections: last held 12 October 1996 (next must be called by October
1999)
election results : percent of vote by party - NP 34.1%, NZLP 28.3%,
NZFP 13.1%, Alliance 10.1%, ACT 6.17%, UNZ 0.91%; seats by party - NP
44, NZLP 37, NZFP 17, Alliance 13, ACT 8, UNZ 1

Judicial branch: High Court; Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: National Party (NP), James BOLGER; New
Zealand First Party (NZFP), Winston PETERS; New Zealand Labor Party
(NZLP, opposition), Helen CLARK; Alliance, Jim ANDERTON; Democratic
Party, John WRIGHT; New Zealand Liberal Party, Frank GROVER; Green
Party, Jeanette FITZSIMONS and Rod DONALD; Mana Motuhake, Sandra LEE;
United New Zealand (UNZ), Clive MATTHEWSON; Conservative Party
(formerly Right of Centre Party), Trevor ROGERS; Association of
Consumers and Taxpayers, New Zealand (ACT), Richard PREBBLE; Christian
Democrats, Graeme LEE; Christian Heritage Party (CH), Rev. Graham
CAPILL

International organization participation: ANZUS (US suspended security
obligations to NZ on 11 August 1986), APEC, AsDB, Australia Group, C,
CCC, CP, EBRD, ESCAP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol,
IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, MTCR, NAM (guest), OECD, PCA, Sparteca,
SPC, SPF, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNPREDEP, UNTAES,
UNTSO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Lionel John WOOD
chancery: 37 Observatory Circle NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone : [1] (202) 328-4800
consulate(s) general: Los Angeles, New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Josiah Horton BEEMAN
embassy: 29 Fitzherbert Terrace, Thorndon, Wellington
mailing address : P. O. Box 1190, Wellington; PSC 467, Box 1, FPO AP
96531-1001
telephone: [64] (4) 472-2068
FAX: [64] (4) 472-3537
consulate(s) general: Auckland

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
quadrant with four red five-pointed stars edged in white centered in
the outer half of the flag; the stars represent the Southern Cross
constellation

Economy

Economy - overview: Since 1984 the government has accomplished major
economic restructuring from an agrarian economy dependent on a
concessionary British market access toward a more industrialized,
open, free market economy that can compete globally. This dynamic
growth has boosted real incomes, broadened and deepened the
technological capabilities of the industrial sector, and contained
inflationary pressures. Business confidence strengthened in 1994, and
export demand picked up in the Asia-Pacific region, resulting in 6.2%
growth. Growth continued strong in 1995, but tailed off in 1996.
Inflation remains among the lowest in the industrial world. Per capita
GDP now is up to the levels of the big West European economies.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $65.6 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.8% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $18,500 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 7.3%
industry: 25.9%
services : 66.8% (1990)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.8% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 1,634,500 (September 1995)
by occupation: services 64.6%, industry 25.0%, agriculture 10.4%
(1994)

Unemployment rate: 5.9% (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues : $22.18 billion
expenditures: $20.28 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY95/96 est.)

Industries: food processing, wood and paper products, textiles,
machinery, transportation equipment, banking and insurance, tourism,
mining

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 7.75 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 34.4 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 9,198 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, barley, potatoes, pulses, fruits,
vegetables; wool, meat, dairy products; fish catch reached a record
503,000 metric tons in 1988

Exports:
total value: $13.7 billion (1995)
commodities: wool, lamb, mutton, beef, fish, cheese, chemicals,
forestry products, fruits and vegetables, manufactures, dairy
products, wood
partners: Australia 19%, Japan 15%, UK 15%, US 12%

Imports:
total value : $14 billion (1995)
commodities: machinery and equipment, vehicles and aircraft,
petroleum, consumer goods, plastics
partners: Australia 21%, US 18%, Japan 16%, UK 6%

Debt - external: $38.5 billion (September 1994)

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $98 million (1993)

Currency: 1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1 - 1.4247 (January
1997), 1.4543 (1996), 1.5235 (1995), 1.6844 (1994), 1.8495 (1993),
1.8584 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@New Zealand:Communications

Telephones: 1.7 million (1986 est.)

Telephone system: excellent international and domestic systems
domestic: NA
international: submarine cables to Australia and Fiji; satellite earth
stations - 2 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 64, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 3.215 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 14 (1986 est.)

Televisions: 1.53 million (1992 est.)

@New Zealand:Transportation

Railways:
total: 3,973 km
narrow gauge: 3,973 km 1.067-m gauge (504 km electrified)

Highways:
total: 92,306 km
paved: 53,537 km (including 144 km of expressways)
unpaved : 38,769 km (1993 est.)

Waterways: 1,609 km; of little importance to transportation

Pipelines: petroleum products 160 km; natural gas 1,000 km; liquefied
petroleum gas or LPG 150 km

Ports and harbors: Auckland, Christchurch, Dunedin, Tauranga,
Wellington

Merchant marine:
total : 18 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 173,831 GRT/224,544 DWT
ships by type: bulk 6, cargo 1, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker 3,
railcar carrier 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6 (1996 est.)

Airports: 112 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 89
over 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
914 to 1,523 m: 31
under 914 m: 48 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 23
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 22 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: New Zealand Army, Royal New Zealand Navy, Royal New
Zealand Air Force

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 932,982 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 785,440 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 26,514 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $677 million (FY96/97)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.1% (FY96/97)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: territorial claim in Antarctica (Ross
Dependency)
______________________________________________________________________

NICARAGUA

@Nicaragua:Geography

Location: Middle America, bordering both the Caribbean Sea and the
North Pacific Ocean, between Costa Rica and Honduras

Geographic coordinates: 13 00 N, 85 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total : 129,494 sq km
land: 120,254 sq km
water: 9,240 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than New York State

Land boundaries:
total: 1,231 km
border countries: Costa Rica 309 km, Honduras 922 km

Coastline: 910 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 25-nm security zone
continental shelf: natural prolongation
territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical in lowlands, cooler in highlands

Terrain: extensive Atlantic coastal plains rising to central interior
mountains; narrow Pacific coastal plain interrupted by volcanoes

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mogoton 2,438 m

Natural resources: gold, silver, copper, tungsten, lead, zinc, timber,
fish

Land use:
arable land : 9%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 46%
forests and woodland: 27%
other : 17% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 880 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: destructive earthquakes, volcanoes, landslides, and
occasionally severe hurricanes

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; water
pollution

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Environmental Modification,
Law of the Sea

@Nicaragua:People

Population: 4,386,399 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 963,878; female 949,658)
15-64 years: 53% (male 1,147,565; female 1,207,386)
65 years and over : 4% (male 50,910; female 67,002) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.6% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 33.01 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.83 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.14 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 44.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 66.17 years
male: 63.83 years
female : 68.6 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.9 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Nicaraguan(s)
adjective: Nicaraguan

Ethnic groups: mestizo (mixed Amerindian and white) 69%, white 17%,
black 9%, Amerindian 5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%, Protestant 5%

Languages: Spanish (official)
note: English- and Amerindian-speaking minorities on Atlantic coast

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 65.7%
male : 64.6%
female: 66.6% (1995 est.)

@Nicaragua:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Nicaragua
conventional short form : Nicaragua
local long form: Republica de Nicaragua
local short form : Nicaragua

Data code: NU

Government type: republic

National capital: Managua

Administrative divisions: 15 departments (departamentos, singular -
departamento), 2 autonomous regions* (regiones autonomistas, singular
- region autonomista); Boaco, Carazo, Chinandega, Chontales, Esteli,
Granada, Jinotega, Leon, Madriz, Managua, Masaya, Matagalpa, Nueva
Segovia, Rio San Juan, Rivas, Atlantico Norte*, Atlantico Sur*

Independence: 15 September 1821 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 15 September (1821)

Constitution: 9 January 1987

Legal system: civil law system; Supreme Court may review
administrative acts

Suffrage: 16 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Arnoldo ALEMAN Lacayo (10 January 1997);
Vice President Enrique BOLANOS Geyer (10 January 1997)
head of government: President Arnoldo ALEMAN Lacayo (10 January 1997);
Vice President Enrique BOLANOS Geyer (10 January 1997)
cabinet: Cabinet
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 20 October 1996 (next to be held NA 2001); note -
in July 1995 the term of the office of the president was amended to
five years
election results: Arnoldo ALEMAN Lacayo (Liberal Alliance) 51.03%,
Daniel ORTEGA Saavedra (FSLN) 37.75%, Guillermo OSORNO (Nicaraguan
Christian Path - CNN) 4.10%, Noel VIDAURRE (Nicaraguan Conservative
Party - PCN) 2.26%, Benjamin LANZAS (National Project) 0.53%, others
(18 other candidates) remaining 4.33%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Asamblea Nacional
(93 seats; members are elected by proportional representation to serve
five-year terms)
elections: last held 20 October 1996 (next to be held NA 2001)
election results: percent of vote by party - Liberal Alliance (ruling
party - includes PLC, PALI, PLIUN, and PUCA) 46.03%, Sandinista
National Liberation Front (FSLN) 36.55%, Nicaraguan Christian Road
Party (PCCN) 3.73%, Nicaraguan Conservative Party (PCN) 2.12%,
Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS) 1.33%; seats by party - Liberal
Alliance 42, FSLN 36, PCCN 4, PCN 3, PRONAL 2, MRS 1, PRN 1, PNC 1,
PLI 1, AU 1, UNO-96 Alliance 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), 12 judges elected for
a seven-year term by the National Assembly

Political parties and leaders:
right: Nicaraguan Party of the Christian Road (PCCN), Guillermo
OSORNO, Roberto RODRIGUEZ; Liberal Constitutionalist Party (PLC), NA;
Independent Liberal Party for National Unity (PLIUN), Carlos GUERRA
Gallardo; National Conservative Party (PNC), Adolfo CALERO, Noel
VIDAURRE; Nationalist Liberal Party (PLN), Enrique SANCHEZ
center right: Neoliberal Party (PALI), Ricardo VEGA Garcia; Nicaraguan
Resistance Party (PRN), Enrique QUINONEZ; Independent Liberal Party
(PLI), Wilfredo NAVARRO; National Project (PRONAL), Antonio LACAYO
Oyanguren; Conservative Action Movement (MAC), Hernaldo ZUNIYA
center left: Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS), Sergio RAMIREZ;
Social Democratic Party (PSD), Adolfo JARQUIN; Social Christian Party
(PSC), Erick RAMIREZ; Movement for Revolutionary Unity (MUR), NA;
Central American Integrationist Party (PIAC), NA; Unity Alliance (AU),
Alejandro SERRANO; Conservative Party of Nicaragua (PCN), Dr. Fernando
AGUERO Rocha; National Democratic Party (PND), Alfredo CESAR Aguirre;
Central American Unionist Party (PUCA), Blanca ROJAS Echaverry; UNO-96
Alliance, Alfredo CESAR Aguirre; Nicaraguan Democratic Movement (MDN),
Alfredo GUZMAN
left: Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), Daniel ORTEGA
Saavedra

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Workers Front (FNT) is
a Sandinista umbrella group of eight labor unions: Sandinista Workers'
Central (CST); Farm Workers Association (ATC); Health Workers
Federation (FETASALUD); National Union of Employees (UNE); National
Association of Educators of Nicaragua (ANDEN); Union of Journalists of
Nicaragua (UPN); Heroes and Martyrs Confederation of Professional
Associations (CONAPRO); and the National Union of Farmers and Ranchers
(UNAG); Permanent Congress of Workers (CPT) is an umbrella group of
four non-Sandinista labor unions: Confederation of Labor Unification
(CUS); Autonomous Nicaraguan Workers' Central (CTN-A); Independent
General Confederation of Labor (CGT-I); and Labor Action and Unity
Central (CAUS); Nicaraguan Workers' Central (CTN) is an independent
labor union; Superior Council of Private Enterprise (COSEP) is a
confederation of business groups

International organization participation: BCIE, CACM, ECLAC, FAO,
G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer),
NAM, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Francisco AGUIRRE Sacasa
chancery: 1627 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 939-6570
consulate(s) general: Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New
York, San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Luis GUTIERREZ
embassy: Kilometer 4.5 Carretera Sur., Managua
mailing address : APO AA 34021
telephone: [505] (2) 666010 through 666013, 666015 through 18, 666026,
666027, 666032 through 33
FAX: [505] (2) 669074

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white,
and blue with the national coat of arms centered in the white band;
the coat of arms features a triangle encircled by the words REPUBLICA
DE NICARAGUA on the top and AMERICA CENTRAL on the bottom; similar to
the flag of El Salvador, which features a round emblem encircled by
the words REPUBLICA DE EL SALVADOR EN LA AMERICA CENTRAL centered in
the white band; also similar to the flag of Honduras, which has five
blue stars arranged in an X pattern centered in the white band

Economy

Economy - overview: The Nicaraguan economy, devastated during the
1980s by economic mismanagement and civil war, is beginning to
rebound. Since March 1991, when President CHAMORRO launched an
ambitious economic stabilization program, Nicaragua has reduced
inflation and obtained substantial economic aid from abroad. Annual
inflation fell from more than 750% in 1991 to less than 5% in 1992.
After rising again to an estimated 20% in 1993, the annual inflation
rate dropped to roughly 11% in 1994-96. Economic growth rose sharply
in 1995-96, thanks to surges in most export categories. The
government's efforts to liberalize trade include a December 1995
decision to stop requiring exporters to bring their foreign exchange
earnings into Nicaragua. On the debt front, the Nicaraguan Government
launched a successful debt buyback program in 1995, purchasing 73% of
its $1.373 billion commercial debt inherited from previous
governments. Progress also occurred on reducing bilateral debt in 1996
as Nicaragua reached an agreement with Russia, reducing Nicaragua's
debt by $3.3 billion. Debt reduction agreements with Paris Club
creditors and rescheduling with Latin American creditors also took
place. Unemployment remains a pressing problem, however, with roughly
half the country's work force unemployed or underemployed.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $7.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 34%
industry: 21%
services: 45% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 11% (1996)

Labor force:
total : 1.086 million
by occupation: services 43%, agriculture 44%, industry 13% (1986)

Unemployment rate: 16%; underemployment 36% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $389 million
expenditures: $551 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: food processing, chemicals, metal products, textiles,
clothing, petroleum refining and distribution, beverages, footwear

Industrial production growth rate: 1.4% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 417,700 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 1.713 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 279 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, bananas, sugarcane, cotton, rice,
corn, cassava (tapioca), citrus, beans; beef, veal, pork, poultry,
dairy products

Exports:
total value: $607 million (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: meat, coffee, cotton, sugar, seafood, gold, bananas
partners: US, Central America, Canada, Germany

Imports:
total value : $1.188 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: consumer goods, machinery and equipment, petroleum
products
partners: Central America, US, Venezuela, Japan

Debt - external: $6 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 gold cordoba (C$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: gold cordobas (C$) per US$1 - 8.63 (September 1996),
7.55 (1995), 6.72 (1994), 5.62 (1993), 5.00 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Nicaragua:Communications

Telephones: 66,810 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: low-capacity microwave radio relay and wire system
being expanded; connected to Central American Microwave System
domestic : wire and microwave radio relay
international: satellite earth stations - 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic
Ocean Region) and 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 45, FM 0, shortwave 3

Radios: 1.037 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 7 (1994 est.)

Televisions: 260,000 (1992 est.)

@Nicaragua:Transportation

Railways:
total: 0 km
narrow gauge: 0 km 1.067-m gauge; note - part of the previous 376 km
system was closed and dismantled in 1993 and, in 1994, the remainder
was closed, the track and rolling stock being sold for scrap

Highways:
total : 17,146 km
paved: 1,715 km
unpaved: 15,431 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 2,220 km, including 2 large lakes

Pipelines: crude oil 56 km

Ports and harbors: Bluefields, Corinto, El Bluff, Puerto Cabezas,
Puerto Sandino, Rama, San Juan del Sur

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 147 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 115
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 3
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m: 107 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 32
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 31 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Ground Forces, Navy, Air Force

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,027,630 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 632,433 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 49,552 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $27.48 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.35% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: territorial disputes with Colombia over the
Archipelago de San Andres y Providencia and Quita Sueno Bank; with
respect to the maritime boundary question in the Golfo de Fonseca, the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) referred the disputants to an
earlier agreement in this century and advised that some tripartite
resolution among El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua likely would be
required; maritime boundary dispute with Honduras

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine destined for the US
______________________________________________________________________

NIGER

@Niger:Geography

Location: Western Africa, southeast of Algeria

Geographic coordinates: 16 00 N, 8 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 1.267 million sq km
land: 1,266,700 sq km
water : 300 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
total : 5,697 km
border countries: Algeria 956 km, Benin 266 km, Burkina Faso 628 km,
Chad 1,175 km, Libya 354 km, Mali 821 km, Nigeria 1,497 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: desert; mostly hot, dry, dusty; tropical in extreme south

Terrain: predominately desert plains and sand dunes; flat to rolling
plains in south; hills in north

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Niger River 200 m
highest point: Mont Greboun 1,944 m

Natural resources: uranium, coal, iron ore, tin, phosphates

Land use:
arable land: 3%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 7%
forests and woodland: 2%
other: 88% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 660 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring droughts

Environment - current issues: overgrazing; soil erosion;
deforestation; desertification; wildlife populations (such as
elephant, hippopotamus, and lion) threatened because of poaching and
habitat destruction

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography - note: landlocked

@Niger:People

Population: 9,388,859 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 48% (male 2,303,790; female 2,207,542)
15-64 years: 50% (male 2,272,535; female 2,381,033)
65 years and over: 2% (male 118,333; female 105,626) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.98% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 53.73 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 23.98 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.95 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.12 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 116 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 41.09 years
male: 41.44 years
female: 40.73 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 7.37 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Nigerien(s)
adjective: Nigerien

Ethnic groups: Hausa 56%, Djerma 22%, Fula 8.5%, Tuareg 8%, Beri Beri
(Kanouri) 4.3%, Arab, Toubou, and Gourmantche 1.2%, about 4,000 French
expatriates

Religions: Muslim 80%, remainder indigenous beliefs and Christians

Languages: French (official), Hausa, Djerma

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 13.6%
male: 20.9%
female: 6.6% (1995 est.)

@Niger:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Niger
conventional short form: Niger
local long form : Republique du Niger
local short form: Niger

Data code: NG

Government type: republic

National capital: Niamey

Administrative divisions: 7 departments (departements, singular -
departement), and 1 capital district* (capitale district); Agadez,
Diffa, Dosso, Maradi, Niamey*, Tahoua, Tillaberi, Zinder

Independence: 3 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Republic Day, 18 December (1958)

Constitution: the constitution of January 1993 was revised by national
referendum on 12 May 1996

Legal system: based on French civil law system and customary law; has
not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Ibrahim BARE Mainassara (since 28 January
1996); note - President is chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Ibraham BARE Mainassara (since 28
January 1996); note - President is chief of state and head of
government; Prime Minister Amadou Boubacar CISSE (since 21 December
1996) was appointed by the president
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by President BARE
elections : the president is elected by popular vote for a five-year
term; last election 7-8 July 1996 (next election NA 2001); note -
Ibrahim BARE Mainassara initially became president when he ousted
President Mahamane OUSMANE in a coup on 27 January 1996 and
subsequently defeated him in the flawed election of July 1996
election results: percent of total vote - Ibrahim BARE Mainassara
52.22%, Mahamane OUSMANE 19.75%, Tandja MAMADOU 15.65%, Mahamadou
ISSOUFOU 7.60%, Moumouni AMADOU Djermakoye 4.77%

Legislative branch: two chamber National Assembly; one chamber with 83
seats directly elected by proportional representation for five-year
terms; selection process for second chamber not established
elections: last held 23 November1996 (next to be held NA 2001)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
UNIRD 59, ANDPS-Zaman Lahiya 8, UDPS-Amana 3, coalition of
independents 3, MDP-Alkwali 1, UPDP-Shamuwa 4, DARAJA 3, PMT-Albarka 2

Judicial branch: State Court or Cour d'Etat; Court of Appeal or Cour
d'Apel

Political parties and leaders: Alliance for Democracy and Progress or
ADP-AUMUNCI [Issoufou BACHARD, chairman]; DARAJA [Ali TALBA,
chairman]; Democratic and Social Convention-Rahama or CDS-Rahama
[Mahamane OUSMANE]; Movement for Development and Pan-Africanism or
MDP-Alkwali [Mai Manga BOUCAR, chairman]; National Movement of the
Development Society-Nassara or MNSD-Nassara [Tandja MAMADOU,
chairman]; National Union of Independents for Democratic Revival or
UNIRD [leader NA]; Niger Progressive Party-African Democratic Rally or
PPN-RDA [Dori ABDOULAI]; Niger Social Democrat Party or PADN [Malam
Adji WAZIRI]; Nigerien Party for Democracy and Socialism-Tarayya or
PNDS-Tarayya [Mahamadou ISSOUFOU]; Nigerien Alliance for Democracy and
Social Progress-Zaman Lahia or ANDPS-Zaman Lahia [Moumouni Adamou
DJERMAKOYE]; PMT-Albarka; Union for Democracy and Social
Progress-Amana or UDPS-Amana [Akoli DAOUEL]; Union of Patriots,
Democrats, and Progressives-Shamuwa or UPDP-Shamuwa [Professor Andre'
SALIFOU, chairman]; Union of Popular Forces for Democracy and
Progress-Sawaba or UFPDP-Sawaba [Djibo BAKARY, chairman]

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA,
ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM,
OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Joseph DIATTA
chancery : 2204 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 483-4224 through 4227

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Charles O. CECIL (20 August 1996)
embassy: Rue Des Ambassades, Niamey
mailing address: B. P. 11201, Niamey
telephone : [227] 72 26 61 through 72 26 64
FAX: [227] 73 31 67

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of orange (top), white,
and green with a small orange disk (representing the sun) centered in
the white band; similar to the flag of India, which has a blue spoked
wheel centered in the white band

Economy

Economy - overview: Niger is a poor, landlocked Sub-Saharan nation,
whose recent GDP growth has barely matched the rapid growth of
population. The economy is centered on subsistence agriculture, animal
husbandry, and reexport trade, and increasingly less on uranium, its
major export throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Terms of trade with
Nigeria, Niger's largest regional trade partner, have improved
dramatically since the 50% devaluation of the African franc in January
1994; this devaluation boosted exports of livestock, peas, onions, and
the products of Niger's small cotton industry. The government relies
on bilateral and multilateral aid for operating expenses and public
investment and is strongly induced to adhere to structural adjustment
programs designed by the IMF and the World Bank. The US terminated
bilateral assistance to Niger after the coup of 1996. Other donors
have reduced their aid.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $5.9 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $640 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 41%
industry: 18%
services: 41% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 10.6% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 2.5 million wage earners (1982)
by occupation: agriculture 90%, industry and commerce 6%, government
4%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $200 million
expenditures : $387 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: cement, brick, textiles, food processing, chemicals,
slaughterhouses, and a few other small light industries; uranium
mining

Industrial production growth rate: 0.5% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 105,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 230 million kWh (1991)
note: imports about 200 million kW of electricity from Nigeria

Electricity - consumption per capita: 53 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: cowpeas, cotton, peanuts, millet, sorghum,
cassava (tapioca), rice; cattle, sheep, goats

Exports:
total value: $247 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: uranium ore 67%, livestock products 20%, cowpeas, onions
partners: France 77%, Nigeria 8%, Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, Canada

Imports:
total value : $307 million (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: consumer goods, primary materials, machinery, vehicles
and parts, petroleum, cereals
partners: France 23%, Cote d'Ivoire, China, Belgium-Luxembourg

Debt - external: $1.6 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA; bilateral donors: France, Japan, Germany, US

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note: beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF
100 per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since
1948

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Niger:Communications

Telephones: 14,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: small system of wire, radiotelephone communications,
and microwave radio relay links concentrated in southwestern area
domestic: wire, radiotelephone communications, and microwave radio
relay; domestic satellite system with 3 earth stations and 1 planned
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
and 1 Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 15, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: 500,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 18 stations in a single network (1995)

Televisions: 38,000 (1992 est.)

@Niger:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 9,863 km
paved: 779 km
unpaved: 9,084 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: Niger river is navigable 300 km from Niamey to Gaya on the
Benin frontier from mid-December through March

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 23 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 11
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 6
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 12
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 11 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Air Force, National Gendarmerie, Republican
Guard, National Police

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,983,377 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,069,743 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 95,217 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $32 million (FY92/93)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.3% (FY92/93)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Libya claims about 19,400 sq km in northern
Niger; demarcation of international boundaries in the vicinity of Lake
Chad, the lack of which has led to border incidents in the past, is
completed and awaiting ratification by Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and
Nigeria
______________________________________________________________________

NIGERIA

@Nigeria:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the Gulf of Guinea, between Benin
and Cameroon

Geographic coordinates: 10 00 N, 8 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 923,770 sq km
land: 910,770 sq km
water : 13,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of California

Land boundaries:
total: 4,047 km
border countries: Benin 773 km, Cameroon 1,690 km, Chad 87 km, Niger
1,497 km

Coastline: 853 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 30 nm

Climate: varies; equatorial in south, tropical in center, arid in
north

Terrain: southern lowlands merge into central hills and plateaus;
mountains in southeast, plains in north

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point : Chappal Waddi 2,419 m

Natural resources: petroleum, tin, columbite, iron ore, coal,
limestone, lead, zinc, natural gas

Land use:
arable land: 33%
permanent crops: 3%
permanent pastures: 44%
forests and woodland: 12%
other : 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 9,570 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: soil degradation; rapid deforestation;
desertification; recent droughts in north severely affecting marginal
agricultural activities

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

@Nigeria:People

Population: 107,129,469 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 45% (male 24,142,369; female 23,931,502)
15-64 years: 52% (male 28,502,597; female 27,432,816)
65 years and over : 3% (male 1,572,773; female 1,547,412) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 3.05% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 42.58 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 12.45 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.33 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.02 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 70.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 54.65 years
male: 53.32 years
female : 56.03 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.17 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Nigerian(s)
adjective: Nigerian

Ethnic groups: Hausa, Fulani, Yoruba, Ibo, Kanuri, Ibibio, Tiv, Ijaw

Religions: Muslim 50%, Christian 40%, indigenous beliefs 10%

Languages: English (official), Hausa, Yoruba, Ibo, Fulani

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 57.1%
male: 67.3%
female: 47.3% (1995 est.)

@Nigeria:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Federal Republic of Nigeria
conventional short form: Nigeria

Data code: NI

Government type: military government; Nigeria has been ruled by one
military regime after another since 31 December 1983; on 1 October
1995, the present military government announced it will turn power
over to democratically elected civilian authorities in October 1998

National capital: Abuja
note : on 12 December 1991 the capital was officially moved from Lagos
to Abuja; many government offices remain in Lagos pending completion
of facilities in Abuja

Administrative divisions: 30 states and 1 territory*; Abia, Abuja
Capital Territory*, Adamawa, Akwa Ibom, Anambra, Bauchi, Benue, Borno,
Cross River, Delta, Edo, Enugu, Imo, Jigawa, Kaduna, Kano, Katsina,
Kebbi, Kogi, Kwara, Lagos, Niger, Ogun, Ondo, Osun, Oyo, Plateau,
Rivers, Sokoto, Taraba, Yobe
note: the government has announced the creation of six additional
states named Bayelsa, Ebonyi, Ekiti, Gombe, Nassarawa, and Zamfara as
part of the process of transition to a civilian government

Independence: 1 October 1960 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 October (1960)

Constitution: 1979 constitution still partially in force; plan for
1989 constitution to take effect in 1993 was not implemented

Legal system: based on English common law, Islamic law, and tribal law

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Chairman of the Provisional Ruling Council and
Commander in Chief of Armed Forces and Defense Minister Gen. Sani
ABACHA (since 17 November 1993); Vice Chairman of the Provisional
Ruling Council Oladipo DIYA (since 17 November 1993); note - the
chairman of the Provisional Ruling Council is both the chief of state
and head of government
head of government: Chairman of the Provisional Ruling Council and
Commander in Chief of Armed Forces and Defense Minister Gen. Sani
ABACHA (since 17 November 1993); Vice Chairman of the Provisional
Ruling Council Oladipo DIYA (since 17 November 1993); note - the
chairman of the Provisional Ruling Council is both the chief of state
and head of government
cabinet: Federal Executive Council
elections: none; Chairman of the Provisional Ruling Council Gen. Sani
ABACHA assumed power in a military coup 17 November 1993; the
government's provisions for a return to civilian rule call for the
election of a president by universal suffrage in the third quarter of
1998 (inaugeration planned for October 1998)

Legislative branch: National Assembly
note: the National Assembly was suspended after the military takeover
of 17 November 1993; in October 1995, the government announced a
three-year program for transition to civilian rule; elections to the
National Assembly are to take place in the second quarter of 1998

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed by the Armed Forces
Ruling Council; Federal Court of Appeal, judges are appointed by the
federal government on the advice of the Advisory Judicial Committee

Political parties and leaders: political party system, which was
suspended after the military takeover of 17 November 1993, was
reestablished by the Provisional Ruling Council on 30 September 1996
with the registration of five of 15 competing political parties; these
were the United Nigeria Congress Party or UNCP [Isa MOHAMMED,
chairman]; National Center Party of Nigeria or NCPN [Magaji ABDULLAH,
chairman]; Grassroots Democratic Movement or GDM [Gambo LAWAR,
chairman]; Comittee for National Consensus or CNC [Abel UBEKU,
chairman]; Democratic Party of Nigeria or DPN [Sale HASSAN, chairman]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C (suspended),
CCC, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPEC, PCA, UN, UNAVEM
III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOP,
UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Wakili Hassan ADAMU
chancery: 1333 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 986-8400
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Walter C. CARRINGTON
embassy: 2 Eleke Crescent, Lagos
mailing address: P. O. Box 554, Lagos
telephone : [234] (1) 261-0097
FAX: [234] (1) 261-0257

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side),
white, and green

Economy

Economy - overview: The oil-rich Nigerian economy continues to be
hobbled by political instability, corruption, and poor macroeconomic
management. Nigeria's unpopular military rulers have failed to make
significant progress in diversifying the economy away from
overdependence on the capital intensive oil sector which provides half
of GDP, 95% of foreign exchange earnings, and about 80% of budgetary
revenues. Regime officials also appear divided on how to redress
fundamental economic imbalances that result in troublesome inflation
and the discouragement of investors. The government's resistance to
initiating greater transparency and accountability in managing the
country's multibillion dollar oil earnings continues to limit economic
growth and prevent an agreement with the IMF and bilateral creditors
on debt relief. The largely subsistence agricultural sector has failed
to keep up with rapid population growth, and Nigeria, once a large net
exporter of food, now must import food. Agricultural production in
1996 suffered from severe shortages of fertilizer.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $143.5 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,380 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 28%
industry: 53%
services: 19% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 57% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 42.844 million
by occupation: agriculture 54%, industry, commerce, and services 19%,
government 15%

Unemployment rate: 28% (1992 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $16.1 billion
expenditures: $16 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
billion (1995 est.)

Industries: crude oil, coal, tin, columbite, palm oil, peanuts,
cotton, rubber, wood, hides and skins, textiles, cement and other
construction materials, food products, footwear, chemicals,
fertilizer, printing, ceramics, steel

Industrial production growth rate: -1% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 5.88 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 14.88 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 141 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: cocoa, peanuts, palm oil, corn, rice, sorghum,
millet, cassava (tapioca), yams, rubber ; cattle, sheep, goats, pigs;
fishing and forest resources extensively exploited

Exports:
total value : $11.6 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: petroleum and petroleum products 95%, cocoa, rubber
partners : US 52%, EU 34%

Imports:
total value: $10 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: machinery, transportation equipment, manufactured goods,
chemicals, food and animals
partners : EU 50%, US 13%, Japan 7%

Debt - external: $34 billion (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 naira (N) = 100 kobo

Exchange rates: naira (N) per US$1 - 21.886 (October 1996), 21.895
(1995), 21.996 (1994), 22.065 (1993), 17.298 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Nigeria:Communications

Telephones: 492,204 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: average system limited by poor maintenance; major
expansion in progress
domestic: microwave radio relay, coaxial cable, and 20 domestic
satellite earth stations carry intercity traffic
international: satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (2 Atlantic Ocean
and 1 Indian Ocean); 1 coaxial submarine cable

Radio broadcast stations: AM 35, FM 17, shortwave 0

Radios: 20 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 28

Televisions: 3.8 million (1992 est.)

@Nigeria:Transportation

Railways:
total: 3,557 km
narrow gauge: 3,505 km 1.067-m gauge
standard gauge: 52 km 1.435-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 32,105 km
paved: 26,005 km (including 2,044 km of expressways)
unpaved: 6,100 km (1994 est.)
note : many of the roads reported as paved may be graveled

Waterways: 8,575 km consisting of the Niger and Benue rivers and
smaller rivers and creeks

Pipelines: crude oil 2,042 km; petroleum products 3,000 km; natural
gas 500 km

Ports and harbors: Calabar, Lagos, Onne, Port Harcourt, Sapele, Warri

Merchant marine:
total : 30 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 353,422 GRT/600,389 DWT
ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 12, chemical tanker 3, oil tanker 13,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 65 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 51
over 3,047 m: 6
2,438 to 3,047 m: 10
1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
914 to 1,523 m: 8
under 914 m : 17 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 14
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 12 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary Police Force

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 24,465,233 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 14,015,140 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 1,209,386 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $243 million (1995 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: less than 1% (1995 est.)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: demarcation of international boundaries in
vicinity of Lake Chad, the lack of which led to border incidents in
the past, is completed and awaits ratification by Cameroon, Chad,
Niger, and Nigeria; dispute with Cameroon over land and maritime
boundaries in the vicinity of the Bakasi Peninsula has been referred
to the ICJ

Illicit drugs: facilitates movement of heroin en route from Southeast
and Southwest Asia to Western Europe and North America; increasingly a
transit route for cocaine from South America intended for European,
East Asian, and North American markets
______________________________________________________________________

NIUE

(free association with New Zealand)

@Niue:Geography

Location: Oceania, island in the South Pacific Ocean, east of Tonga

Geographic coordinates: 19 02 S, 169 52 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 260 sq km
land: 260 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 64 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; modified by southeast trade winds

Terrain: steep limestone cliffs along coast, central plateau

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point : unnamed location near Mutalau settlement 68 m

Natural resources: fish, arable land

Land use:
arable land: 19%
permanent crops : 8%
permanent pastures: 4%
forests and woodland: 19%
other: 50% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons

Environment - current issues: traditional methods of burning brush and
trees to clear land for agriculture have threatened soil supplies
which are not naturally very abundant

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography - note: one of world's largest coral islands

@Niue:People

Population: 1,708 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years : NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: -3.65% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years : NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: NA years
male: NA years
female : NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
noun: Niuean(s)
adjective: Niuean

Ethnic groups: Polynesian (with some 200 Europeans, Samoans, and
Tongans)

Religions: Ekalesia Nieue (Niuean Church) 75% - a Protestant church
closely related to the London Missionary Society, Latter-Day Saints
10%, other 15% (mostly Roman Catholic, Jehovah's Witnesses,
Seventh-Day Adventist)

Languages: Polynesian closely related to Tongan and Samoan, English

Literacy:
definition: NA
total population: 95%
male: NA%
female: NA%

@Niue:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Niue

Data code: NE

Dependency status: in free association with New Zealand; Niue fully
responsible for internal affairs; New Zealand retains responsibility
for external affairs

Government type: self-governing parliamentary democracy

National capital: Alofi

Administrative divisions: none

Independence: on 19 October 1974, Niue became a self-governing
parliamentary government in free association with New Zealand

National holiday: Waitangi Day, 6 February (1840) (Treaty of Waitangi
established British sovereignty)

Constitution: 19 October 1974 (Niue Constitution Act)

Legal system: English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952);
the queen and New Zealand are represented by New Zealand High
Commissioner Warren SEARELL (since NA August 1993)
head of government: Premier Frank Fakaotimanava LUI (acting premier
since NA December 1992, premier since 12 March 1993)
cabinet: Cabinet consists of the premier and three ministers
elections: the queen is a hereditary monarch; premier elected by the
Legislative Assembly for a three-year term; election last held 23
February 1996 (next to be held NA March 1999)
election results: Frank Fakaotimanava LUI elected premier; percent of
Legislative Assembly vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly (20 seats; members
elected by popular vote to serve three-year terms; six elected from a
common roll and 14 are village representatives)
elections : last held 23 February 1996 (next to be held NA March 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - NPP
9, independents 11

Judicial branch: Appeal Court of New Zealand; High Court

Political parties and leaders: Niue Peoples Party (NPP), Robert REX,
Jr.

International organization participation: ESCAP (associate), Intelsat
(nonsignatory user), Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UNESCO, WHO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (self-governing territory in
free association with New Zealand)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (self-governing territory
in free association with New Zealand)

Flag description: yellow with the flag of the UK in the upper
hoist-side quadrant; the flag of the UK bears five yellow five-pointed
stars - a large one on a blue disk in the center and a smaller one on
each arm of the bold red cross

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is heavily dependent on aid from New
Zealand as Niue has no indigenous export product. Government
expenditures regularly exceed revenues, with the shortfall made up by
grants from New Zealand - the grants are used to pay wages to public
employees. Niue has cut government expenditures in 1994-96, however,
by reducing the public service by almost half. The agricultural sector
consists mainly of subsistence gardening, although some cash crops are
grown for export. Industry consists primarily of small factories to
process passion fruit, lime oil, honey, and coconut cream. The sale of
postage stamps to foreign collectors is an important source of
revenue. The island in recent years has suffered a serious loss of
population because of migration of Niueans to New Zealand.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $2.4 million (1993 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,200 (1993 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5% (1992)

Labor force:
total: 1,000 (1981 est.)
by occupation: most work on family plantations; paid work exists only
in government service, small industry, and the Niue Development Board

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $5.5 million
expenditures: $6.3 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1985 est.)

Industries: tourism, handicrafts, food processing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: coconuts, passion fruit, honey, limes, taro,
yams, cassava (tapioca), sweet potatoes; pigs, poultry, beef cattle

Exports:
total value: $117,500 (f.o.b., 1989)
commodities: canned coconut cream, copra, honey, passion fruit
products, pawpaw, root crops, limes, footballs, stamps, handicrafts
partners: NZ 89%, Fiji, Cook Islands, Australia

Imports:
total value: $4.1 million (c.i.f., 1989)
commodities: food, live animals, manufactured goods, machinery, fuels,
lubricants, chemicals, drugs
partners : NZ 59%, Fiji 20%, Japan 13%, Western Samoa, Australia, US

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $5.9 million from NZ (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1 - 1.4247 (January
1997), 1.4543 (1996), 1.5235 (1995), 1.6844 (1994), 1.8495 (1993),
1.8584 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Niue:Communications

Telephones: 276 (1992 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : single-line telephone system connects all villages on
island
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0 (1987 est.)

Radios: 1,000

Television broadcast stations: 0
note: there is cable television

Televisions: 312 (1991 est.)

@Niue:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 229 km
paved: 0 km
unpaved: 229 km

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Police Force

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of New Zealand

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

NORFOLK ISLAND

(territory of Australia)

@Norfolk Island:Geography

Location: Oceania, island in the South Pacific Ocean, east of
Australia

Geographic coordinates: 29 02 S, 167 57 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total : 34.6 sq km
land: 34.6 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.2 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 32 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: subtropical, mild, little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: volcanic formation with mostly rolling plains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Bates 319 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops : NA%
permanent pastures: 25%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: 75% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons (especially May to July)

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified : NA

@Norfolk Island:People

Population: 2,194 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: -0.68% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population : NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: NA years
male: NA years
female: NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
noun: Norfolk Islander(s)
adjective: Norfolk Islander(s)

Ethnic groups: descendants of the Bounty mutineers, Australian, New
Zealander, Polynesians

Religions: Anglican 39%, Roman Catholic 11.7%, Uniting Church in
Australia 16.4%, Seventh-Day Adventist 4.4%, none 9.2%, unknown 16.9%,
other 2.4% (1986)

Languages: English (official), Norfolk a mixture of 18th century
English and ancient Tahitian

@Norfolk Island:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Territory of Norfolk Island
conventional short form: Norfolk Island

Data code: NF

Dependency status: territory of Australia

Government type: NA

National capital: Kingston (administrative center); Burnt Pine
(commercial center)

Administrative divisions: none (territory of Australia)

Independence: none (territory of Australia)

National holiday: Pitcairners Arrival Day Anniversary, 8 June (1856)

Constitution: Norfolk Island Act of 1979

Legal system: based on the laws of Australia, local ordinances and
acts; English common law applies in matters not covered by either
Australian or Norfolk Island law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952);
the queen and Australia are represented by Administrator Alan Gardner
KERR (since NA April 1992)
head of government: Assembly President and Chief Minister David
Earnest BUFFETT (since NA 1995)
cabinet: Executive Council is made up of executive members of the
Legislative Assembly
elections : the queen is a hereditary monarch; administrator appointed
by the governor general of Australia; chief minister elected by the
Legislative Assembly for a term of not more than three years; election
last held NA May 1995 (next to be held NA May 1998)
election results : David Earnest BUFFETT elected chief minister;
percent of Legislative Assembly vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly (9 seats; members
elected by electors who have nine equal votes each but only four votes
can be given to any one candidate; members serve three-year terms)
elections: last held NA May 1995 (next to be held NA May 1998)
election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - independents 9

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Australia)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of Australia)

Flag description: three vertical bands of green (hoist side), white,
and green with a large green Norfolk Island pine tree centered in the
slightly wider white band

Economy

Economy - overview: The primary economic activity is tourism, which
has brought a level of prosperity unusual among inhabitants of the
Pacific islands. The number of visitors has increased steadily over
the years and reached 29,000 in FY88/89. Revenues from tourism have
given the island a favorable balance of trade and helped the
agricultural sector to become self-sufficient in the production of
beef, poultry, and eggs.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry : NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total : 1,395 (1991 est.)
by occupation: tourism NA%, subsistence agriculture NA%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $4.6 million
expenditures: $4.8 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY92/93)

Industries: tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: Norfolk Island pine seed, Kentia palm seed,
cereals, vegetables, fruit; cattle, poultry

Exports:
total value : $1.5 million (f.o.b., FY91/92)
commodities: postage stamps, seeds of the Norfolk Island pine and
Kentia palm, small quantities of avocados
partners: Australia, other Pacific island countries, NZ, Asia, Europe

Imports:
total value : $17.9 million (c.i.f., FY91/92)
commodities: NA
partners: Australia, other Pacific island countries, NZ, Asia, Europe

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid: none

Currency: 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.2835 (January
1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995), 1.3667 (1994), 1.4704 (1993),
1.3600 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Norfolk Island:Communications

Telephones: 1,087 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: radiotelephone service with Sydney (Australia)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 2,000 (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: 900 (1991 est.)

@Norfolk Island:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 80 km
paved: 53 km
unpaved: 27 km

Ports and harbors: none; loading jetties at Kingston and Cascade

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of Australia

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS

(commonwealth in political union with the US)

@Northern Mariana Islands:Geography

Location: Oceania, islands in the North Pacific Ocean, about
three-quarters of the way from Hawaii to the Philippines

Geographic coordinates: 15 12 N, 145 45 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 477 sq km
land: 477 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes 14 islands including Saipan, Rota, and Tinian

Area - comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,482 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; moderated by northeast trade winds, little
seasonal temperature variation; dry season December to June, rainy
season July to October

Terrain: southern islands are limestone with level terraces and
fringing coral reefs; northern islands are volcanic

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point : unnamed location on Agrihan 965 m

Natural resources: arable land, fish

Land use:
arable land : 21%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: 19%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: active volcanoes on Pagan and Agrihan; typhoons
(especially August to November)

Environment - current issues: contamination of groundwater on Saipan
by raw sewage contributes to disease; clean-up of landfill; protection
of endangered species conflicts with development

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean

@Northern Mariana Islands:People

Population: 53,552 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over : NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : NA
male: NA
female: NA

Nationality:
noun: NA
adjective : NA

Ethnic groups: Chamorro, Carolinians and other Micronesians,
Caucasian, Japanese, Chinese, Korean

Religions: Christian (Roman Catholic majority, although traditional
beliefs and taboos may still be found)

Languages: English, Chamorro, Carolinian
note: 86% of population speaks a language other than English at home

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 97%
male: 97%
female : 96% (1980 est.)

@Northern Mariana Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands
conventional short form : Northern Mariana Islands

Data code: CQ

Dependency status: commonwealth in political union with the US;
federal funds to the Commonwealth administered by the US Department of
the Interior, Office of Territorial and International Affairs

Government type: commonwealth; self-governing with locally elected
governor, lieutenant governor, and legislature

National capital: Saipan

Administrative divisions: none

Independence: none (commonwealth in political union with the US)

National holiday: Commonwealth Day, 8 January (1978)

Constitution: Covenant Agreement effective 3 November 1986 and the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands

Legal system: based on US system except for customs, wages,
immigration laws, and taxation

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal; indigenous inhabitants are US
citizens but do not vote in US presidential elections

Executive branch:
chief of state: President of the US William Jefferson CLINTON (since
20 January 1993); Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January
1993)
head of government: Governor Froilan C. TENORIO (since NA January
1994) and Lieutenant Governor Jesus C. BORJA (since NA January 1994)
cabinet: NA
elections : governor and lieutenant governor elected on the same
ticket by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held in NA
November 1993 (next to be held NA November 1997)
election results: Froilan C. TENORIO elected governor of Northern
Mariana Islands; percent of vote - Froilan C. TENORIO (Democrat) 56%

Legislative branch: bicameral Legislature consists of the Senate (9
seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
and the House of Representatives (18 seats; members are elected by
popular vote to serve two-year terms)
elections : Senate - last held NA November 1993 (next to be held NA
November 1997); House of Representatives - last held NA November 1995
(next to be held NA November 1997)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - NA (Republicans retained a majority of the seats); House of
Representatives - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - NA
(Republicans retained a majority of the seats)
note : the Commonwealth does not have a nonvoting delegate in
Congress; instead, it has an elected official or "resident
representative" located in Washington, DC; seats by party - Republican
1 (Juan N. BABAUTA)

Judicial branch: Commonwealth Supreme Court; Superior Court; Federal
District Court

Political parties and leaders: Republican Party, Benigno R. FITIAL,
leader; Democratic Party, Benigno SABLAN, chairman

International organization participation: ESCAP (associate), SPC

Flag description: blue with a white five-pointed star superimposed on
the gray silhouette of a latte stone (a traditional foundation stone
used in building) in the center, surrounded by a wreath

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy benefits substantially from financial
assistance from the US. The rate of funding has declined as locally
generated government revenues have grown. An agreement for the years
1986 to 1992 entitled the islands to $228 million for capital
development, government operations, and special programs. Since 1992,
funding has been extended one year at a time. The commonwealth
received $27.7 million from FY93/94 through FY95/96. For FY96/97
through FY02/03, funding of $11 million will be provided for
infrastructure, with an equal local match. A rapidly growing major
source of income is the tourist industry, which now employs about 50%
of the work force. Japanese tourists predominate. The agricultural
sector is of minor importance and is made up of cattle ranches and
small farms producing coconuts, breadfruit, tomatoes, and melons.
Industry is small scale, mostly handicrafts, light manufacturing, and
garment production.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $524 million (1994 est.)
note: GDP numbers reflect US spending

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $10,500 (1994 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 6.5% (1994 est.)

Labor force:
total: 7,476 total indigenous labor force; 2,699 unemployed; 22,560
foreign workers (1995)
by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: 15% (residents)

Budget:
revenues: $190.4 million
expenditures : $190.4 million, including capital expenditures of $19.1
million (FY94/95)

Industries: tourism, construction, garments, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: coconuts, fruits, vegetables; cattle

Exports: NA
commodities: garments
partners : NA

Imports: NA
commodities: food, construction equipment and materials, petroleum
products
partners : US, Japan

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid: none

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September

@Northern Mariana Islands:Communications

Telephones: 13,618 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : NA
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3

Radios: 15,350 (1987 est.)

Television broadcast stations: none
note: there are 2 cable TV stations

Televisions: 10,650 (1993 est.)

@Northern Mariana Islands:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 362 km (1991 est.)
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Saipan, Tinian

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 5 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 4
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

NORWAY

@Norway:Geography

Location: Northern Europe, bordering the North Sea and the North
Atlantic Ocean, west of Sweden

Geographic coordinates: 62 00 N, 10 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 324,220 sq km
land: 307,860 sq km
water: 16,360 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than New Mexico

Land boundaries:
total: 2,515 km
border countries: Finland 729 km, Sweden 1,619 km, Russia 167 km

Coastline: 21,925 km (includes mainland 3,419 km, large islands 2,413
km, long fjords, numerous small islands, and minor indentations 16,093
km)

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 10 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 4 nm

Climate: temperate along coast, modified by North Atlantic Current;
colder interior; rainy year-round on west coast

Terrain: glaciated; mostly high plateaus and rugged mountains broken
by fertile valleys; small, scattered plains; coastline deeply indented
by fjords; arctic tundra in north

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Norwegian Sea 0 m
highest point: Glittertinden 2,472 m

Natural resources: petroleum, copper, natural gas, pyrites, nickel,
iron ore, zinc, lead, fish, timber, hydropower

Land use:
arable land: 3%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures : 0%
forests and woodland: 27%
other: 70% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 970 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: water pollution; acid rain damaging
forests and adversely affecting lakes, threatening fish stocks; air
pollution from vehicle emissions

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile
Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: about two-thirds mountains; some 50,000 islands off
its much indented coastline; strategic location adjacent to sea lanes
and air routes in North Atlantic; one of most rugged and longest
coastlines in world; Norway and Turkey only NATO members having a land
boundary with Russia

@Norway:People

Population: 4,399,993 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 19% (male 440,621; female 417,331)
15-64 years : 65% (male 1,446,739; female 1,399,291)
65 years and over: 16% (male 289,426; female 406,585) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.47% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 13.25 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.22 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.66 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.09 years
male: 75.29 years
female: 81.07 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.83 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Norwegian(s)
adjective: Norwegian

Ethnic groups: Germanic (Nordic, Alpine, Baltic), Lapps (Sami) 20,000

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran 87.8% (state church), other Protestant
and Roman Catholic 3.8%, none 3.2%, unknown 5.2% (1980)

Languages: Norwegian (official)
note: small Lapp- and Finnish-speaking minorities

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99% (1976 est.)
male: NA%
female: NA%

@Norway:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Kingdom of Norway
conventional short form: Norway
local long form: Kongeriket Norge
local short form: Norge

Data code: NO

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: Oslo

Administrative divisions: 19 provinces (fylker, singular - fylke);
Akershus, Aust-Agder, Buskerud, Finnmark, Hedmark, Hordaland, More og
Romsdal, Nordland, Nord-Trondelag, Oppland, Oslo, Ostfold, Rogaland,
Sogn og Fjordane, Sor-Trondelag, Telemark, Troms, Vest-Agder, Vestfold

Dependent areas: Bouvet Island, Jan Mayen, Svalbard

Independence: 26 October 1905 (from Sweden)

National holiday: Constitution Day, 17 May (1814)

Constitution: 17 May 1814, modified in 1884

Legal system: mixture of customary law, civil law system, and common
law traditions; Supreme Court renders advisory opinions to legislature
when asked; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : King HARALD V (since 17 January 1991); Heir Apparent
Crown Prince HAAKON MAGNUS (born 20 July 1973)
head of government: Prime Minister Thorbjoern JAGLAND (since 25
October 1996)
cabinet: State Council appointed by the king with the approval of the
Parliament
elections: none; the king is a hereditary monarch; following
parliamentary elections, the leader of the majority party or leader of
a majority coalition is usually appointed prime minister by the king
with the approval of the Parliament

Legislative branch: modified unicameral Parliament or Storting which,
for certain purposes, divides itself into two chambers (165 seats;
members are elected by popular vote by proportional representation to
serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 13 September 1993 (next to be held NA September
1997)
election results : percent of vote by party - Labor 37.1%, Center
Party 18.5%, Conservatives 15.6%, Christian People's 8.4%, Socialist
Left 7.9%, Progress 6%, Left Party 3.6%, Red Electoral Alliance 1.2%;
seats by party - Labor 67, Center Party 32, Conservatives 18,
Christian People's 13, Socialist Left 13, Progress 10, Left Party 1,
Red Electoral Alliance 1, unawarded 10
note : for certain purposes, the Parliament divides itself into two
chambers and elects one-fourth of its membership to an upper house or
Lagting

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Hoyesterett, justices appointed by
the king

Political parties and leaders: Labor Party [Thorbjorn JAGLAND];
Conservative Party [Jan PETERSEN]; Center Party [Anne ENGER
LAHNSTEIN]; Christian People's Party [Valgerd HAUGLAND]; Socialist
Left [Erik SOLHEIM]; Norwegian Communist [Kare Andre NILSEN]; Progress
Party [Carl I. HAGEN]; Liberal [Odd Einar DORUM]; Left Party; Red
Electoral Alliance [Erling FOLKVORD]

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia Group,
BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, ESA, FAO, IADB, IAEA, IBRD,
ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MTCR,
NACC, NAM (guest), NATO, NC, NEA, NIB, NSG, OECD, OSCE, PCA, UN,
UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNMOP, UNPREDEP,
UNTAES, UNTSO, UPU, WEU (associate), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Tom-Erik VRAALSON
chancery : 2720 34th Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 333-6000
FAX: [1] (202) 337-0870
consulate(s) general: Houston, Minneapolis, New York, and San
Francisco
consulate(s): Miami

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Thomas A. LOFTUS
embassy: Drammensveien 18, 0244 Oslo
mailing address: PSC 69, Box 1000, APO AE 09707
telephone: [47] 22 44 85 50
FAX : [47] 22 44 33 63

Flag description: red with a blue cross outlined in white that extends
to the edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to
the hoist side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

Economy

Economy - overview: Norway is a prosperous bastion of welfare
capitalism. The economy consists of a combination of free market
activity and government intervention. The government controls key
areas, such as the vital petroleum sector (through large-scale state
enterprises), and extensively subsidizes agriculture, fishing, and
areas with sparse resources. Norway maintains an extensive welfare
system that helps propel public sector expenditures to more than 50%
of GDP and results in one of the highest average tax levels in the
world (46%). A small country with a high dependence on international
trade, Norway is basically an exporter of raw materials and
semiprocessed goods, with an abundance of small- and medium-sized
firms, and is ranked among the major shipping nations. The country is
richly endowed with natural resources - petroleum, hydropower, fish,
forests, and minerals - and is highly dependent on its oil sector.
Only Saudi Arabia exports more oil than Norway. Norway imports more
than half its food needs. Economic growth, only 1.6% in 1993, has
improved steadily over the past few years, resulting in a budget
surplus in 1996. Oslo opted to stay out of the EU during a referendum
in November 1994. Despite their high per capita income - outstripped
among major nations only by the US - and their generous welfare
benefits, the Norwegians worry about that time in the 21st century
when the oil and gas run out.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $114.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.8% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $26,200 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 2.9%
industry: 34.7%
services : 62.4% (1991)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.2% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 2.13 million
by occupation: services 71%, industry 23%, agriculture, forestry, and
fishing 6% (1993)

Unemployment rate: 4.5% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $48.6 billion
expenditures: $53 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1994
est.)

Industries: petroleum and gas, food processing, shipbuilding, pulp and
paper products, metals, chemicals, timber, mining, textiles, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 26.43 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 123.2 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 24,586 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: oats, other grains; beef, milk; livestock
output exceeds value of crops; among world's top 10 fishing nations;
fish catch of 2.33 million metric tons in 1994

Exports:
total value: $41.7 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: petroleum and petroleum products 43%, metals and products
11%, foodstuffs (mostly fish) 9%, chemicals and raw materials 25%,
natural gas 6.0%, ships 5.4%
partners: EU 77.2% (UK 19.8%, Germany 12.7%, Netherlands 9.1%, France
7.8%, Sweden 9.8%), US 6.0% (1995)

Imports:
total value : $32.7 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: machinery and equipment and manufactured consumer goods
54%, chemicals and other industrial inputs 39%, foodstuffs 6%
partners: EU 71.0% (Sweden 15.4%, Germany 13.8%, UK 9.7%, Denmark
7.5%, Netherlands 4.4%), US 6.6% (1995)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $1.014 billion (1993)

Currency: 1 Norwegian krone (NKr) = 100 oere

Exchange rates: Norwegian kroner (NKr) per US$1 - 6.4475 (January
1997), 6.4498 (1996), 6.3352 (1995), 7.0576 (1994), 7.0941 (1993),
6.2145 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Norway:Communications

Telephones: 2.39 million (1994 est.); 470,000 mobile phones in use in
1994

Telephone system: high-quality domestic and international telephone,
telegraph, and telex services
domestic: NA domestic satellite earth stations
international: 2 buried coaxial cable systems; 4 coaxial submarine
cables; satellite earth stations - NA Eutelsat, NA Intelsat (Atlantic
Ocean), and 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic and Indian Ocean Regions); note -
Norway shares the Inmarsat earth station with the other Nordic
countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland, and Sweden)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 46, FM 493 (350 private and 143
government), shortwave 0

Radios: 3.3 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 54 (repeaters 2,100)

Televisions: 1.5 million (1993 est.)

@Norway:Transportation

Railways:
total: 4,027 km
standard gauge: 4,027 km 1.435-m gauge (2422 km electrified; 96 km
double track) (1995)

Highways:
total: 90,261 km
paved : 66,342 km (including 105 km of expressways)
unpaved: 23,919 km (1995)

Waterways: 1,577 km along west coast; 2.4 m draft vessels maximum

Pipelines: refined products 53 km

Ports and harbors: Bergen, Drammen, Floro, Hammerfest, Harstad,
Haugesund, Kristiansand, Larvik, Narvik, Oslo, Porsgrunn, Stavanger,
Tromso, Trondheim

Merchant marine:
total : 718 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 19,401,580
GRT/31,740,273 DWT
ships by type: bulk 102, cargo 106, chemical tanker 83, combination
bulk 9, combination ore/oil 33, container 16, liquefied gas tanker 87,
multi-function large load carrier 1, oil tanker 148, passenger 14,
passenger-cargo 1, railcar carrier 1, refrigerated cargo 10,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 49, short-sea passenger 24, vehicle carrier 34
note: the government has created an internal register, the Norwegian
International Ship register (NIS), as a subset of the Norwegian
register; ships on the NIS enjoy many benefits of flags of convenience
and do not have to be crewed by Norwegians (1996 est.)

Airports: 102 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 97
over 3,047 m : 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 11
1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
914 to 1,523 m: 12
under 914 m: 59 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 5
914 to 1,523 m: 5 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Norwegian Army, Royal Norwegian Navy (includes
Coast Artillery and Coast Guard), Royal Norwegian Air Force, Home
Guard

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,112,390 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 925,780 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 27,382 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $3.7 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.9% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: territorial claim in Antarctica (Queen Maud
Land); Svalbard is the focus of a maritime boundary dispute in the
Barents Sea between Norway and Russia

Illicit drugs: minor transshipment point for drugs shipped via the CIS
and Baltic states for the European market; increasing domestic
consumption of cannabis and amphetamines
______________________________________________________________________

OMAN

@Oman:Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Arabian Sea, Gulf of Oman, and
Persian Gulf, between Yemen and UAE

Geographic coordinates: 21 00 N, 57 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 212,460 sq km
land: 212,460 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Kansas

Land boundaries:
total: 1,374 km
border countries: Saudi Arabia 676 km, UAE 410 km, Yemen 288 km

Coastline: 2,092 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: dry desert; hot, humid along coast; hot, dry interior; strong
southwest summer monsoon (May to September) in far south

Terrain: vast central desert plain, rugged mountains in north and
south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Arabian Sea 0 m
highest point: Jabal ash Sham 2,980 m

Natural resources: petroleum, copper, asbestos, some marble,
limestone, chromium, gypsum, natural gas

Land use:
arable land : 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 5%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: 95% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 580 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: summer winds often raise large sandstorms and dust
storms in interior; periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: rising soil salinity; beach pollution
from oil spills; very limited natural fresh water resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ship Pollution
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: strategic location with small foothold on Musandam
Peninsula controlling Strait of Hormuz, a vital transit point for
world crude oil

@Oman:People

Population: 2,264,590 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 46% (male 527,091; female 507,849)
15-64 years: 51% (male 632,647; female 535,149)
65 years and over: 3% (male 27,974; female 33,880) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.49% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 37.85 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.39 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.42 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.18 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female
total population: 1.1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 26.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 70.8 years
male : 68.84 years
female: 72.85 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.02 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Omani(s)
adjective: Omani

Ethnic groups: Arab, Baluchi, South Asian (Indian, Pakistani, Sri
Lankan, Bangladeshi), African

Religions: Ibadhi Muslim 75%, Sunni Muslim, Shi'a Muslim, Hindu

Languages: Arabic (official), English, Baluchi, Urdu, Indian dialects

Literacy:
definition: NA
total population: approaching 80%
male : NA%
female: NA%

@Oman:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Sultanate of Oman
conventional short form : Oman
local long form: Saltanat Uman
local short form: Uman

Data code: MU

Government type: monarchy

National capital: Muscat

Administrative divisions: 6 regions (mintaqah, singular - mintaqat)
and 2 governorates* (muhafazah, singular - muhafazat) Ad Dakhiliyah,
Al Batinah, Al Wusta, Ash Sharqiyah, Az Zahirah, Masqat, Musandam*,
Zufar*

Independence: 1650 (expulsion of the Portuguese)

National holiday: National Day, 18 November (1940)

Constitution: none; note - on 6 November 1996, Sultan QABOOS issued a
royal decree promulgating a new basic law which, among other things,
clarifies the royal succession, provides for a prime minister, bars
ministers from holding interests in companies doing business with the
government, establishes a bicameral Omani council, and guarantees
basic civil liberties for Omani citizens

Legal system: based on English common law and Islamic law; ultimate
appeal to the sultan; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: none

Executive branch:
chief of state: Sultan and Prime Minister QABOOS bin Said Al Said
(since 23 July 1970); note - the sultan is both the chief of state and
head of government
head of government : Sultan and Prime Minister QABOOS bin Said Al Said
(since 23 July 1970); note - the sultan is both the chief of state and
head of government
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the sultan
elections: none; the sultan is a hereditary monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral Consultative Council or Majlis
ash-Shura (80 members; two appointed from each wilayat with a
population over 30,000, one appointed from each of the other wilayats;
members serve four-year terms; has advisory powers only)
note: new basic law to be implemented in 1997, provides for an upper
chamber - the Majlis ad-Dawla or State Council; also the Majlis
ash-Shura will be expanded to 110 members; the resulting bicameral
legislature will be known as the Omani Council

Judicial branch: none; traditional Islamic judges and a nascent civil
court system, administered by region

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF,
ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IHO, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM,
OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Abdallah bin Muhammad bin Aqil al-DHAHAB
chancery: 2535 Belmont Road, NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 387-1980 through 1982
FAX : [1] (202) 745-4933

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Frances D. COOK
embassy: Jameat A'Duwal Al Arabiya Street, Al Khuwair area, Muscat
mailing address: domestic - Unit 73000, Box 1, APO AE 09890-3000;
international - P. O. Box 202, Code No. 115, Medinat Qaboos, Muscat
telephone: [968] 698989 (Medinat Qaboos, switchboard)
FAX: [968] 699779

Flag description: three horizontal bands of white, red, and green of
equal width with a broad, vertical, red band on the hoist side; the
national emblem (a khanjar dagger in its sheath superimposed on two
crossed swords in scabbards) in white is centered at the top of the
vertical band

Economy

Economy - overview: Economic performance is closely tied to the
fortunes of the oil industry. Petroleum accounts for 75% of export
earnings and government revenues and for roughly 40% of GDP. Oman has
proved oil reserves of 4 billion barrels, equivalent to about 20
years' supply at the current rate of extraction. Agriculture is
carried on at a subsistence level and the general population depends
on imported food. The year 1996 was marked by higher oil production
and prices. The government is encouraging private investment, both
domestic and foreign, as a prime force for further economic
development.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $20.8 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $9,500 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 3%
industry: 55%
services : 42% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 0.5% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 454,000
by occupation: agriculture 37% (1993 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $5.3 billion
expenditures: $6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1997
est.)

Industries: crude oil production and refining, natural gas production,
construction, cement, copper

Industrial production growth rate: 3% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 1.74 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 7.39 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,412 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: dates, limes, bananas, alfalfa, vegetables;
camels, cattle; annual fish catch averages 100,000 metric tons

Exports:
total value: $7.2 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: petroleum 75%, reexports, fish, processed copper,
textiles
partners: Japan 32%, South Korea 16%, Thailand 12%, China 8%, US 6%,
Taiwan 6% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $5.5 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: machinery, transportation equipment, manufactured goods,
food, livestock, lubricants
partners : UAE 25% (largely reexports), UK 16%, Japan 16%, France 11%,
US 5% (1995)

Debt - external: $2.7 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $82 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Omani rial (RO) = 1,000 baiza

Exchange rates: Omani rials (RO) per US$1 - 0.3845 (fixed rate since
1986)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Oman:Communications

Telephones: 150,000 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: modern system consisting of open wire, microwave,
and radiotelephone communication stations; limited coaxial cable
domestic: open wire, microwave, radiotelephone communications, and a
domestic satellite system with 8 earth stations
international : satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)
and 1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 4, shortwave 1

Radios: 1.043 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 9

Televisions: 1.195 million (1992 est.)

@Oman:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 5,000 km
paved: 3,500 km (including 426 km of expressways)
unpaved: 1,500 km (1983 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,300 km; natural gas 1,030 km

Ports and harbors: Matrah, Mina' al Fahl, Mina' Raysut

Merchant marine:
total: 3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 16,306 GRT/8,210 DWT
ships by type: cargo 1, passenger 1, passenger-cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 126 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 38
over 3,047 m: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 32 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 88
over 3,047 m : 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m : 57
914 to 1,523 m: 25 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary (includes Royal
Oman Police)

Military manpower - military age: 14 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 550,421 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 312,205 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.82 billion (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 13.7% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: no defined boundary with most of UAE, but
Administrative Line in far north
______________________________________________________________________

PACIFIC OCEAN
[Map of Pacific Ocean]

@Pacific Ocean:Geography

Location: body of water between Antarctica, Asia, Australia, and the
Western Hemisphere

Geographic coordinates: 0 00 N, 160 00 W

Map references: World

Area:
total: 165.384 million sq km
note: includes Bali Sea, Bellingshausen Sea, Bering Sea, Bering
Strait, Coral Sea, East China Sea, Flores Sea, Gulf of Alaska, Gulf of
Tonkin, Java Sea, Philippine Sea, Ross Sea, Savu Sea, Sea of Japan,
Sea of Okhotsk, South China Sea, Tasman Sea, Timor Sea, and other
tributary water bodies

Area - comparative: about 18 times the size of the US; the largest
ocean (followed by the Atlantic Ocean, the Indian Ocean, and the
Arctic Ocean); covers about one-third of the global surface; larger
than the total land area of the world

Coastline: 135,663 km

Climate: planetary air pressure systems and resultant wind patterns
exhibit remarkable uniformity in the south and east; trade winds and
westerly winds are well-developed patterns, modified by seasonal
fluctuations; tropical cyclones (hurricanes) may form south of Mexico
from June to October and affect Mexico and Central America;
continental influences cause climatic uniformity to be much less
pronounced in the eastern and western regions at the same latitude in
the North Pacific Ocean; the western Pacific is monsoonal - a rainy
season occurs during the summer months, when moisture-laden winds blow
from the ocean over the land, and a dry season during the winter
months, when dry winds blow from the Asian land mass back to the
ocean; tropical cyclones (typhoons) may strike southeast and East Asia
from May to December

Terrain: surface currents in the northern Pacific are dominated by a
clockwise, warm-water gyre (broad circular system of currents) and in
the southern Pacific by a counterclockwise, cool-water gyre; in the
northern Pacific, sea ice forms in the Bering Sea and Sea of Okhotsk
in winter; in the southern Pacific, sea ice from Antarctica reaches
its northernmost extent in October; the ocean floor in the eastern
Pacific is dominated by the East Pacific Rise, while the western
Pacific is dissected by deep trenches, including the Marianas Trench,
which is the world's deepest

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Marianas Trench -10,924 m
highest point: sea level 0 m

Natural resources: oil and gas fields, polymetallic nodules, sand and
gravel aggregates, placer deposits, fish

Natural hazards: surrounded by a zone of violent volcanic and
earthquake activity sometimes referred to as the "Pacific Ring of
Fire"; subject to tropical cyclones (typhoons) in southeast and east
Asia from May to December (most frequent from July to October);
tropical cyclones (hurricanes) may form south of Mexico and strike
Central America and Mexico from June to October (most common in August
and September); southern shipping lanes subject to icebergs from
Antarctica; occasional El Nino phenomenon occurs off the coast of
Peru, when the trade winds slacken and the warm Equatorial
Countercurrent moves south, killing the plankton that is the primary
food source for anchovies; consequently, the anchovies move to better
feeding grounds, causing resident marine birds to starve by the
thousands because of the loss of their food source; ships subject to
superstructure icing in extreme north from October to May and in
extreme south from May to October; persistent fog in the northern
Pacific can be a maritime hazard from June to December

Environment - current issues: endangered marine species include the
dugong, sea lion, sea otter, seals, turtles, and whales; oil pollution
in Philippine Sea and South China Sea

Environment - international agreements:
party to : none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: the major choke points are the Bering Strait, Panama
Canal, Luzon Strait, and the Singapore Strait; the Equator divides the
Pacific Ocean into the North Pacific Ocean and the South Pacific
Ocean; dotted with low coral islands and rugged volcanic islands in
the southwestern Pacific Ocean

@Pacific Ocean:Government

Data code: none; the US Government has not approved a standard for
hydrographic codes - see the Cross-Reference List of Hydrographic
Codes appendix

Economy

Economy - overview: The Pacific Ocean is a major contributor to the
world economy and particularly to those nations its waters directly
touch. It provides low-cost sea transportation between East and West,
extensive fishing grounds, offshore oil and gas fields, minerals, and
sand and gravel for the construction industry. In 1985 over half (54%)
of the world's fish catch came from the Pacific Ocean, which is the
only ocean where the fish catch has increased every year since 1978.
Exploitation of offshore oil and gas reserves is playing an
ever-increasing role in the energy supplies of Australia, NZ, China,
US, and Peru. The high cost of recovering offshore oil and gas,
combined with the wide swings in world prices for oil since 1985, has
slowed but not stopped new drillings.

@Pacific Ocean:Communications

Telephone system:
international : several submarine cables with network nodal points on
Guam and Hawaii

@Pacific Ocean:Transportation

Ports and harbors: Bangkok (Thailand), Hong Kong, Kao-hsiung (Taiwan),
Los Angeles (US), Manila (Philippines), Pusan (South Korea), San
Francisco (US), Seattle (US), Shanghai (China), Singapore, Sydney
(Australia), Vladivostok (Russia), Wellington (NZ), Yokohama (Japan)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: some maritime disputes (see littoral states)
______________________________________________________________________

PAKISTAN

@Pakistan:Geography

Location: Southern Asia, bordering the Arabian Sea, between India on
the east and Iran and Afghanistan on the west

Geographic coordinates: 30 00 N, 70 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total : 803,940 sq km
land: 778,720 sq km
water: 25,220 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of California

Land boundaries:
total: 6,774 km
border countries: Afghanistan 2,430 km, China 523 km, India 2,912 km,
Iran 909 km

Coastline: 1,046 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly hot, dry desert; temperate in northwest; arctic in
north

Terrain: flat Indus plain in east; mountains in north and northwest;
Balochistan plateau in west

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: K2 (Mt. Godwin-Austen) 8,611 m

Natural resources: land, extensive natural gas reserves, limited
petroleum, poor quality coal, iron ore, copper, salt, limestone

Land use:
arable land: 27%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 6%
forests and woodland: 5%
other : 61% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 171,100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent earthquakes, occasionally severe especially
in north and west; flooding along the Indus after heavy rains (July
and August)

Environment - current issues: water pollution from raw sewage,
industrial wastes, and agricultural runoff; limited natural fresh
water resources; a majority of the population does not have access to
potable water; deforestation; soil erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Law of the Sea, Marine Life
Conservation

Geography - note: controls Khyber Pass and Bolan Pass, traditional
invasion routes between Central Asia and the Indian Subcontinent

@Pakistan:People

Population: 132,185,299 (July 1997 est.)
note: no national census has been conducted since 1981

Age structure:
0-14 years: 42% (male 28,702,496; female 27,048,787)
15-64 years: 54% (male 36,387,329; female 34,708,803)
65 years and over : 4% (male 2,667,936; female 2,669,948) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 2.22% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 35.26 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.95 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.14 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1 male(s)/female
total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 95.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 58.77 years
male: 57.97 years
female : 59.61 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.08 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Pakistani(s)
adjective: Pakistani

Ethnic groups: Punjabi, Sindhi, Pashtun (Pathan), Baloch, Muhajir
(immigrants from India and their descendants)

Religions: Muslim 97% (Sunni 77%, Shi'a 20%), Christian, Hindu, and
other 3%

Languages: Punjabi 48%, Sindhi 12%, Siraiki (a Punjabi variant) 10%,
Pashtu 8%, Urdu (official) 8%, Balochi 3%, Hindko 2%, Brahui 1%,
English (official and lingua franca of Pakistani elite and most
government ministries), Burushaski, and other 8%

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 37.8%
male: 50%
female: 24.4% (1995 est.)

@Pakistan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Islamic Republic of Pakistan
conventional short form: Pakistan
former: West Pakistan

Data code: PK

Government type: federal republic

National capital: Islamabad

Administrative divisions: 4 provinces, 1 territory*, and 1 capital
territory**; Balochistan, Federally Administered Tribal Areas*,
Islamabad Capital Territory**, North-West Frontier, Punjab, Sindh
note: the Pakistani-administered portion of the disputed Jammu and
Kashmir region includes Azad Kashmir and the Northern Areas

Independence: 14 August 1947 (from UK)

National holiday: Pakistan Day, 23 March (1956) (proclamation of the
republic)

Constitution: 10 April 1973, suspended 5 July 1977, restored with
amendments 30 December 1985

Legal system: based on English common law with provisions to
accommodate Pakistan's stature as an Islamic state; accepts compulsory
ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal; separate electorates and
reserved parliamentary seats for non-Muslims

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Sardar Farooq LEGHARI (since 13 November
1993)
head of government : Prime Minister Mohammad Nawaz SHARIF (since 17
February 1997)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the prime minister
elections: president elected by Parliament for a five-year term;
election last held 13 November 1993 (next to be held no later than 14
October 1998); following legislative elections, the leader of the
majority party or leader of a majority coalition is usually elected
prime minister by the National Assembly; election last held 3 February
1997 (next to be held NA February 2002)
election results: Sardar Farooq LEGHARI elected president; percent of
Parliament vote - NA; Mohammad Nawaz SHARIF elected prime minister;
percent of National Assembly vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Majlis-e-Shoora consists
of the Senate (87 seats; members indirectly elected by provincial
assemblies to serve six-year terms; one-third of the members up for
election every two years; has advisory powers only) and the National
Assembly (217 seats; 207 represent Muslims and 10 represent
non-Muslims; members elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 12 March 1997 (next to be held NA March
1999); National Assembly - last held 3 February 1997 (next to be held
NA February 2002)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - PML/N 30, PPP 17, ANP 7, MQM/A 6, JWP 5, BNP 4, JUI/F 2, PML/J
2, BNM/M 1, PKMAP 1, TJP 1, independents 6, vacant 5; National
Assembly - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PML/N 137,
PPP 18, MQM/A 12, ANP 10, BNP 3, JWP 2, JUI/F 2, PPP/SB 1, NPP 1,
independents 21, minorities 10

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judicial chiefs are appointed by the
president; Federal Islamic (Shari'at) Court

Political parties and leaders:
government: Pakistan Muslim League, Nawaz Sharif faction (PML/N),
Nawaz SHARIF; Awami National Party (ANP), Ajmal Khan KHATTAK;
Balochistan National Movement/Mengal Group (BNM/M), Sardar Akhtar
MENGAL; Mohajir Quami Movement, Altaf faction (MQM/A), Altaf HUSSAIN;
Jamiat-al-Hadith (JAH); Jamhoori Watan Party (JWP), Akbar Khan BUGTI;
Pakistan People's Party/Shaheed Bhutto (PPP/SB), Ghinva BHUTTO; Baluch
National Party (BNP), leader NA
opposition: Pakistan People's Party (PPP), Benazir BHUTTO; Pakistan
Muslim League, Junejo faction (PML/J), Hamid Nasir CHATTHA; National
People's Party (NPP), Ghulam Mustapha JATOI; Pakhtun Khwa Milli Awami
Party (PKMAP), Mahmood Khan ACHAKZAI; Balochistan National
Movement/Hayee Group (BNM/H), Dr. HAYEE Baluch; Pakhtun Quami Party
(PKQP), Mohammed AFZAL Khan
frequently shifting: Mutaheda Deeni Mahaz (MDM), Maulana Sami-ul-HAQ,
the MDM includes Jamiat Ulema-i-Pakistan, Niazi faction (JUP/NI) and
Sepah-i-Sahaba Pakistan (SSP); Islami-Jamhoori-Mahaz (IJM-Islamic
Democratic Front) includes Jamiat Ulema-i-Islami, Fazlur Rehman group
(JUI/F); Pakistan Muslim League, Functional Group (PML/F), Pir PAGARO;
Pakistan National Party (PNP); Milli Yakjheti Council (MYC) is an
umbrella organization which includes Jamaat-i-Islami (JI), Qazi
Hussain AHMED, Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam, Sami-ul-Haq faction (JUI/S),
Tehrik-I-Jafria Pakistan (TJP), Allama Sajid NAQVI, and Jamiat
Ulema-i-Pakistan, Noorani faction (JUP/NO)
note: political alliances in Pakistan can shift frequently

Political pressure groups and leaders: military remains important
political force; ulema (clergy), landowners, industrialists, and small
merchants also influential

International organization participation: AsDB, C, CCC, CP, ECO,
ESCAP, FAO, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, NAM, OAS (observer), OIC, PCA,
SAARC, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR,
UNMIBH, UNMIH, UNOMIG, UNOMIL, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Riaz KHOKAR
chancery: 2315 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 939-6200
FAX: [1] (202) 387-0484
consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Thomas W. SIMONS, Jr.
embassy : Diplomatic Enclave, Ramna 5, Islamabad
mailing address: P. O. Box 1048, Unit 62200, APO AE 09812-2200
telephone: [92] (51) 826161 through 826179
FAX: [92] (51) 214222
consulate(s) general : Karachi, Lahore
consulate(s): Peshawar

Flag description: green with a vertical white band (symbolizing the
role of religious minorities) on the hoist side; a large white
crescent and star are centered in the green field; the crescent, star,
and color green are traditional symbols of Islam

Economy

Economy - overview: Pakistan is a poor, highly populated Third World
country struggling to make the difficult transition to the modern
world of high technology and international markets. Even though GDP
growth has remained strong, at roughly 5% annually, international
confidence in Prime Minister Benazir BHUTTO's government declined in
1996. The IMF suspended a Standby Agreement in the spring; foreign
investment declined; and the budget and trade deficits rose
substantially. In October 1996, BHUTTO responded to IMF pressure to
implement reforms, devaluing the rupee by about 8% and raising
petroleum prices in an attempt to slow the drain on foreign exchange
reserves. But Islamabad still failed to meet IMF revenue and borrowing
targets. Pakistan's interim government - in power since President
LEGHARI sacked BHUTTO on 5 November 1996 - agreed to slash the budget
deficit, push down bank borrowing, implement an agricultural tax; and
speed up reforms in the financial sector; accordingly, the Standby
Agreement was reinstated in December 1996 and a tranche of $80 million
released; but Pakistan fell out of compliance in February 1997. For
the long run, Pakistan must deal with serious problems of
deteriorating infrastructure, low literacy levels, and persistent
sectarian and political violence.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $296.5 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,300 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 24.8%
industry: 26.5%
services: 48.7% (1996)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 10.8% (FY95/96)

Labor force:
total: 36.7 million (1997)
by occupation: agriculture 47%, mining and manufacturing 17%, services
17%, other 19%
note : extensive export of labor, mostly to the Middle East, and use
of child labor

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $12.5 billion
expenditures: $14 billion, including capital expenditures of $2.8
billion (FY95/96 est.)

Industries: textiles, food processing, beverages, construction
materials, clothing, paper products, shrimp

Industrial production growth rate: 6.1% (FY95/96 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 13.17 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 46.1 billion kWh (FY95/96)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 403 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: cotton, wheat, rice, sugarcane, fruits,
vegetables; milk, beef, mutton, eggs

Exports:
total value: $8.3 billion (FY95/96)
commodities: cotton, textiles, clothing, rice, leather, carpets
partners: US, Japan, Hong Kong, Germany, UK, UAE, France

Imports:
total value: $12 billion (FY95/96)
commodities : petroleum, petroleum products, machinery, transportation
equipment, vegetable oils, animal fats, chemicals
partners: Japan, US, Germany, UK, Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, South Korea

Debt - external: $28.6 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: $2.6 billion from all bilateral and multilateral sources
(FY95/96)

Currency: 1 Pakistani rupee (PRe) = 100 paisa

Exchange rates: Pakistani rupees (PRs) per US$1 - 40.120 (January
1997), 36.078 (1996), 31.643 (1995), 30.567 (1994), 28.1 (1993), 25.1
(1992); note - annual average of official rate; parallel market rate
is higher

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Pakistan:Communications

Telephones: 1.572 million (1993 est.)

Telephone system: the domestic system is mediocre, but adequate for
government and business use, in part because major businesses have
established their own private systems; since 1988, the government has
promoted investment in the national telecommunications system on a
priority basis; despite major improvements in trunk and urban systems,
telecommunication services are still not readily available to the
major portion of the population
domestic: microwave radio relay
international: satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
and 2 Indian Ocean); microwave radio relay to neighboring countries

Radio broadcast stations: AM 26, FM 8, shortwave 11

Radios: 11.3 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 29

Televisions: 2.08 million (1993 est.)

@Pakistan:Transportation

Railways:
total: 8,163 km
broad gauge: 7,718 km 1.676-m gauge (293 km electrified; 1,037 km
double track)
narrow gauge: 445 km 1.000-m gauge (1996 est.)

Highways:
total : 216,564 km
paved: 116,945 km
unpaved: 99,619 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 250 km; petroleum products 885 km; natural gas
4,044 km (1987)

Ports and harbors: Karachi, Port Muhammad bin Qasim

Merchant marine:
total: 26 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 425,140 GRT/699,040 DWT
ships by type : bulk 5, cargo 17, container 3, oil tanker 1 (1996
est.)

Airports: 102 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 86
over 3,047 m : 11
2,438 to 3,047 m: 19
1,524 to 2,437 m: 27
914 to 1,523 m: 11
under 914 m: 18 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 16
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
914 to 1,523 m: 8 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 6 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Civil Armed Forces, National
Guard

Military manpower - military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 31,456,430 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 19,288,081 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 1,431,074 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $3.3 billion (FY96/97)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 5.3% (FY96/97)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: status of Kashmir with India; water-sharing
problems with upstream riparian India over the Indus (Wular Barrage)

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of opium and hashish for the
international drug trade (produced 75 metric tons in 1996, down from
155 metric tons in 1995); major center for processing Afghan heroin
and key transit area for Southwest Asian heroin moving to Western
markets
______________________________________________________________________

PALAU

@Palau:Geography

Location: Oceania, group of islands in the North Pacific Ocean,
southeast of the Philippines

Geographic coordinates: 7 30 N, 134 30 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 458 sq km
land : 458 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than 2.5 times the size of
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,519 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf : 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 12 nm
extended fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: wet season May to November; hot and humid

Terrain: varying geologically from the high, mountainous main island
of Babelthuap to low, coral islands usually fringed by large barrier
reefs

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Ngerchelchauus 242 m

Natural resources: forests, minerals (especially gold), marine
products, deep-seabed minerals

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures : NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons (June to December)

Environment - current issues: inadequate facilities for disposal of
solid waste; threats to the marine ecosystem from sand and coral
dredging, illegal fishing practices, and overfishing

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Law of the Sea
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: includes World War II battleground of Beliliou
(Peleliu) and world-famous rock islands; archipelago of six island
groups totaling over 200 islands in the Caroline chain

@Palau:People

Population: 17,240 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 1.66% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 21.04 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.61 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.12 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 25.07 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 71.01 years
male : 69.14 years
female: 73.02 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.71 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Palauan(s)
adjective: Palauan

Ethnic groups: Palauans are a composite of Polynesian, Malayan, and
Melanesian races

Religions: Christian (Catholics, Seventh-Day Adventists, Jehovah's
Witnesses, the Assembly of God, the Liebenzell Mission, and Latter-Day
Saints), Modekngei religion (one-third of the population observes this
religion which is indigenous to Palau)

Languages: English (official in all of Palau's 16 states), Sonsorolese
(official in the state of Sonsoral), Angaur and Japanese (in the state
of Anguar), Tobi (in the state of Tobi), Palauan (in the other 13
states)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 92%
male: 93%
female: 90% (1980 est.)

@Palau:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Palau
conventional short form: Palau
local long form: Beluu er a Belau
local short form : Belau
former: Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands

Data code: PS

Government type: constitutional government in free association with
the US; the Compact of Free Association entered into force 1 October
1994

National capital: Koror
note: a new capital is being built about 20 km northeast in eastern
Babelthuap

Administrative divisions: there are no first-order administrative
divisions as defined by the US Government, but there are 16 states
named Aimeliik, Airai, Angaur, Kayangel, Koror, Melekeok, Ngaraard,
Ngardmau, Ngaremlengui, Ngatpang, Ngchesar, Ngerchelong, Ngiwal,
Peleliu, Sonsorol, Tobi

Independence: 1 October 1994 (from the US-administered UN Trusteeship)

National holiday: Constitution Day, 9 July (1979)

Constitution: 1 January 1981

Legal system: based on Trust Territory laws, acts of the legislature,
municipal, common, and customary laws

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Kuniwo NAKAMURA (since 1 January 1993) and
Vice President Tommy E. REMENGESAU Jr. (since 1 January 1993); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Kuniwo NAKAMURA (since 1 January 1993)
and Vice President Tommy E. REMENGESAU Jr. (since 1 January 1993);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet : Cabinet
elections: president and vice president elected on separate tickets by
popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 11 November 1996
(next to be held NA November 2000)
election results : Kuniwo NAKAMURA reelected president; percent of
vote - Kuniwo NAKAMURA 64%, Chief Ibedul Yutuka GIBBONS 36%; Tommy E.
REMENGESAU Jr. reelected vice president; percent of vote - Tommy E.
REMENGESAU Jr. 69%, Kione ISECHAL 31%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Olbiil Era Kelulau (OEK)
consists of the Senate (14 seats; members elected by popular vote on a
population basis to serve four-year terms) and the House of Delegates
(16 seats - one from each state; members elected by popular vote to
serve four-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 11 November 1996 (next to be held NA
November 2000); House of Delegates - last held 11 November 1996 (next
to be held NA November 2000)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - NA; House of Delegates - percent of vote by party - NA; seats
by party - NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; National Court; Court of Common Pleas

Political parties and leaders: Palau Nationalist Party, Polycarp
BASILIUS

International organization participation: ESCAP, SPC, SPF, UN, WHO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires ad interim
David A. ORRUKEM
chancery: 2000 L Street NW, Suite 407, Washington, DC 20036
telephone : [1] (202) 452-6814
FAX: [1] (202) 452-6281

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Thomas C. HUBBARD (resident in Manila)
embassy: address NA, Koror
mailing address: P.O. Box 6028, Republic of Palau 96940
telephone: [680] 488-2920, 2990
FAX: [680] 488-2911

Flag description: light blue with a large yellow disk (representing
the moon) shifted slightly to the hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy consists primarily of subsistence
agriculture and fishing. The government is the major employer of the
work force, relying heavily on financial assistance from the US. The
population, in effect, enjoys a per capita income of $5,000, twice
that of the Philippines and much of Micronesia. Long-run prospects for
the tourist sector have been greatly bolstered by the expansion of air
travel in the Pacific and the rapidly rising prosperity of leading
East Asian countries. Reducing budgeted operating expenditures - which
have increased 56% from 1989 to 1993 - will be the biggest challenge
for the government over the next several years.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $81.8 million (1994 est.)
note: GDP numbers reflect US spending

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,000 (1994 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force: NA
by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $21 million
expenditures: $57 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1996
est.)

Industries: tourism, craft items (from shell, wood, pearls), some
commercial fishing and agriculture

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: coconuts, copra, cassava (tapioca), sweet
potatoes

Exports:
total value: $600,000 (f.o.b., 1989)
commodities: trochus (type of shellfish), tuna, copra, handicrafts
partners: US, Japan

Imports:
total value : $24.6 million (c.i.f., 1989)
commodities: NA
partners: US

Debt - external: about $100 million (1989)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note : the compact of "free association" with the US, entered into
after the end of the UN trusteeship on 1 October 1994, will provide
Palau with up to $700 million in US aid over 15 years in return for
furnishing military facilities

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September

@Palau:Communications

Telephones: 1,500 (1988 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 9,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2

Televisions: 1,600 (1993 est.)

@Palau:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 61 km
paved: 36 km
unpaved: 25 km

Ports and harbors: Koror

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

PALMYRA ATOLL

(territory of the US)

@Palmyra Atoll:Geography

Location: Oceania, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, about one-half of
the way from Hawaii to American Samoa

Geographic coordinates: 5 52 N, 162 06 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total : 11.9 sq km
land: 11.9 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 20 times the size of The Mall in Washington,
DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 14.5 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: equatorial, hot, and very rainy

Terrain: very low

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 2 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
arable land : 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 100%
other: 0%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: about 50 islets covered with dense vegetation,
coconut trees, and balsa-like trees up to 30 meters tall

@Palmyra Atoll:People

Population: uninhabited

@Palmyra Atoll:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Palmyra Atoll

Data code: LQ

Dependency status: incorporated territory of the US; privately owned,
but administered by the Office of Territorial and International
Affairs, US Department of the Interior

National capital: none; administered from Washington, DC

Flag description: the flag of the US is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Palmyra Atoll:Transportation

Highways: much of the road and many causeways built during World War
II are unserviceable and overgrown

Ports and harbors: West Lagoon

Airports: airstrip has been overgrown by vegetation and is no longer
serviceable

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

PANAMA

@Panama:Geography

Location: Middle America, bordering both the Caribbean Sea and the
North Pacific Ocean, between Colombia and Costa Rica

Geographic coordinates: 9 00 N, 80 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 78,200 sq km
land: 75,990 sq km
water: 2,210 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than South Carolina

Land boundaries:
total: 555 km
border countries: Colombia 225 km, Costa Rica 330 km

Coastline: 2,490 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid, cloudy; prolonged rainy season (May to
January), short dry season (January to May)

Terrain: interior mostly steep, rugged mountains and dissected, upland
plains; coastal areas largely plains and rolling hills

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Volcan de Chiriqui 3,475 m

Natural resources: copper, mahogany forests, shrimp

Land use:
arable land: 7%
permanent crops: 2%
permanent pastures: 20%
forests and woodland : 44%
other: 27% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 320 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: water pollution from agricultural runoff
threatens fishery resources; deforestation of tropical rain forest;
land degradation

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: strategic location on eastern end of isthmus forming
land bridge connecting North and South America; controls Panama Canal
that links North Atlantic Ocean via Caribbean Sea with North Pacific
Ocean

@Panama:People

Population: 2,693,417 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 32% (male 444,673; female 426,823)
15-64 years: 62% (male 846,707; female 824,690)
65 years and over : 6% (male 72,472; female 78,052) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.58% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 22.27 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.15 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.35 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.93 male(s)/female
total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 24.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 74.28 years
male: 71.55 years
female : 77.1 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.6 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Panamanian(s)
adjective: Panamanian

Ethnic groups: mestizo (mixed Amerindian and white) 70%, Amerindian
and mixed (West Indian) 14%, white 10%, Amerindian 6%

Religions: Roman Catholic 85%, Protestant 15%

Languages: Spanish (official), English 14%
note: many Panamanians bilingual

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 90.8%
male: 91.4%
female : 90.2% (1995 est.)

@Panama:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Panama
conventional short form: Panama
local long form: Republica de Panama
local short form: Panama

Data code: PM

Government type: constitutional republic

National capital: Panama

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces (provincias, singular -
provincia) and 1 territory* (comarca); Bocas del Toro, Chiriqui,
Cocle, Colon, Darien, Herrera, Los Santos, Panama, San Blas*, Veraguas

Independence: 3 November 1903 (from Colombia; became independent from
Spain 28 November 1821)

National holiday: Independence Day, 3 November (1903)

Constitution: 11 October 1972; major reforms adopted April 1983

Legal system: based on civil law system; judicial review of
legislative acts in the Supreme Court of Justice; accepts compulsory
ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Ernesto PEREZ BALLADARES Gonzalez Revilla
(since 1 September 1994); First Vice President Tomas Gabriel
ALTAMIRANO DUQUE (since 1 September 1994); Second Vice President
Felipe Alejandro VIRZI Lopez (since 1 September 1994); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government : President Ernesto PEREZ BALLADARES Gonzalez
Revilla (since 1 September 1994); First Vice President Tomas Gabriel
ALTAMIRANO DUQUE (since 1 September 1994); Second Vice President
Felipe Alejandro VIRZI Lopez (since 1 September 1994); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
elections: president and vice presidents elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 8 May 1994 (next
to be held 9 May 1999)
election results: Ernesto PEREZ BALLADARES elected president; percent
of vote - Ernesto PEREZ BALLADARES (PRD) 33%, Mireya MOSCOSO DE GRUBER
(PA) 29%, Ruben BLADES (MPE) 17%, Ruben Dario CARLES (MOLIRENA) 16%

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly or Asamblea
Legislativa (72 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms)
elections : last held 8 May 1994 (next to be held 9 May 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PRD
32, PS 4, PALA 1, PA 14, MPE 6, MOLIRENA 4, PLA 3, PRC 3, PL 2, PDC 1,
UDI 1, MORENA 1
note: legislators from outlying rural districts are chosen on a
plurality basis while districts located in more populous towns and
cities elect multiple legislators by means of a proportion-based
formula

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justicia),
nine judges appointed for 10-year terms; five superior courts; three
courts of appeal

Political parties and leaders:
governing coalition : Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD), Gerardo
GONZALEZ; Liberal Republican Party (PLR), Rodolfo CHIARI; Labor Party
(PALA), Carlos Lopez GUEVARA
other parties: Solidarity Party (PS), Samuel LEWIS GALINDO;
Nationalist Republican Liberal Movement (MOLIRENA), Ramon MORALES
Quijano; Authentic Liberal Party (PLA), Arnulfo ESCALONA; Arnulfista
Party (PA), Mireya MOSCOSO DE GRUBER; Christian Democratic Party
(PDC), Ruben AROSEMENA; Liberal Party (PL), Roberto ALEMAN Zubieta;
Papa Egoro Movement (MPE), Gloria YOUNG; Civic Renewal Party (PRC),
Tomas HERRERA; National Unity Mission Party (MUN), Jose Manuel
PAREDES; Independent Democratic Union (UDI), Jacinto CARDENAS;
National Renovation Movement (MORENA), Pedro VALLERINO

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Council of Organized
Workers (CONATO); National Council of Private Enterprise (CONEP);
Panamanian Association of Business Executives (APEDE); National Civic
Crusade; Chamber of Commerce; Panamanian Industrialists Society (SIP);
Workers Confederation of the Republic of Panama (CTRP)

International organization participation: AG (associate), CCC, ECLAC,
FAO, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES,
LAIA (observer), NAM, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Eduardo Gonzalez MORGAN
chancery: 2862 McGill Terrace NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 483-1407
consulate(s) general : Atlanta, Houston, Miami, New Orleans, New York,
San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico), Tampa

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador William John HUGHES
embassy: Avenida Balboa and Calle 38, Apartado 6959, Panama City 5
mailing address : American Embassy Panama, Unit 0945, APO AA 34002
telephone: [507] 227-1377
FAX: [507] 227-1964

Flag description: divided into four, equal rectangles; the top
quadrants are white (hoist side) with a blue five-pointed star in the
center and plain red, the bottom quadrants are plain blue (hoist side)
and white with a red five-pointed star in the center

Economy

Economy - overview: Because of its key geographic location, Panama's
economy is service-based, heavily weighted toward banking, commerce,
and tourism. Panama's former protectionist policies have taken their
toll, and the economy has been sluggish the last two years, with GDP
growth at 1.9% in 1995 and 1.5% in 1996. Although tourism and the
Panama Canal posted growth in 1996, most sectors remained stagnant,
and some, like the Colon Free Zone, banana and shrimp exports, and
construction, were down from 1995. Although the PEREZ BALLADARES
administration has advanced an economic reform program designed to
liberalize the trade regime, attract foreign investment, privatize
state-owned enterprises, institute fiscal reform, and encourage
job-creation through labor code reform, the positive effects of this
program have not yet been felt at the macroeconomic level. In 1996,
the government concluded a Brady-type plan to restructure the
country's commercial debt - one of the highest in the world in per
capita terms - allowing it to reenter international financial markets.
Panama also completed all requirements to join the World Trade
Organization (WTrO) and is awaiting legislative ratification to become
a full member.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $14 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,300 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 10%
industry : 16%
services: 74% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.3% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 1.015 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: government and community services 31.8%, agriculture,
hunting, and fishing 26.8%, commerce, restaurants, and hotels 16.4%,
manufacturing and mining 9.4%, construction 3.2%, transportation and
communications 6.2%, finance, insurance, and real estate 4.3%
note: shortage of skilled labor, but an oversupply of unskilled labor

Unemployment rate: 14% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $1.86 billion
expenditures: $1.86 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995)

Industries: construction, petroleum refining, brewing, cement and
other construction materials, sugar milling

Industrial production growth rate: 0.4% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 1.1405 billion kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 3.519 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,069 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: bananas, rice, corn, coffee, sugarcane,
vegetables; livestock; fishing (shrimp)

Exports:
total value: $570 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: bananas 43%, shrimp 11%, sugar 4%, clothing 5%, coffee 2%
partners: US 39%, EU, Central America and Caribbean

Imports:
total value: $2.512 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: capital goods 21%, crude oil 11%, foodstuffs 9%, consumer
goods, chemicals
partners: US 40%, EU, Central America and Caribbean, Japan

Debt - external: $5.6 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $58 million (1993)

Currency: 1 balboa (B) = 100 centesimos

Exchange rates: balboas (B) per US$1 - 1.000 (fixed rate)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Panama:Communications

Telephones: 273,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: domestic and international facilities well developed
domestic: NA
international: 1 coaxial submarine cable; satellite earth stations - 2
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean); connected to the Central American Microwave
System

Radio broadcast stations: AM 91, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 564,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 23

Televisions: 420,000 (1992 est.)

@Panama:Transportation

Railways:
total : 355 km
broad gauge: 76 km 1.524-m gauge
narrow gauge: 279 km 0.914-m gauge

Highways:
total: 10,792 km
paved : 3,615 km
unpaved: 7,177 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 800 km navigable by shallow draft vessels; 82 km Panama
Canal

Pipelines: crude oil 130 km

Ports and harbors: Balboa, Cristobal, Coco Solo, Vacamonte

Merchant marine:
total: 4,062 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 80,120,443
GRT/122,668,194 DWT
ships by type: bulk 1,051, cargo 1,049, chemical tanker 172,
combination bulk 65, combination ore/oil 21, container 353, liquefied
gas tanker 169, livestock carrier 8, multifunction large-load carrier
4, oil tanker 529, passenger 35, passenger-cargo 10, railcar carrier
1, refrigerated cargo 293, roll-on/roll-off cargo 90, short-sea
passenger 38, specialized tanker 12, vehicle carrier 162
note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 76 countries
among which are Japan 1,240, Greece 361, Hong Kong 301, South Korea
226, Taiwan 212, China 168, Singapore 132, US 127, Switzerland 76, and
UK 65 (1996 est.)

Airports: 97 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 80
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
914 to 1,523 m: 14
under 914 m : 59 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 17
914 to 1,523 m: 17 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Panamanian Public Forces (PPF; includes the
National Police, National Maritime Service, National Air Service, and
Institutional Protective Service); Judicial Technical Police; note -
the Constitution prohibits armed forces

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 719,467 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 493,819 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $78 million (1995); note - for
police and security forces

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: major cocaine transshipment point and major drug
money-laundering center; minor producer of coca leaf; active
eradication program
______________________________________________________________________

PAPUA NEW GUINEA

@Papua New Guinea:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, group of islands including the eastern
half of the island of New Guinea between the Coral Sea and the South
Pacific Ocean, east of Indonesia

Geographic coordinates: 6 00 S, 147 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 462,840 sq km
land: 452,860 sq km
water : 9,980 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries:
total: 820 km
border countries : Indonesia 820 km

Coastline: 5,152 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
continental shelf : 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; northwest monsoon (December to March), southeast
monsoon (May to October); slight seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: mostly mountains with coastal lowlands and rolling foothills

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Wilhelm 4,509 m

Natural resources: gold, copper, silver, natural gas, timber, oil,
fisheries

Land use:
arable land : 0.1%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 92.9%
other : 6% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: active volcanism; situated along the Pacific "Rim of
Fire"; the country is subject to frequent and sometimes severe
earthquakes; mud slides

Environment - current issues: rain forest subject to deforestation as
a result of growing commercial demand for tropical timber; pollution
from mining projects

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography - note: shares island of New Guinea with Indonesia; one of
world's largest swamps along southwest coast

@Papua New Guinea:People

Population: 4,496,221 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 40% (male 921,227; female 874,290)
15-64 years: 57% (male 1,338,483; female 1,229,180)
65 years and over: 3% (male 61,082; female 71,959) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.28% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 32.65 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.83 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.09 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.85 male(s)/female
total population: 1.07 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 58.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 57.65 years
male: 56.78 years
female: 58.56 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.36 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Papua New Guinean(s)
adjective: Papua New Guinean

Ethnic groups: Melanesian, Papuan, Negrito, Micronesian, Polynesian

Religions: Roman Catholic 22%, Lutheran 16%,
Presbyterian/Methodist/London Missionary Society 8%, Anglican 5%,
Evangelical Alliance 4%, Seventh-Day Adventist 1%, other Protestant
sects 10%, indigenous beliefs 34%

Languages: English spoken by 1%-2%, pidgin English widespread, Motu
spoken in Papua region
note: 715 indigenous languages

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 72.2%
male: 81%
female: 62.7% (1995 est.)

@Papua New Guinea:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Independent State of Papua New Guinea
conventional short form: Papua New Guinea
abbreviation: PNG

Data code: PP

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Port Moresby

Administrative divisions: 20 provinces; Bougainville, Central, Chimbu,
Eastern Highlands, East New Britain, East Sepik, Enga, Gulf, Madang,
Manus, Milne Bay, Morobe, National Capital, New Ireland, Northern,
Sandaun, Southern Highlands, Western, Western Highlands, West New
Britain

Independence: 16 September 1975 (from the Australian-administered UN
trusteeship)

National holiday: Independence Day, 16 September (1975)

Constitution: 16 September 1975

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General Sir Wiwa KOROWI (since 11 November
1991)
head of government : Acting Prime Minister John GIHENO (since 27 March
1997); Acting Deputy Prime Minister Andrew BAING (since 27 March
1997); note - John GIHENO and Andrew BAING assumed the respective
posts of acting prime minister and acting deputy prime minister after
Prime Minister Sir Julius CHAN (in office since 30 August 1994) and
Deputy Prime Minister Chris HAIVETA (in office since 7 September 1994)
were required to step down during an inquiry into the government's
hiring of mercenaries to assist the Papua New Guinea Defense Forces
against Bougainville rebels; the inquiry is scheduled to conclude on
30 May 1997
cabinet: National Executive Council appointed by the governor general
on the recommendation of the prime minister
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor general
appointed by the National Executive Council; prime minister and deputy
prime minister appointed by the governor general for up to five years
on the basis of majority support in National Parliament

Legislative branch: unicameral National Parliament - sometimes
referred to as the House of Assembly (109 seats - 89 elected from open
electorates and 20 from provincial electorates; members elected by
popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 13-26 June 1992 (next to be held 14-28 June 1997)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
Pangu Party 24, PDM 17, PPP 10, PAP 10, independents 30, others 18;
note - association with political parties is fluid

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, the chief justice is appointed by the
governor general on the proposal of the National Executive Council
after consultation with the minister responsible for justice, other
judges are appointed by the Judicial and Legal Services Commission

Political parties and leaders: Papua New Guinea United Party (Pangu
Party), Chris HAIVETA; People's Democratic Movement (PDM), Roy YAKI;
People's Action Party (PAP), Ted DIRO; People's Progress Party (PPP),
Sir Julius CHAN; Melanesian Alliance (MA), Fr. John MOMIS; People's
United Party (PUP), David UNASI; National Party (NP), Mathias IJAPE;
United Party (UP), Paul TORATO; Papua Party (PP), Galeva KWARARA;
National Alliance (NA), Sir Michael SOMARE; Movement For Greater
Autonomy, Stephen POKAWIN; Black Action Party (BAP), John WAIKO;
League for National Advancement (LNA), Thomas PELIKA

International organization participation: ACP, APEC, AsDB, C, CP,
ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM,
Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Nagora Y. BOGAN
chancery: 3rd floor, 1615 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC
20009
telephone: [1] (202) 745-3680
FAX : [1] (202) 745-3679

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Arma Jane KARAER
embassy: Douglas Street, Port Moresby
mailing address: P. O. Box 1492, Port Moresby
telephone : [675] 321-1455
FAX: [675] 321-3423

Flag description: divided diagonally from upper hoist-side corner; the
upper triangle is red with a soaring yellow bird of paradise centered;
the lower triangle is black with five white five-pointed stars of the
Southern Cross constellation centered

Economy

Economy - overview: Papua New Guinea is richly endowed with natural
resources, but exploitation has been hampered by the rugged terrain
and the high cost of developing an infrastructure. Agriculture
provides a subsistence livelihood for the bulk of the population.
Mineral deposits, including oil, copper, and gold, account for 72% of
export earnings. Budgetary support from Australia and development aid
under World Bank auspices have helped sustain the economy. In 1995,
Port Moresby reached agreement with the IMF and World Bank on a
structural adjustment program, of which the first phase was
successfully completed in 1996. A second phase structural adjustment
loan will be negotiated in 1997. The structural adjustment program
includes liberalization of trade and investment policies, sustainable
development of the forestry sector, improvement of government planning
capacity and better delivery of public services. New gold and oil
projects are under development and planned to begin production in 1997
and 1998 respectively.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $10.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 27%
industry: 42%
services: 31%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 6% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1.941 million
by occupation: agriculture 64% (1993 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $1.5 billion
expenditures: $1.35 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: copra crushing, palm oil processing, plywood production,
wood chip production; mining of gold, silver, and copper; crude oil
production; construction, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 252,000 kW (1992)

Electricity - production: 1.71 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 382 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, cocoa, coconuts, palm kernels, tea,
rubber, sweet potatoes, fruit, vegetables; poultry, pork

Exports:
total value: $2.7 billion (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: gold, copper ore, oil, logs, palm oil, coffee, cocoa,
lobster
partners : Australia, Japan, US, Singapore, New Zealand

Imports:
total value: $1.3 billion (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods,
food, fuels, chemicals
partners : Australia, Japan, UK, New Zealand, Netherlands

Debt - external: $3.2 billion (1995)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $291 million (1993); $240 million bilateral aid from
Australia (FY96/97 est.); $4.1 million ODA from NZ (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 kina (K) = 100 toea

Exchange rates: kina (K) per US$1 - 0.7451 (December 1996), 0.7588
(1996), 0.7835 (1995), 0.9950 (1994), 1.0221 (1993), 1.0367 (1992);
note - the government floated the kina on 10 October 1994

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Papua New Guinea:Communications

Telephones: 63,212 (1986 est.)

Telephone system: services are adequate and being improved; facilities
provide radiotelephone and telegraph, coastal radio, aeronautical
radio, and international radio communication services
domestic: mostly radiotelephone
international: submarine cables to Australia and Guam; satellite earth
station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean); international radio
communication service

Radio broadcast stations: AM 31, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 298,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 10,000 (1992 est.)

@Papua New Guinea:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 19,400 km
paved: 660 km
unpaved: 18,740 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 10,940 km

Ports and harbors: Kieta, Lae, Madang, Port Moresby, Rabaul

Merchant marine:
total: 12 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 22,614 GRT/29,643 DWT
ships by type: bulk 2, cargo 3, combination ore/oil 5, container 1,
roll-on/roll-off 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 451 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 387
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 12
914 to 1,523 m: 4
under 914 m: 370 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 64
1,524 to 2,437 m : 12
914 to 1,523 m: 52 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Papua New Guinea Defense Force (includes Ground,
Naval, and Air Forces, and Special Forces Unit)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,174,591 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 653,179 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $63 million (1997); note -
includes $12 million to cover leftover 1996 expenditures

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

PARACEL ISLANDS

@Paracel Islands:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, group of small islands and reefs in the
South China Sea, about one-third of the way from central Vietnam to
the northern Philippines

Geographic coordinates: 16 30 N, 112 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total : NA sq km
land: NA sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: NA

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 518 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: tropical

Terrain: NA

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: South China Sea 0 m
highest point: unnamed location on Rocky Island 14 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: typhoons

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

@Paracel Islands:People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants
note: there are scattered Chinese garrisons

@Paracel Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Paracel Islands

Data code: PF

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Paracel Islands:Communications

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

@Paracel Islands:Transportation

Ports and harbors: small Chinese port facilities on Woody Island and
Duncan Island being expanded

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (on Woody Island) (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: occupied by China

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: occupied by China, but claimed by Taiwan and
Vietnam
______________________________________________________________________

PARAGUAY

@Paraguay:Geography

Location: Central South America, northeast of Argentina

Geographic coordinates: 23 00 S, 58 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total: 406,750 sq km
land: 397,300 sq km
water: 9,450 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than California

Land boundaries:
total: 3,920 km
border countries: Argentina 1,880 km, Bolivia 750 km, Brazil 1,290 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: subtropical; substantial rainfall in the eastern portions,
becoming semiarid in the far west

Terrain: grassy plains and wooded hills east of Rio Paraguay; Gran
Chaco region west of Rio Paraguay mostly low, marshy plain near the
river, and dry forest and thorny scrub elsewhere

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: junction of Rio Paraguay and Rio Parana 46 m
highest point: Cerro San Rafael 850 m

Natural resources: hydropower, timber, iron ore, manganese, limestone

Land use:
arable land: 6%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 55%
forests and woodland : 32%
other: 7% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 670 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: local flooding in southeast (early September to
June); poorly drained plains may become boggy (early October to June)

Environment - current issues: deforestation (an estimated 2 million
hectares of forest land have been lost from 1958-85); water pollution;
inadequate means for waste disposal present health risks for many
urban residents

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography - note: landlocked; lies between Argentina, Bolivia, and
Brazil

@Paraguay:People

Population: 5,651,634 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 40% (male 1,163,416; female 1,113,654)
15-64 years: 56% (male 1,571,685; female 1,564,757)
65 years and over: 4% (male 109,547; female 128,575) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.62% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 30.47 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.24 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.85 male(s)/female
total population : 1.01 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 22.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 74.1 years
male: 72.6 years
female: 75.68 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.08 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Paraguayan(s)
adjective: Paraguayan

Ethnic groups: mestizo (mixed Spanish and Amerindian) 95%, white plus
Amerindian 5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 90%, Mennonite and other Protestant
denominations

Languages: Spanish (official), Guarani

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 92.1%
male: 93.5%
female : 90.6% (1995 est.)

@Paraguay:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Paraguay
conventional short form: Paraguay
local long form: Republica del Paraguay
local short form: Paraguay

Data code: PA

Government type: republic

National capital: Asuncion

Administrative divisions: 18 departments (departamentos, singular -
departamento); Alto Paraguay, Alto Parana, Amambay, Asuncion,
Boqueron, Caaguazu, Caazapa, Canindeyu, Central, Concepcion,
Cordillera, Guaira, Itapua, Misiones, Neembucu, Paraguari, Presidente
Hayes, San Pedro

Independence: 14 May 1811 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Days, 14-15 May (1811)

Constitution: promulgated 20 June 1992

Legal system: based on Argentine codes, Roman law, and French codes;
judicial review of legislative acts in Supreme Court of Justice; does
not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory up to age 60

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Juan Carlos WASMOSY (since 15 August 1993)
and Vice President Roberto Angel SEIFART (since 15 August 1993); note
- the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Juan Carlos WASMOSY (since 15 August
1993) and Vice President Roberto Angel SEIFART (since 15 August 1993);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet : Council of Ministers nominated by the president
elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 9 May 1993 (next
to be held NA May 1998)
election results: Juan Carlos WASMOSY elected president; percent of
vote - Juan Carlos WASMOSY 40.09%, Domingo LAINO 32.06%, Guillermo
CABALLERO VARGAS 23.04%

Legislative branch: bicameral Congress or Congreso consists of the
Chamber of Senators or Camara de Senadores (45 seats; members are
elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms) and the Chamber of
Deputies or Camara de Diputados (80 seats; members are elected by
popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: Chamber of Senators - last held 9 May 1993 (next to be held
10 May 1998); Chamber of Deputies - last held 9 May 1993 (next to be
held NA May 1998)
election results : Chamber of Senators - percent of vote by party -
NA; seats by party - Colorado Party 20, PLRA 17, EN 8; Chamber of
Deputies - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - Colorado
Party 38, PLRA 33, EN 9

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justicia),
judges appointed on the proposal of the Counsel of Magistrates
(Consejo de la Magistratura)

Political parties and leaders: Colorado Party, Luis Maria ARGANA,
president; Authentic Radical Liberal Party (PLRA), Domingo LAINO;
National Encounter (EN), Carlos FILIZZOLA; Christian Democratic Party
(PDC), Miguel MONTANER; Febrerista Revolutionary Party (PRF), Victor
SANCHEZ Villagra; Popular Democratic Party (PDP), Hugo Richer

Political pressure groups and leaders: Unitary Workers Central (CUT);
Roman Catholic Church; National Workers Central (CNT); Paraguayan
Workers Confederation (CPT)

International organization participation: AG (observer), CCC, ECLAC,
FAO, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA,
Mercosur, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Jorge G. PRIETO CONTI
chancery: 2400 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 483-6960 through 6962
FAX: [1] (202) 234-4508
consulate(s) general : Miami and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Robert E. SERVICE
embassy: 1776 Avenida Mariscal Lopez, Casilla Postal 402, Asuncion
mailing address: Unit 4711, APO AA 34036-0001
telephone: [595] (21) 213-715
FAX: [595] (21) 213-728

Flag description: three equal, horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and blue with an emblem centered in the white band; unusual flag in
that the emblem is different on each side; the obverse (hoist side at
the left) bears the national coat of arms (a yellow five-pointed star
within a green wreath capped by the words REPUBLICA DEL PARAGUAY, all
within two circles); the reverse (hoist side at the right) bears the
seal of the treasury (a yellow lion below a red Cap of Liberty and the
words Paz y Justicia (Peace and Justice) capped by the words REPUBLICA
DEL PARAGUAY, all within two circles)

Economy

Economy - overview: Paraguay has a market economy marked by a large
informal sector. The informal sector features both reexport of
imported consumer goods (electronics, whiskeys, perfumes, cigarettes,
and office equipment) to neighboring countries as well as by the
activities of thousands of microenterprises and urban street vendors.
The formal sector is largely oriented toward services, but a large
percentage of the population derive their living from agricultural
activity, often on a subsistence basis. The formal economy has grown
an average of 3% to 4% over the past five years. However, population
has increased at 3% a year over the same period, leaving per capita
income nearly stagnant. The WASMOSY government has continued to pursue
its economic reform agenda - with mixed success - in close
coordination with its partners in Mercosur (Southern Cone Common
Market). Paraguay's ongoing integration into Mercosur offers potential
for investment and growth. Although GDP grew by only about 1.5% in
1996, it is expected to grow at a higher rate in 1997.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $17.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,200 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 26.3%
industry: 20.7%
services: 53% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 8.2% (December 1996)

Labor force:
total: 1.8 million (1995 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 45%

Unemployment rate: 5.3% (urban) (1995)

Budget:
revenues : $1.25 billion (1995 est.)
expenditures: $1.66 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: meat packing, oilseed crushing, milling, brewing,
textiles, other light consumer goods, cement, construction

Industrial production growth rate: 1.3% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 6,927,500 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 41.625 billion kWh (1995)
note: exported about 37.9 million kW of electricity

Electricity - consumption per capita: 616 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: cotton, sugarcane, soybeans, corn, wheat,
tobacco, cassava (tapioca), fruits, vegetables; beef, pork, eggs,
milk; timber

Exports:
total value: $819.5 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: cotton, soybeans, timber, vegetable oils, meat products,
coffee, tung oil
partners: EU 37%, Brazil 25%, Argentina 10%, Chile 6%, US 6%

Imports:
total value: $2.871 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: capital goods, foodstuffs, consumer goods, raw materials,
fuels
partners : Brazil 30%, EU 20%, US 18%, Argentina 8%, Japan 7%

Debt - external: $1.3 billion (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $38 million (1993)

Currency: 1 guarani (G) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates: guaranies (G) per US$ - 2,139.1 (January 1997),
2,063.8 (1996), 1,970.4 (1995), 1,911.5 (1994), 1,744.3 (1993),
1,500.3 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Paraguay:Communications

Telephones: 88,730 (1985 est.)

Telephone system: meager telephone service; principal switching center
is Asuncion
domestic: fair microwave radio relay network
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 40, FM 0, shortwave 7

Radios: 775,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 5

Televisions: 370,000 (1992 est.)

@Paraguay:Transportation

Railways:
total: 971 km
standard gauge: 441 km 1.435-m gauge
narrow gauge : 60 km 1.000-m gauge
other gauge: 470 km various gauges (privately owned)

Highways:
total : 28,900 km
paved: 2,717 km
unpaved: 26,183 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 3,100 km

Ports and harbors: Asuncion, Villeta, San Antonio, Encarnacion

Merchant marine:
total : 19 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 25,379 GRT/32,510 DWT
ships by type: cargo 14, chemical tanker 1, oil tanker 3,
roll-on/roll-off 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 725 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 436
over 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 4
under 914 m: 427 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 289
1,524 to 2,437 m : 22
914 to 1,523 m: 267 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Naval Air and Marines), Air
Force

Military manpower - military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,380,775 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 1,001,316 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 61,382 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $94 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 0.6% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: short section of the boundary with Brazil,
just west of Salto del Guaira (Guaira Falls) on the Rio Parana, has
not been precisely delimited

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis for the international drug
trade; transshipment country for Bolivian cocaine headed for Europe
and the US
______________________________________________________________________

PERU

@Peru:Geography

Location: Western South America, bordering the South Pacific Ocean,
between Chile and Ecuador

Geographic coordinates: 10 00 S, 76 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total: 1,285,220 sq km
land : 1.28 million sq km
water: 5,220 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Alaska

Land boundaries:
total: 6,940 km
border countries: Bolivia 900 km, Brazil 1,560 km, Chile 160 km,
Colombia 2,900 km, Ecuador 1,420 km

Coastline: 2,414 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf : 200 nm
territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: varies from tropical in east to dry desert in west

Terrain: western coastal plain (costa), high and rugged Andes in
center (sierra), eastern lowland jungle of Amazon Basin (selva)

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Nevado Huascaran 6,768 m

Natural resources: copper, silver, gold, petroleum, timber, fish, iron
ore, coal, phosphate, potash

Land use:
arable land : 3%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 21%
forests and woodland: 66%
other: 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 12,800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: earthquakes, tsunamis, flooding, landslides, mild
volcanic activity

Environment - current issues: deforestation; overgrazing of the slopes
of the costa and sierra leading to soil erosion; desertification; air
pollution in Lima; pollution of rivers and coastal waters from
municipal and mining wastes

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: shares control of Lago Titicaca, world's highest
navigable lake, with Bolivia

@Peru:People

Population: 25,573,924 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 36% (male 4,693,504; female 4,532,607)
15-64 years : 59% (male 7,658,718; female 7,551,588)
65 years and over: 5% (male 519,294; female 618,213) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 27.26 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.14 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.17 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.84 male(s)/female
total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 50 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 69.55 years
male : 67.38 years
female: 71.82 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.4 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Peruvian(s)
adjective: Peruvian

Ethnic groups: Amerindian 45%, mestizo (mixed Amerindian and white)
37%, white 15%, black, Japanese, Chinese, and other 3%

Religions: Roman Catholic

Languages: Spanish (official), Quechua (official), Aymara

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 88.7%
male: 94.5%
female: 83% (1995 est.)

@Peru:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Peru
conventional short form: Peru
local long form: Republica del Peru
local short form: Peru

Data code: PE

Government type: republic

National capital: Lima

Administrative divisions: 24 departments (departamentos, singular -
departamento) and 1 constitutional province* (provincia
constitucional); Amazonas, Ancash, Apurimac, Arequipa, Ayacucho,
Cajamarca, Callao*, Cusco, Huancavelica, Huanuco, Ica, Junin, La
Libertad, Lambayeque, Lima, Loreto, Madre de Dios, Moquegua, Pasco,
Piura, Puno, San Martin, Tacna, Tumbes, Ucayali
note: the 1979 constitution mandated the creation of regions
(regiones, singular - region) to function eventually as autonomous
economic and administrative entities; so far, 12 regions have been
constituted from 23 of the 24 departments - Amazonas (from Loreto),
Andres Avelino Caceres (from Huanuco, Pasco, Junin), Arequipa (from
Arequipa), Chavin (from Ancash), Grau (from Tumbes, Piura), Inca (from
Cusco, Madre de Dios, Apurimac), La Libertad (from La Libertad), Los
Libertadores-Huari (from Ica, Ayacucho, Huancavelica), Mariategui
(from Moquegua, Tacna, Puno), Nor Oriental del Maranon (from
Lambayeque, Cajamarca, Amazonas), San Martin (from San Martin),
Ucayali (from Ucayali); formation of another region has been delayed
by the reluctance of the constitutional province of Callao to merge
with the department of Lima; because of inadequate funding from the
central government and organizational and political difficulties, the
regions have yet to assume major responsibilities; the 1993
constitution retains the regions but limits their authority; the 1993
constitution also reaffirms the roles of departmental and municipal
governments

Independence: 28 July 1821 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 28 July (1821)

Constitution: 31 December 1993

Legal system: based on civil law system; has not accepted compulsory
ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Alberto Kenyo FUJIMORI Fujimori (since 28
July 1990); note - the president is both the chief of state and head
of government
head of government: President Alberto Kenyo FUJIMORI Fujimori (since
28 July 1990); note - the president is both the chief of state and
head of government
note: Prime Minister Alberto PANDOLFI Arbulu (since 3 April 1996) does
not exercise executive power; this power is in the hands of the
president
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections : president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 9 April 1995 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results: President FUJIMORI reelected; percent of vote -
Alberto FUJIMORI 64.42%, Javier PEREZ de CUELLAR 21.80%, Mercedes
CABANILLAS 4.11%, other 9.67%

Legislative branch: unicameral Democratic Constituent Congress or
Congresso Constituyente Democratico (120 seats; members are elected by
popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 9 April 1995 (next to be held NA April 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - C90/NM 52.1%, UPP 14%, 11
other parties 33.9%; seats by party, when installed on 28 July 1995 -
C90/NM 67, UPP 17, APRA 8, FIM 6, (CODE)-Pais Posible 5, AP 4, PPC 3,
Renovacion 3, IU 2, OBRAS 2, MIA 1, FRENATRACA 1, FREPAP 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justicia),
judges are appointed by the National Council of the Judiciary

Political parties and leaders: Change 90-New Majority (C90/NM),
Alberto FUJIMORI; Union for Peru (UPP), Javier PEREZ de CUELLAR;
American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA), Agustin MANTILLA
Campos; Independent Moralizing Front (FIM), Fernando OLIVERA Vega;
Democratic Coordinator (CODE) - Pais Posible, Jose BARBA Caballero and
Alejandro TOLEDO; Popular Action Party (AP), Juan DIAZ Leon; Popular
Christian Party (PPC), Luis BEDOYA Reyes; Renovation Party, Rafael REY
Rey; Civic Works Movement (OBRAS), Ricardo BELMONT; United Left (IU),
Agustin HAYA de la TORRE; Independent Agrarian Movement (MIA), Rolando
SALVATERRIE; Peru 2000-National Front of Workers and Peasants
(FRENATRACA), Roger CACARES; Popular Agricultural Front (FREPAP),
Ezequiel ATAUCUSI

Political pressure groups and leaders: leftist guerrilla groups
include Shining Path, Abimael GUZMAN Reynoso (imprisoned); Tupac Amaru
Revolutionary Movement, Nestor CERPA and Victor POLAY (imprisoned)

International organization participation: AG, CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-11,
G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol,
IOC, IOM, ISO (correspondent), ITU, LAES, LAIA, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, PCA,
RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Ricardo V. LUNA Mendoza
chancery: 1700 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone : [1] (202) 833-9860 through 9869
FAX: [1] (202) 659-8124
consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New York,
Paterson (New Jersey), San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Dennis C. JETT
embassy: Avenida Encalada, Cuadra 17, Monterrico, Lima
mailing address: P. O. Box 1995, Lima 1; American Embassy (Lima), APO
AA 34031
telephone: [51] (1) 434-3000
FAX: [51] (1) 434-3037

Flag description: three equal, vertical bands of red (hoist side),
white, and red with the coat of arms centered in the white band; the
coat of arms features a shield bearing a llama, cinchona tree (the
source of quinine), and a yellow cornucopia spilling out gold coins,
all framed by a green wreath

Economy

Economy - overview: The Peruvian economy has become increasingly
market-oriented, with major privatizations completed since 1990 in the
mining, electricity, and telecommunications industries. In the 1980s,
the economy suffered from hyperinflation, declining per capita output,
and mounting external debt. Peru was shut off from IMF and World Bank
support in the mid-1980s because of its huge debt arrears. An
austerity program implemented shortly after the FUJIMORI government
took office in July 1990 contributed to a third consecutive yearly
contraction of economic activity, but the slide came to a halt late
that year, and in 1991 output rose 2.4%. After a burst of inflation as
the austerity program eliminated government price subsidies, monthly
price increases eased to the single-digit level and by December 1991
dropped to the lowest increase since mid-1987. Lima obtained a
financial rescue package from multilateral lenders in September 1991,
although it faced $14 billion in arrears on its external debt. By
working with the IMF and World Bank on new financial conditions and
arrangements, the government succeeded in ending its arrears by March
1993. In 1992, GDP fell by 2.8%, in part because a warmer-than-usual
El Nino current resulted in a 30% drop in the fish catch, but the
economy rebounded as strong foreign investment helped push growth to
7% in 1993, about 13% in 1994, and 6.8% in 1995. Growth slowed to
about 2.8% in 1996 as the government adopted tight fiscal and monetary
policy to reduce the current account deficit and meet its IMF targets.
Capital inflows surged to record levels in early 1997 despite the MRTA
hostage crisis.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $92 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.8% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 13%
industry: 42%
services: 45% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 11.5% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 7.6 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: agriculture, mining and quarrying, manufacturing,
construction, transport, services

Unemployment rate: 8.2%; extensive underemployment (1996)

Budget:
revenues: $8.5 billion
expenditures: $9.3 billion including capital expenditures of $NA (1996
est.)

Industries: mining of metals, petroleum, fishing, textiles, clothing,
food processing, cement, auto assembly, steel, shipbuilding, metal
fabrication

Industrial production growth rate: 4.5% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 4,520,200 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 16.04 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 519 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, cotton, sugarcane, rice, wheat,
potatoes, plantains, coca; poultry, red meats, dairy products, wool;
fish catch of 6.9 million metric tons (1990)

Exports:
total value : $6 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: copper, zinc, fishmeal, crude petroleum and byproducts,
lead, refined silver, coffee, cotton
partners: US 19%, Japan 9%, Italy, Germany (1995)

Imports:
total value : $7.5 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: machinery, transport equipment, foodstuffs, petroleum,
iron and steel, chemicals, pharmaceuticals
partners: US 21%, Colombia, Chile, Argentina, Japan, Germany, Brazil
(1995)

Debt - external: $23.4 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $363 million (1993)

Currency: 1 nuevo sol (S/.) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates: nuevo sol (S/.) per US$1 - 2.630 (January 1997), 2.453
(1996), 2.253 (1995), 2.195 (1994), 1.988 (1993), 1.246 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Peru:Communications

Telephones: 779,306 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: adequate for most requirements
domestic : nationwide microwave radio relay system and a domestic
satellite system with 12 earth stations
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 273, FM 0, shortwave 144

Radios: 5.7 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 140

Televisions: 2 million (1993 est.)

@Peru:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,041 km
standard gauge: 1,726 km 1.435-m gauge
narrow gauge: 315 km 0.914-m gauge (1994)

Highways:
total: 71,400 km
paved: 7,783 km
unpaved : 63,617 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 8,600 km of navigable tributaries of Amazon system and 208
km of Lago Titicaca

Pipelines: crude oil 800 km; natural gas and natural gas liquids 64 km

Ports and harbors: Callao, Chimbote, Ilo, Matarani, Paita, Puerto
Maldonado, Salaverry, San Martin, Talara, Iquitos, Pucallpa,
Yurimaguas
note: Iquitos, Pucallpa, and Yurimaguas are all on the upper reaches
of the Amazon and its tributaries

Merchant marine:
total : 8 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 63,767 GRT/91,395 DWT
ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 7 (1996 est.)

Airports: 212 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 128
over 3,047 m: 5
2,438 to 3,047 m : 16
1,524 to 2,437 m: 11
914 to 1,523 m: 8
under 914 m: 88 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 84
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 21
914 to 1,523 m: 59 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army (Ejercito Peruano), Navy (Marina de Guerra del
Peru; includes Naval Air, Marines, and Coast Guard), Air Force (Fuerza
Aerea del Peru), National Police

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 6,591,276 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 4,446,428 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 259,868 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $998 million (1996); note - may
not include off-budget purchases related to military modernization
program

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.9% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: three sections of the boundary with Ecuador
are in dispute

Illicit drugs: still world's largest coca leaf producer with some
94,400 hectares under cultivation in 1996, even though down 18% from
1995; source of supply for most of the world's coca paste and cocaine
base; most of cocaine base is shipped to Colombian drug dealers for
processing into cocaine for the international drug market, but exports
of finished cocaine are increasing
______________________________________________________________________

PHILIPPINES

@Philippines:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, archipelago between the Philippine Sea
and the South China Sea, east of Vietnam

Geographic coordinates: 13 00 N, 122 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 300,000 sq km
land: 298,170 sq km
water: 1,830 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Arizona

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 36,289 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
continental shelf: to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: irregular polygon extending up to 100 nm from
coastline as defined by 1898 treaty; since late 1970s has also claimed
polygonal-shaped area in South China Sea up to 285 nm in breadth

Climate: tropical marine; northeast monsoon (November to April);
southwest monsoon (May to October)

Terrain: mostly mountains with narrow to extensive coastal lowlands

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Philippine Sea 0 m
highest point : Mount Apo 2,954 m

Natural resources: timber, petroleum, nickel, cobalt, silver, gold,
salt, copper

Land use:
arable land : 19%
permanent crops: 12%
permanent pastures: 4%
forests and woodland: 46%
other: 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 15,800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: astride typhoon belt, usually affected by 15 and
struck by five to six cyclonic storms per year; landslides; active
volcanoes; destructive earthquakes; tsunamis

Environment - current issues: uncontrolled deforestation in watershed
areas; soil erosion; air and water pollution in Manila; increasing
pollution of coastal mangrove swamps which are important fish breeding
grounds

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

@Philippines:People

Population: 76,103,564 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 38% (male 14,677,291; female 14,203,376)
15-64 years: 59% (male 21,994,106; female 22,553,425)
65 years and over: 3% (male 1,198,079; female 1,477,287) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 2.13% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 28.97 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.59 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.05 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.81 male(s)/female
total population : 0.99 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 35.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 66.13 years
male: 63.35 years
female: 69.05 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.62 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Filipino(s)
adjective: Philippine

Ethnic groups: Christian Malay 91.5%, Muslim Malay 4%, Chinese 1.5%,
other 3%

Religions: Roman Catholic 83%, Protestant 9%, Muslim 5%, Buddhist and
other 3%

Languages: Pilipino (official, based on Tagalog), English (official)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 94.6%
male : 95%
female: 94.3% (1995 est.)

@Philippines:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of the Philippines
conventional short form: Philippines
local long form: Republika ng Pilipinas
local short form: Pilipinas

Data code: RP

Government type: republic

National capital: Manila

Administrative divisions: 72 provinces and 61 chartered cities*; Abra,
Agusan del Norte, Agusan del Sur, Aklan, Albay, Angeles*, Antique,
Aurora, Bacolod*, Bago*, Baguio*, Bais*, Basilan, Basilan City*,
Bataan, Batanes, Batangas, Batangas City*, Benguet, Bohol, Bukidnon,
Bulacan, Butuan*, Cabanatuan*, Cadiz*, Cagayan, Cagayan de Oro*,
Calbayog*, Caloocan*, Camarines Norte, Camarines Sur, Camiguin,
Canlaon*, Capiz, Catanduanes, Cavite, Cavite City*, Cebu, Cebu City*,
Cotabato*, Dagupan*, Danao*, Dapitan*, Davao City* Davao, Davao del
Sur, Davao Oriental, Dipolog*, Dumaguete*, Eastern Samar, General
Santos*, Gingoog*, Ifugao, Iligan*, Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Sur, Iloilo,
Iloilo City*, Iriga*, Isabela, Kalinga-Apayao, La Carlota*, Laguna,
Lanao del Norte, Lanao del Sur, Laoag*, Lapu-Lapu*, La Union,
Legaspi*, Leyte, Lipa*, Lucena*, Maguindanao, Mandaue*, Manila*,
Marawi*, Marinduque, Masbate, Mindoro Occidental, Mindoro Oriental,
Misamis Occidental, Misamis Oriental, Mountain, Naga*, Negros
Occidental, Negros Oriental, North Cotabato, Northern Samar, Nueva
Ecija, Nueva Vizcaya, Olongapo*, Ormoc*, Oroquieta*, Ozamis*,
Pagadian*, Palawan, Palayan*, Pampanga, Pangasinan, Pasay*, Puerto
Princesa*, Quezon, Quezon City*, Quirino, Rizal, Romblon, Roxas*,
Samar, San Carlos* (in Negros Occidental), San Carlos* (in
Pangasinan), San Jose*, San Pablo*, Silay*, Siquijor, Sorsogon, South
Cotabato, Southern Leyte, Sultan Kudarat, Sulu, Surigao*, Surigao del
Norte, Surigao del Sur, Tacloban*, Tagaytay*, Tagbilaran*, Tangub*,
Tarlac, Tawitawi, Toledo*, Trece Martires*, Zambales, Zamboanga*,
Zamboanga del Norte, Zamboanga del Sur

Independence: 4 July 1946 (from US)

National holiday: Independence Day, 12 June (1898) (from Spain)

Constitution: 2 February 1987, effective 11 February 1987

Legal system: based on Spanish and Anglo-American law; accepts
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Fidel Valdes RAMOS (since 30 June 1992) and
Vice President Joseph Ejercito ESTRADA (since 30 June 1992); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Fidel Valdes RAMOS (since 30 June 1992)
and Vice President Joseph Ejercito ESTRADA (since 30 June 1992); note
- the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the president with the consent of the
Commission of Appointments
elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for six-year terms; election last held 11 May 1992 (next
to be held NA May 1998)
election results: Fidel Valdes RAMOS elected president; percent of
vote - Fidel Valdes RAMOS 23.6% (a narrow plurality)

Legislative branch: bicameral Congress or Kongreso consists of the
Senate or Senado (24 seats - one-half elected every three years;
members elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms) and the House
of Representatives or Kapulungan Ng Mga Kinatawan (204 seats; members
elected by popular vote to serve three-year terms; note - an
additional 50 members may be appointed by the president)
elections : Senate - last held 8 May 1995 (next to be held NA May
1998); House of Representatives - elections last held 8 May 1995 (next
to be held NA May 1998)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - LDP 14, Lakas/NUCD 5, NPC 2, LP 1, PRP 1, independent 1; House
of Representatives - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
Lakas/NUCD 129, LDP 29, NPC (opposition) 25, LP 6, PDP 3, KBL/NPC 1,
results pending 11

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, justices are appointed for four-year
terms by the president on the recommendation of the Judicial and Bar
Council

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Filipino Struggle (Laban ng
Demokratikong Pilipino, LDP), Edgardo ANGARA; People Power-National
Union of Christian Democrats (Lakas ng EDSA-NUCD or Lakas-NUCD), Raul
MANGLAPUS, president, and Jose DE VENECIA, secretary general; Liberal
Party (LP), Raul DAZA; National People's Coalition (NPC), Eduardo
COJUANGCO; People's Reform Party (PRP), Miriam DEFENSOR-SANTIAGO; New
Society Movement (Kilusan Bagong Lipunan, KBL), Imelda MARCOS;
Nacionalista Party (NP), Salvador H. LAUREL, president; Filipino
Democratic Party (Partido Demokratikong Philipinas or PDP), Jose
COJUANGCO, is part of the ruling coalition with the LDP

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, CCC, CP,
ESCAP, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
ISO, ITU, Mekong Group, NAM, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNU,
UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Raul Chaves RABE
chancery: 1600 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 467-9300
FAX: [1] (202) 328-7614
consulate(s) general: Agana (Guam), Chicago, Honolulu, Los Angeles,
New York, San Francisco, and Seattle
consulate(s): San Jose (Saipan)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Thomas C. HUBBARD
embassy: 1201 Roxas Boulevard, Ermita Manila 1000
mailing address: APO AP 96440
telephone: [63] (2) 521-71-16
FAX: [63] (2) 522-43-61

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and red
with a white equilateral triangle based on the hoist side; in the
center of the triangle is a yellow sun with eight primary rays (each
containing three individual rays) and in each corner of the triangle
is a small yellow five-pointed star

Economy

Economy - overview: The Philippine economy, primarily a mixture of
agriculture and light industry, continued its fourth year of recovery
in 1996, led by growth in exports and investments. Officials have
targeted 7.1%-7.8% growth for 1997 after achieving an estimated 5.5%
growth in 1996. The government is continuing its economic reforms to
enable the Philippines to move closer to the development of the newly
industrialized countries of East Asia. The strategy includes improving
infrastructure, overhauling the tax system to bolster government
revenues, and moving toward further deregulation and privatization of
the economy.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $194.2 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,600 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 22%
industry: 32%
services: 46% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 8.4% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 29.13 million (1996 est.)
by occupation : agriculture 43.4%, services 22.6%, government services
17.9%, industry and commerce 16.1% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 8.6% (1996)

Budget:
revenues: $18.4 billion
expenditures : $16.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: textiles, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, wood products, food
processing, electronics assembly, petroleum refining, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: 6.3% (1996)

Electricity - capacity: 7.64 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 25.22 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 326 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, coconuts, corn, sugarcane, bananas,
pineapples, mangoes; pork, eggs, beef; fish catch of 2 million metric
tons annually

Exports:
total value : $20.5 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: electronics, textiles, coconut products,
telecommunications equipment, fruit, fish
partners: US 36%, Japan 16%, Singapore 5%, Hong Kong 5%, UK 5% (1995)

Imports:
total value : $33.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: crude petroleum, telecommunications equipment,
electronics, plastics, cars, textiles
partners: Japan 22%, US 18%, Saudi Arabia 6%, Taiwan 5%, South Korea
5% Singapore 4% (1995)

Debt - external: $42.7 billion (June 1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $934 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Philippine peso (P) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Philippine pesos (P) per US$1 - 26.36 (May 1997),
26.216 (1996), 25.714 (1995), 26.417 (1994), 27.120 (1993), 25.512
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Philippines:Communications

Telephones: 1.8 million (1996)

Telephone system: good international radiotelephone and submarine
cable services; domestic and interisland service adequate
domestic: domestic satellite system with 11 earth stations
international: submarine cables to Hong Kong, Guam, Singapore, Taiwan,
and Japan; satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 2
Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 261, FM 55, shortwave 0

Radios: 9.03 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 29

Televisions: 7.6 million (1996)

@Philippines:Transportation

Railways:
total : 499 km
narrow gauge: 499 km 1.067-m gauge (1993)

Highways:
total: 182,000 km (1994 est.)
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km
note : probably less than 30,000 km are designated arterial roads and
not all of these are all-weather roads

Waterways: 3,219 km; limited to shallow-draft (less than 1.5 m)
vessels

Pipelines: petroleum products 357 km

Ports and harbors: Batangas, Cagayan de Oro, Cebu, Davao, Guimaras
Island, Iligan, Iloilo, Jolo, Legaspi, Manila, Masao, Puerto Princesa,
San Fernando, Subic Bay, Zamboanga

Merchant marine:
total: 523 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 7,614,831 GRT/12,246,321
DWT
ships by type : bulk 223, cargo 124, chemical tanker 3, combination
bulk 9, container 8, liquefied gas tanker 9, livestock carrier 11, oil
tanker 45, passenger 3, passenger-cargo 13, refrigerated cargo 18,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 14, short-sea passenger 23, vehicle carrier 20
note: a flag of convenience registry; Japan owns 24 ships, Hong Kong
4, UK 2, Denmark 1, Netherlands 1, Norway 1, Singapore 1, and Taiwan 1
(1996 est.)

Airports: 234 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 168
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m : 7
1,524 to 2,437 m: 26
914 to 1,523 m: 30
under 914 m: 103 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 66
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 63 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Coast Guard and Marine Corps),
Air Force

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 19,231,427 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 13,574,133 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 782,064 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.3 billion (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 0.7% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: involved in a complex dispute over the
Spratly Islands with China, Malaysia, Taiwan, Vietnam, and possibly
Brunei; claims Malaysian state of Sabah

Illicit drugs: exports locally-produced marijuana and hashish to East
Asia, the US, and other Western markets; serves as a transit point for
heroin and crystal methamphetamines
______________________________________________________________________

PITCAIRN ISLANDS

(dependent territory of the UK)

@Pitcairn Islands:Geography

Location: Oceania, islands in the South Pacific Ocean, about one-half
of the way from Peru to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 25 04 S, 130 06 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 47 sq km
land: 47 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 51 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone : 200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical, hot, humid, modified by southeast trade winds;
rainy season (November to March)

Terrain: rugged volcanic formation; rocky coastline with cliffs

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Pawala Valley Ridge 347 m

Natural resources: miro trees (used for handicrafts), fish

Land use:
arable land : NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons (especially November to March)

Environment - current issues: deforestation (only a small portion of
the original forest remains because of burning and clearing for
settlement)

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

@Pitcairn Islands:People

Population: 54 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years : NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: -0.6% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: NA years
male: NA years
female: NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
noun: Pitcairn Islander(s)
adjective: Pitcairn Islander

Ethnic groups: descendants of the Bounty mutineers and their Tahitian
wives

Religions: Seventh-Day Adventist 100%

Languages: English (official), Tahitian/English dialect

@Pitcairn Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Pitcairn, Henderson, Ducie, and Oeno Islands
conventional short form: Pitcairn Islands

Data code: PC

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK

Government type: NA

National capital: Adamstown

Administrative divisions: none (dependent territory of the UK)

Independence: none (dependent territory of the UK)

National holiday: Celebration of the Birthday of the Queen (second
Saturday in June)

Constitution: Local Government Ordinance of 1964

Legal system: local island by-laws

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal with three years residency

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by UK High Commissioner to New Zealand and Governor
(non-resident) of the Pitcairn Islands Robert John ALSTON (since NA
August 1994); Commissioner (non-resident) G. D. HARRAWAY (since NA; is
the liaison person between the governor and the Island Council)
head of government: Island Magistrate and Chairman of the Island
Council Jay WARREN (since NA)
cabinet: NA
elections : the queen is a hereditary monarch; island magistrate
elected by popular vote for a three-year term; last known election
held NA December 1993 (next to be held NA December 1996)
election results: Jay WARREN re-elected island magistrate; percent of
vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Island Council (10 seats, 6 popularly
elected, 1 appointed by the 6 elected members, 2 appointed by the
governor, and the Island Secretary; members serve one-year terms)
elections: take place each December; last held NA December 1996 (next
to be held NA December 1997)
election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - all independents

Judicial branch: Island Court, island magistrate presides over the
court and is elected every three years

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: SPC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (dependent territory of
the UK)

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
quadrant and the Pitcairn Islander coat of arms centered on the outer
half of the flag; the coat of arms is yellow, green, and light blue
with a shield featuring a yellow anchor

Economy

Economy - overview: The inhabitants exist on fishing and subsistence
farming. The fertile soil of the valleys produces a wide variety of
fruits and vegetables, including citrus, sugarcane, watermelons,
bananas, yams, and beans. Bartering is an important part of the
economy. The major sources of revenue are the sale of postage stamps
to collectors and the sale of handicrafts to passing ships.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 14 able-bodied men (1993)
by occupation: no business community in the usual sense; some public
works; subsistence farming and fishing

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $729,884
expenditures: $878,119, including capital expenditures of $NA (1994/95
est.)

Industries: postage stamps, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: wide variety of fruits and vegetables

Exports: $NA
commodities: fruits, vegetables, curios
partners: NA

Imports: $NA
commodities: fuel oil, machinery, building materials, flour, sugar,
other foodstuffs
partners: NA

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA bilateral commitments (1992-93), $84,000

Currency: 1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1 - 1.4247 (January
1997),1.4543 (1996), 1.5235 (1995), 1.6844 (1994), 1.8495 (1993),
1.8584 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Pitcairn Islands:Communications

Telephones: 24

Telephone system: party line telephone service on the island
domestic: NA
international: radiotelephone

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: NA

@Pitcairn Islands:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 6.4 km
paved : 0 km
unpaved: 6.4 km

Ports and harbors: Bounty Bay

Merchant marine: none

Airports: none

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

POLAND

@Poland:Geography

Location: Central Europe, east of Germany

Geographic coordinates: 52 00 N, 20 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 312,683 sq km
land: 304,510 sq km
water: 8,173 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than New Mexico

Land boundaries:
total: 2,888 km
border countries: Belarus 605 km, Czech Republic 658 km, Germany 456
km, Lithuania 91 km, Russia (Kaliningrad Oblast) 206 km, Slovakia 444
km, Ukraine 428 km

Coastline: 491 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone : defined by international treaties
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate with cold, cloudy, moderately severe winters with
frequent precipitation; mild summers with frequent showers and
thundershowers

Terrain: mostly flat plain; mountains along southern border

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Raczki Elblaskie -2 m
highest point: Rysy 2,499 m

Natural resources: coal, sulfur, copper, natural gas, silver, lead,
salt

Land use:
arable land: 47%
permanent crops : 1%
permanent pastures: 13%
forests and woodland: 29%
other: 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: situation has improved since 1989 due to
decline in heavy industry and increased environmental concern by
postcommunist governments; air pollution nonetheless remains serious
because of sulfur dioxide emissions from coal-fired power plants, and
the resulting acid rain has caused forest damage; water pollution from
industrial and municipal sources is also a problem, as is disposal of
hazardous wastes

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic
Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 94, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: historically, an area of conflict because of flat
terrain and the lack of natural barriers on the North European Plain

@Poland:People

Population: 38,615,239 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 21% (male 4,235,659; female 4,038,016)
15-64 years : 67% (male 12,842,909; female 13,020,736)
65 years and over: 12% (male 1,698,505; female 2,779,414) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 10.18 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.82 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.4 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.61 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 13.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 72.47 years
male : 68.27 years
female: 76.91 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.43 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Pole(s)
adjective: Polish

Ethnic groups: Polish 97.6%, German 1.3%, Ukrainian 0.6%, Byelorussian
0.5% (1990 est.)

Religions: Roman Catholic 95% (about 75% practicing), Eastern
Orthodox, Protestant, and other 5%

Languages: Polish

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99%
male: 99%
female: 98% (1978 est.)

@Poland:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Poland
conventional short form: Poland
local long form: Rzeczpospolita Polska
local short form: Polska

Data code: PL

Government type: democratic state

National capital: Warsaw

Administrative divisions: 49 provinces (wojewodztwa, singular -
wojewodztwo); Biala Podlaska, Bialystok, Bielsko Biala, Bydgoszcz,
Chelm, Ciechanow, Czestochowa, Elblag, Gdansk, Gorzow, Jelenia Gora,
Kalisz, Katowice, Kielce, Konin, Koszalin, Krakow, Krosno, Legnica,
Leszno, Lodz, Lomza, Lublin, Nowy Sacz, Olsztyn, Opole, Ostroleka,
Pila, Piotrkow, Plock, Poznan, Przemysl, Radom, Rzeszow, Siedlce,
Sieradz, Skierniewice, Slupsk, Suwalki, Szczecin, Tarnobrzeg, Tarnow,
Torun, Walbrzych, Warszawa, Wloclawek, Wroclaw, Zamosc, Zielona Gora

Independence: 11 November 1918 (independent republic proclaimed)

National holiday: Constitution Day, 3 May (1791)

Constitution: interim "small constitution" came into effect in
December 1992 supplementing the heavily amended constitution of 22
July 1952; referendum for a new constitution to be held 25 May 1997

Legal system: mixture of Continental (Napoleonic) civil law and
holdover communist legal theory; changes being gradually introduced as
part of broader democratization process; limited judicial review of
legislative acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Aleksander KWASNIEWSKI (since 23 December
1995)
head of government: Prime Minister Wlodimierz CIMOSZEWICZ (since 7
February 1996), Deputy Prime Ministers Roman JAGIELINSKI (since 7
March 1995), Marek BELKA (since NA February 1997), and Miroslaw
PIETRIEWICZ (since 7 February 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers responsible to the prime minister and
the Sejm; the prime minister appoints and the Sejm approves the
Council of Ministers
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election first round held 5 November 1995, second round held 19
November 1995 (next to be held NA November 2000); prime minister and
deputy prime ministers elected by the Sejm; election last held NA 1996
(next to be held September 1997)
election results: Aleksander KWASNIEWSKI elected president; percent of
legislative vote, second round - Aleksander KWASNIEWSKI 51.7%, Lech
WALESA 48.3%; Wlodimierz CIMOSZEWICZ selected prime minister

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly or Zgromadzenie
Narodowe consists of the Senate or Senat (100 seats; members are
elected by a majority vote on a provincial basis to serve four-year
terms) and the Sejm (460 seats; members are elected under a complex
system of proportional representation to serve four-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 19 September 1993 (next to be held 14
September 1997); Sejm elections last held 19 September 1993 (next to
be held 14 September 1997)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - post-communist parties (PSL 34, SLD 37), post-Solidarity
parties (UW 6, NSZZ 12, BBWR 2), non-communist, non-Solidarity
(independents 7, unaffiliated 1, vacant 1); Sejm - percent of vote by
party - NA; seats by party - post-communist parties (SLD 171, PSL
132), post-Solidarity parties (UW 74, UP 41, BBWR 16), non-communist,
non-Solidarity (KPN 22)
note: four seats are constitutionally assigned to ethnic German
parties

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the president
on the recommendation of the National Council of Judiciary

Political parties and leaders:
post-Communist: Democratic Left Alliance or SLD (Social Democracy of
Poland) [Jozef OLEKSY]; Polish Peasant Party or PSL [Waldemar PAWLAK]
post-Solidarity parties: Freedom Union or UW (Democratic Union and
Liberal Democratic Congress merged to form Freedom Union) [Leszek
BALCEROWICZ]; Christian-National Union or ZCHN [Marian PILKA]; Center
Alliance Party or PC [Jaroslaw KACZYNSKI]; Peasant Alliance or PL
[Gabriel JANOWSKI]; Solidarity Electoral Action or AWS [Marian
KRZAKLEWSKI]; Union of Labor or UP [Ryszard BUGAJ]; Conservative Party
or PK [Aleksander HALL]; Nonparty Reform Bloc or BBWR [Jacek
LIPINSKI]; Nonparty Reform Block United for Elections or BBWR-SW
[Jerzy GWIZDZ]
non-Communist, non-Solidarity : Movement for the Reconstruction of
Poland or ROP [Jan OLSZEWSKI]; Confederation for an Independent Poland
or KPN [Leszek MOCZULSKI]; German Minority or MN [Gerhardt
BARTODZIEJ]; Union of Real Politics or UPR [Janusz KORWIN-MIKKE]

Political pressure groups and leaders: powerful Roman Catholic Church;
Solidarity (trade union); All Poland Trade Union Alliance or OPZZ
(trade union)

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS, BSEC
(observer), CBSS, CCC, CE, CEI, CERN, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO,
IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, NACC, NAM
(guest), NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UN Security
Council (temporary), UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNDOF, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIFIL,
UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNMOT, UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UPU, WCL, WEU
(associate partner), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Jerzy KOZMINSKI
chancery: 2640 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 234-3800 through 3802
FAX: [1] (202) 328-6271
consulate(s) general : Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Nicholas Andrew REY
embassy: Aleje Ujazdowskie 29/31, Warsaw
mailing address: American Embassy Warsaw, US Department of State,
Washington, DC 20521-5010
telephone: [48] (2) 628-30-41
FAX: [48] (2) 628-82-98
consulate(s) general: Krakow

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red;
similar to the flags of Indonesia and Monaco which are red (top) and
white

Economy

Economy - overview: In 1996, Poland continued to make good progress in
the difficult transition to a market economy. The transition began on
1 January 1990, when the new democratic government instituted shock
therapy by decontrolling prices, slashing subsidies, and drastically
reducing import barriers. Although real GDP fell sharply in 1990 and
1991, in 1992 Poland became the first country in the region to resume
economic growth with a 2.6% increase. Growth advanced to 3.8% in 1993,
5.2% in 1994, 6.5% in 1995, and 6.0% in 1996. Most of the growth since
1991 has come from the booming private sector, which now accounts for
more than 60% of GDP, attributable mostly to the creation of new
private firms. Large-scale industry still remains largely in state
hands. The trade and current account balances officially are in
deficit but in fact both have comfortable surpluses because of large,
unrecorded sales to cross-border visitors. The government has promised
to extend privatization and social welfare reform and to maintain
fiscal and monetary discipline. As for external debt, the burden was
sharply reduced by reschedulings and write-offs of both private and
official debt during 1991-95.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $246.3 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 6%
industry: 40%
services: 54% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 18.8% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 17.662 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: industry and construction 32.0%, agriculture 27.6%,
trade, transport, and communications 14.7%, government and other 25.7%
(1992)

Unemployment rate: 13.3% (yearend 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $37.1 billion
expenditures: $40.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: machine building, iron and steel, coal mining, chemicals,
shipbuilding, food processing, glass, beverages, textiles

Industrial production growth rate: 8.5% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 29.64 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 127.42 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,124 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: potatoes, milk, fruits, vegetables, wheat;
poultry and eggs; pork, beef

Exports:
total value: $30.9 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: intermediate goods 38%, machinery and transport equipment
23%, consumer goods 21%, foodstuffs 10%, fuels 7% (1996 est.)
partners : Germany 35.7%, Netherlands 5.9%, Russia 5.4%, Italy 4.9%
(1994)

Imports:
total value: $34.6 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment 32%, intermediate goods
20%, chemicals 15%, consumer goods 9%, food 9%, fuels 8% (1996 est.)
partners: Germany 27.5%, Italy 8.4%, Russia 6.8%, UK 5.3% (1994)

Debt - external: $45.8 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: Western governments and institutions pledged $22 billion in
grants and loans during 1990-94, but much of the money has not been
disbursed

Currency: 1 zloty (Zl) = 100 groszy

Exchange rates: zlotych (Zl) per US$1 - 2.8158 (January 1997), 2.4250
(1995); note - a currency reform on 1 January 1995 replaced 10,000 old
zlotys with 1 new zloty; 22,723 (1994), 18,115 (1993), 13,626 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Poland:Communications

Telephones: 5 million (1994)

Telephone system: underdeveloped and outmoded system; government aims
to have 10 million phones in service by the year 2000
domestic: cable, open wire, and microwave radio relay
international: satellite earth stations - NA Intelsat, NA Eutelsat, 1
Inmarsat (Atlantic and Indian Ocean Regions), and 1 Intersputnik
(Atlantic Ocean Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 27, FM 27, shortwave 0

Radios: 10.9 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 40 (Russian repeaters 5)

Televisions: 9.6 million

@Poland:Transportation

Railways:
total: 24,313 km
broad gauge : 652 km 1.520-m gauge
standard gauge: 22,243 km 1.435-m gauge (11,648 km electrified; 8,978
km double track)
narrow gauge: 1,418 km various gauges including 1.000-m, 0.785-m,
0.750-m, and 0.600-m (1995)

Highways:
total: 372,479 km
paved : 243,229 km (including 257 km of expressways)
unpaved: 129,250 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 3,997 km navigable rivers and canals (1991)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,986 km; petroleum products 360 km; natural gas
4,600 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Gdansk, Gdynia, Gliwice, Kolobrzeg, Szczecin,
Swinoujscie, Ustka, Warsaw, Wrocaw

Merchant marine:
total: 125 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,952,937 GRT/2,933,887
DWT
ships by type: bulk 72, cargo 30, chemical tanker 4, container 7,
passenger 1, refrigerated cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 4, short-sea
passenger 5
note: Poland owns an additional 16 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
233,906 DWT operating under the registries of The Bahamas, Cyprus,
Liberia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Vanuatu (1996 est.)

Airports: 134 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 69
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 30
1,524 to 2,437 m: 27
914 to 1,523 m : 3
under 914 m: 7 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 65
2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
914 to 1,523 m : 32
under 914 m: 18 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Force

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 10,321,399 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 8,030,056 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 327,862 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $3.46 billion (1997)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.3% (1997)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: major illicit producer of amphetamines for the
international market; transshipment point for Asian and Latin American
illicit drugs to Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

PORTUGAL

@Portugal:Geography

Location: Southwestern Europe, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
west of Spain

Geographic coordinates: 39 30 N, 8 00 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 92,391 sq km
land: 91,951 sq km
water: 440 sq km
note: includes Azores and Madeira Islands

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Indiana

Land boundaries:
total: 1,214 km
border countries: Spain 1,214 km

Coastline: 1,793 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: maritime temperate; cool and rainy in north, warmer and drier
in south

Terrain: mountainous north of the Tagus, rolling plains in south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Ponta do Pico in Azores 2,351 m

Natural resources: fish, forests (cork), tungsten, iron ore, uranium
ore, marble

Land use:
arable land : 26%
permanent crops: 9%
permanent pastures: 9%
forests and woodland: 36%
other : 20% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 6,300 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: Azores subject to severe earthquakes

Environment - current issues: soil erosion; air pollution caused by
industrial and vehicle emissions; water pollution, especially in
coastal areas

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping,
Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Tropical
Timber 94

Geography - note: Azores and Madeira Islands occupy strategic
locations along western sea approaches to Strait of Gibraltar

@Portugal:People

Population: 9,931,045 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 17% (male 895,294; female 848,133)
15-64 years: 68% (male 3,280,015; female 3,429,007)
65 years and over: 15% (male 605,074; female 873,522) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.01% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 10.75 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.3 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.5 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.69 male(s)/female
total population: 0.93 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 75.42 years
male: 72.02 years
female: 79.04 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.36 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Portuguese (singular and plural)
adjective: Portuguese

Ethnic groups: homogeneous Mediterranean stock in mainland, Azores,
Madeira Islands; citizens of black African descent who immigrated to
mainland during decolonization number less than 100,000

Religions: Roman Catholic 97%, Protestant denominations 1%, other 2%

Languages: Portuguese

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 85%
male: 89%
female: 82% (1990 est.)

@Portugal:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Portuguese Republic
conventional short form: Portugal
local long form: Republica Portuguesa
local short form: Portugal

Data code: PO

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Lisbon

Administrative divisions: 18 districts (distritos, singular -
distrito) and 2 autonomous regions* (regioes autonomas, singular -
regiao autonoma); Aveiro, Acores (Azores)*, Beja, Braga, Braganca,
Castelo Branco, Coimbra, Evora, Faro, Guarda, Leiria, Lisboa,
Madeira*, Portalegre, Porto, Santarem, Setubal, Viana do Castelo, Vila
Real, Viseu

Dependent areas: Macau (scheduled to become a Special Administrative
Region of China on 20 December 1999)

Independence: 1140 (independent republic proclaimed 5 October 1910)

National holiday: Day of Portugal, 10 June (1580)

Constitution: 25 April 1976, revised 30 October 1982, 1 June 1989, and
5 November 1992

Legal system: civil law system; the Constitutional Tribunal reviews
the constitutionality of legislation; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Jorge SAMPAIO (since 9 March 1996)
head of government: Prime Minister Antonio Manuel de Oliviera GUTERRES
(since 28 October 1995)
cabinet : Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
recommendation of the prime minister
note: there is also a Council of State that acts as a consultative
body to the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 14 January 1996 (next to be held NA January 2001);
following assembly elections, the leader of the majority party or
leader of a majority coalition is usually appointed prime minister by
the president
election results: Jorge SAMPAIO elected president; percent of vote -
Jorge SAMPAIO (Socialist) 53.8%, Anibal CAVACO SILVA (Conservative)
46.2%

Legislative branch: unicameral Assembly of the Republic or Assembleia
da Republica (230 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
four-year terms)
elections : last held 1 October 1995 (next to be held by NA October
1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - PSD 34.0%, PS 43.8%, CDU
8.6%, CDS/PP 9.1%; seats by party - PSD 88, PS 112, CDU 15, CDS/PP 15

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Supremo Tribunal de Justica, judges
appointed for life by the Conselho Superior da Magistratura

Political parties and leaders: Social Democratic Party or PSD [Marcelo
Rebelo DE SOUSA]; Portuguese Socialist Party or PS [Antonio GUTERRES];
Portuguese Communist Party or PCP [Carlos CARVALHAS]; Popular Party or
PP [Manuel MONTEIRO], may have joined the CDS for the election;
National Solidarity Party or PSN [Manuel SERGIO]; Center Democratic
Party or CDS; United Democratic Coalition or CDU (communists)

International organization participation: AfDB, Australia Group, BIS,
CCC, CE, CERN, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, EIB, EU, FAO, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer),
MINURSO, MTCR, NACC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer),
OECD, OSCE, PCA, UN, UN Security Council (temporary), UNAVEM III,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UPU, WCL, WEU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Fernando Antonio de Lacerda ANDRESEN
GUIMARAES
chancery: 2125 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone : [1] (202) 328-8610
FAX: [1] (202) 462-3726
consulate(s) general: Boston, New York, Newark (New Jersey), and San
Francisco
consulate(s): Los Angeles, New Bedford (Massachusetts), Providence
(Rhode Island), Washington, DC

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Elizabeth Frawley BAGLEY
embassy: Avenida das Forcas Armadas, 1600 Lisbon
mailing address : PSC 83, APO AE 09726
telephone: [351] (1) 7266600, 7266659, 7268670, 7268880
FAX: [351] (1) 7269109
consulate(s): Ponta Delgada (Azores)

Flag description: two vertical bands of green (hoist side, two-fifths)
and red (three-fifths) with the Portuguese coat of arms centered on
the dividing line

Economy

Economy - overview: Portugal's short-term economic fundamentals remain
strong: the economy has grown by more than 2% during the past two
years, with similar growth expected in 1997. The Socialist
government's primary economic goal is to place Portugal in the first
group of countries adopting the single European currency, and it has
instituted a disciplined 1997 budget to bolster Lisbon's chances.
Portuguese government forecasts suggest that it is likely to meet
partially the Maastricht monetary convergence criteria by lowering its
budget deficit from 4% of GDP in 1996 to 2.9% in 1997, although the
government predicts that government debt will be cut only to 68% of
GDP, overshooting Maastricht's 60% target. Social programs - a
priority for the Socialists - will still grow slightly faster than GDP
in 1997, mandating strict budget discipline in other areas. As for the
long run, Portugal is increasing its infrastructure spending - much of
it in anticipation of hosting the world's International Exposition in
1998 - while working to modernize its capital plant and increase
competitiveness in hopes of increasing Portugal's GDP, which remains
below 65% of the EU's average GDP per capita.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $122.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $12,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 6%
industry: 36%
services: 58% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3.4% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 4.53 million (1996 est.)
by occupation : services 54.5%, manufacturing 24.4%, agriculture,
forestry, fisheries 11.2%, construction 8.3%, utilities 1.0%, mining
0.5% (1992)

Unemployment rate: 7% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $48 billion
expenditures: $52 billion, including capital expenditures of $7.4
billion (1996 est.)

Industries: textiles and footwear; wood pulp, paper, and cork;
metalworking; oil refining; chemicals; fish canning; wine; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 2.2% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 8.83 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 33.1 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,863 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grain, potatoes, olives, grapes; sheep,
cattle, goats, poultry, meat, dairy products

Exports:
total value: $25.8 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: clothing and footwear, machinery, cork and paper
products, hides
partners : EU 80%, other developed countries 9% (US 4.5%)

Imports:
total value: $34.2 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment, agricultural products,
chemicals, petroleum, textiles
partners: EU 72%, other developed countries 8% (US 3%), less developed
countries 17%

Debt - external: $13.6 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $248 million (1993)
recipient : ODA, $70 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Portuguese escudo (Esc) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Portuguese escudos (Esc) per US$1 - 160.35 (January
1997), 154.24 (1996), 151.11 (1995), 165.99 (1994), 160.80 (1993),
135.00 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Portugal:Communications

Telephones: 3,444,300 (1994 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: generally adequate integrated network of coaxial cables,
open wire, microwave radio relay, and domestic satellite earth
stations
international: 6 submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 3
Intelsat (2 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), NA Eutelsat;
tropospheric scatter to Azores; note - an earth station for Inmarsat
(Atlantic Ocean Region) is planned

Radio broadcast stations: AM 57, FM 66 (repeaters 22), shortwave 0

Radios: 2.2 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 66 (repeaters 23)

Televisions: 2,970,892 (1993 est.)

@Portugal:Transportation

Railways:
total: 3,068 km
broad gauge: 2,761 km 1.668-m gauge (464 km electrified; 426 km double
track)
narrow gauge: 307 km 1.000-m gauge
note : in 1994, Portugal had 3,520 km of track of which 464 km were
electrified

Highways:
total: 68,732 km
paved: 59,110 km (including 587 km of expressways)
unpaved: 9,622 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 820 km navigable; relatively unimportant to national
economy, used by shallow-draft craft limited to 300 metric-ton cargo
capacity

Pipelines: crude oil 22 km; petroleum products 58 km
note: there is a 700 km natural gas pipeline which connects with one
in Spain carrying Algerian natural gas which is to open in 1997; the
secondary lines that will be 300 km long have not yet been built

Ports and harbors: Aveiro, Funchal (Madeira Islands), Horta (Azores),
Leixoes, Lisbon, Porto, Ponta Delgada (Azores), Praia da Vitoria
(Azores), Setubal, Viana do Castelo

Merchant marine:
total: 84 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 556,069 GRT/906,790 DWT
ships by type: bulk 9, cargo 47, chemical tanker 6, container 5,
liquefied gas tanker 4, oil tanker 7, passenger-cargo 1, refrigerated
cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2, short-sea passenger 2
note: Portugal has created a captive register on Madeira for
Portuguese-owned ships; ships on the Madeira Register (MAR) will have
taxation and crewing benefits of a flag of convenience; Portugal owns
an additional 10 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 322,887 DWT
operating under the registries of Cyprus, Liberia, and Panama (1996
est.)

Airports: 67 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 66
over 3,047 m: 5
2,438 to 3,047 m: 8
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 18
under 914 m: 32 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Marines), Air Force, National
Republican Guard, Fiscal Guard, Public Security Police

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,543,502 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 2,049,806 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 80,494 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $2.07 billion (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.9% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: sovereignty over Timor Timur (East Timor
province) disputed with Indonesia and not recognized by the UN

Illicit drugs: important gateway country for Latin American cocaine
entering the European market; transshipment point for hashish from
North Africa to Europe; consumer of Southwest Asian heroin
______________________________________________________________________

PUERTO RICO

(commonwealth associated with the US)

@Puerto Rico:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island between the Caribbean Sea and the North
Atlantic Ocean, east of the Dominican Republic

Geographic coordinates: 18 15 N, 66 30 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 9,104 sq km
land: 8,959 sq km
water: 145 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Rhode
Island

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 501 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine, mild, little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: mostly mountains with coastal plain belt in north; mountains
precipitous to sea on west coast; sandy beaches along most coastal
areas

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Cerro de Punta 1,338 m

Natural resources: some copper and nickel, potential for onshore and
offshore oil

Land use:
arable land: 4%
permanent crops : 5%
permanent pastures: 26%
forests and woodland: 16%
other: 49% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 390 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: the recent drought has caused water
levels in reservoirs to drop and prompted water rationing for more
than one-half of the population

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: important location along the Mona Passage - a key
shipping lane to the Panama Canal; San Juan is one of the biggest and
best natural harbors in the Caribbean; many small rivers and high
central mountains ensure land is well watered; south coast relatively
dry; fertile coastal plain belt in north

@Puerto Rico:People

Population: 3,828,506 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 25% (male 485,782; female 463,226)
15-64 years: 65% (male 1,192,306; female 1,298,256)
65 years and over : 10% (male 170,170; female 218,766) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.93% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 17.21 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.87 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.78 male(s)/female
total population: 0.93 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 11.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 74.49 years
male : 70.04 years
female: 79.22 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.08 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Puerto Rican(s) (US citizens)
adjective: Puerto Rican

Ethnic groups: Hispanic

Religions: Roman Catholic 85%, Protestant denominations and other 15%

Languages: Spanish, English

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 89%
male: 90%
female: 88% (1980 est.)

@Puerto Rico:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
conventional short form: Puerto Rico

Data code: RQ

Dependency status: commonwealth associated with the US

Government type: commonwealth

National capital: San Juan

Administrative divisions: none (commonwealth associated with the US);
there are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
Government, but there are 78 municipalities

Independence: none (commonwealth associated with the US)

National holiday: US Independence Day, 4 July (1776)

Constitution: ratified 3 March 1952; approved by US Congress 3 July
1952; effective 25 July 1952

Legal system: based on Spanish civil code

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal; indigenous inhabitants are US
citizens but do not vote in US presidential elections

Executive branch:
chief of state: President of the US William Jefferson CLINTON (since
20 January 1993); Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January
1993)
head of government : Governor Pedro ROSSELLO (since 2 January 1993)
cabinet: NA
elections : governor of Puerto Rico elected by popular vote for a
four-year term; election last held 5 November 1996 (next to be held NA
November 2000)
election results: Pedro ROSSELLO reelected governor of Puerto Rico;
percent of vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Legislative Assembly consists of the
Senate (28 seats; members are directly elected by popular vote to
serve four-year terms) and the House of Representatives (54 seats;
members are directly elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : Senate - last held 5 November 1996 (next to be held 7
November 2000); House of Representatives - last held 5 November 1996
(next to be held 7 November 2000)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - PNP 19, PPD 8, PIP 1; House of Representatives - percent of
vote by party - NA; seats by party - PNP 37, PPD 16, PIP 1
note: Puerto Rico elects one representative to the US House of
Representatives; elections last held 5 November 1996 (next to be held
7 November 2000); results - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - PNP 1 (Carlos Romero BARCELO)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, justices appointed by the governor
with the consent of the Senate; Superior Courts, justices appointed by
the governor with the consent of the Senate; Municipal Courts,
justices appointed by the governor with the consent of the Senate

Political parties and leaders: National Republican Party of Puerto
Rico, Luis FERRE; Popular Democratic Party (PPD), Hector ACEVEDO; New
Progressive Party (PNP), Pedro ROSSELLO; Puerto Rican Independence
Party (PIP), Ruben BERRIOS Martinez; Puerto Rican Communist Party
(PCP), leader(s) unknown

Political pressure groups and leaders: Armed Forces for National
Liberation (FALN); Volunteers of the Puerto Rican Revolution; Boricua
Popular Army (also known as the Macheteros); Armed Forces of Popular
Resistance

International organization participation: Caricom (observer), ECLAC
(associate), FAO (associate), ICFTU, Interpol (subbureau), IOC, WCL,
WFTU, WHO (associate), WToO (associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (commonwealth associated
with the US)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (commonwealth associated
with the US)

Flag description: five equal horizontal bands of red (top and bottom)
alternating with white; a blue isosceles triangle based on the hoist
side bears a large white five-pointed star in the center; design based
on the US flag

Economy

Economy - overview: Puerto Rico has one of the most dynamic economies
in the Caribbean region. A diverse industrial sector has surpassed
agriculture as the primary locus of economic activity and income.
Encouraged by duty-free access to the US and by tax incentives, US
firms have invested heavily in Puerto Rico since the 1950s. US minimum
wage laws apply. Sugar production has lost out to dairy production and
other livestock products as the main source of income in the
agricultural sector. Tourism has traditionally been an important
source of income for the island, with estimated arrivals of nearly 3.9
million tourists in 1993.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $31.6 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $8,200 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5.1% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1.3 million (1996)
by occupation: government 22%, manufacturing 17%, trade 20%,
construction 6%, communications and transportation 5%, other 30%
(1993)

Unemployment rate: 14% (FY95/96 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $5.1 billion
expenditures: $5.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY94/95)

Industries: pharmaceuticals, electronics, apparel, food products;
tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 5% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 4.47 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 16.82 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 4,231 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: livestock products, chickens; sugarcane,
coffee, pineapples, plantains, bananas

Exports:
total value : $22.9 billion (f.o.b. 1996)
commodities: pharmaceuticals, electronics, apparel, canned tuna, rum,
beverage concentrates, medical equipment
partners: US 88% (1995 est.)

Imports:
total value: $19.1 billion (c.i.f. 1996)
commodities: chemicals, clothing, food, fish, petroleum products
partners : US 62% (1995 est.)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid: none

Currency: 1 US dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Puerto Rico:Communications

Telephones: 1,166,231 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: modern system, integrated with that of the US by
high-capacity submarine cable and Intelsat with high-speed data
capability
domestic: digital telephone system with about 1 million lines (1990
est.); cellular telephone service
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat; submarine cable
to US

Radio broadcast stations: AM 50, FM 63, shortwave 0

Radios: 2.565 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 9
note: cable television available with US programs (1990 est.)

Televisions: 952,000 (1992 est.)

@Puerto Rico:Transportation

Railways:
total: 96 km
narrow gauge: 96 km 1.000-m gauge, rural, narrow-gauge system for
hauling sugarcane; no passenger service

Highways:
total: 14,100 km
paved : 14,100 km
unpaved: 0 km (1995 est.

Ports and harbors: Guanica, Guayanilla, Guayama, Playa de Ponce, San
Juan

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 22 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 20
over 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 7
under 914 m : 7 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: paramilitary National Guard, Police Force

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

QATAR

@Qatar:Geography

Location: Middle East, peninsula bordering the Persian Gulf and Saudi
Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 25 30 N, 51 15 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 11,437 sq km
land: 11,437 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Connecticut

Land boundaries:
total: 60 km
border countries: Saudi Arabia 60 km

Coastline: 563 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: desert; hot, dry; humid and sultry in summer

Terrain: mostly flat and barren desert covered with loose sand and
gravel

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
highest point: Qurayn Aba al Bawl 103 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, fish

Land use:
arable land: 1%
permanent crops : NA%
permanent pastures: 5%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: 94% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 80 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: haze, dust storms, sandstorms common

Environment - current issues: limited natural fresh water resources
are increasing dependence on large-scale desalination facilities

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer
Protection
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography - note: strategic location in central Persian Gulf near
major petroleum deposits

@Qatar:People

Population: 670,274 (July 1997 est.)
note : includes 516,508 non-nationals (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 28% (male 95,145; female 91,338)
15-64 years : 70% (male 339,892; female 131,429)
65 years and over: 2% (male 8,567; female 3,903) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 4.04% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 17.26 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 3.5 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 26.64 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 2.59 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 2.2 male(s)/female
total population: 1.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 18.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 73.56 years
male: 71.06 years
female: 76.18 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.57 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Qatari(s)
adjective: Qatari

Ethnic groups: Arab 40%, Pakistani 18%, Indian 18%, Iranian 10%, other
14%

Religions: Muslim 95%

Languages: Arabic (official), English commonly used as a second
language

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 79.4%
male : 79.2%
female: 79.9% (1995 est.)

@Qatar:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: State of Qatar
conventional short form : Qatar
local long form: Dawlat Qatar
local short form: Qatar
note: closest approximation of the native pronunciation falls between
cutter and gutter, but not like ka-tar (rhymes with guitar)

Data code: QA

Government type: traditional monarchy

National capital: Doha

Administrative divisions: 9 municipalities (baladiyat, singular -
baladiyah); Ad Dawhah, Al Ghuwayriyah, Al Jumayliyah, Al Khawr, Al
Wakrah, Ar Rayyan, Jarayan al Batnah, Ash Shamal, Umm Salal

Independence: 3 September 1971 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 3 September (1971)

Constitution: provisional constitution enacted 19 April 1972

Legal system: discretionary system of law controlled by the amir,
although civil codes are being implemented; Islamic law is significant
in personal matters

Suffrage: none

Executive branch:
chief of state: Amir HAMAD bin Khalifa Al Thani (since 27 June 1995
when, as crown prince, he ousted his father, Amir KHALIFA bin Hamad Al
Thani, in a bloodless coup); Crown Prince JASSIM bin Hamad bin Khalifa
Al Thani, third son of the amir (selected crown prince by the amir 22
October 1996); note - Amir HAMAD also holds the positions of minister
of defense and commander-in-chief of the armed forces
head of government: Prime Minister ABDALLAH bin Khalifa Al Thani,
brother of the amir (since 30 October 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the amir
elections: none; the amir is an absolute monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral Advisory Council or Majlis al-Shura (35
seats; members appointed by the amir)
note: the constitution calls for elections for part of this
consultative body, but no elections have been held since 1970, when
there were partial elections to the body; Council members have had
their terms extended every four years since

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF, CCC,
ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDB, IFAD, IFRCS, IHO
(pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador-designate Saad Muhammad al-KUBAYSI
chancery: Suite 200, 4200 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016
telephone: [1] (202) 274-1600

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Patrick N. THEROS
embassy: 149 Ahmed Bin Ali St., Fariq Bin Omran (opposite the
television station), Doha
mailing address: P. O. Box 2399, Doha; pouch address - AMEMB Doha,
Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-6130
telephone: [974] 864701 through 864703
FAX: [974] 861669

Flag description: maroon with a broad white serrated band (nine white
points) on the hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: Oil is the backbone of the economy and accounts
for more than 30% of GDP, roughly 80% of export earnings, and 66% of
government revenues. Proved oil reserves of 3.7 billion barrels should
ensure continued output at current levels for about 23 years. Oil has
given Qatar a per capita GDP comparable to the leading West European
industrial countries. Qatar's proved reserves of natural gas exceed 7
trillion cubic meters, more than 5% of the world total, third largest
in the world. Production and export of natural gas are becoming
increasingly important. Long-term goals feature the development of
off-shore petroleum and the diversification of the economy.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $11.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $21,300 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 1%
industry: 45%
services: 54% (1993 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.2% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 233,000 (1993 est.)
note: 83.49% of the population in the 15-64 age group is non-national
(July 1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $3 billion
expenditures: $3.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY96/97)

Industries: crude oil production and refining, fertilizers,
petrochemicals, steel reinforcing bars, cement

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 1.3 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 5.5 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 10,095 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: fruits, vegetables; poultry, dairy products,
beef; fish (all on small scale)

Exports:
total value: $4 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: petroleum products 80%, steel, fertilizers
partners: Japan 54%, Singapore 7%, South Korea 6%, Australia 3%, UAE
3% (1995 est.)

Imports:
total value: $4.4 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : machinery and equipment, consumer goods, food, chemicals
partners: Italy 16%, Germany 11%, Japan 10%, UK 9%, France 9% (1995
est.)

Debt - external: $5.7 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Qatari riyal (QR) = 100 dirhams

Exchange rates: Qatari riyals (QR) per US$1 - 3.6400 riyals (fixed
rate)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Qatar:Communications

Telephones: 160,717 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: modern system centered in Doha
domestic: NA
international : tropospheric scatter to Bahrain; microwave radio relay
to Saudi Arabia and UAE; submarine cable to Bahrain and UAE; satellite
earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean) and
1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 201,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (1988 est.)

Televisions: 205,000 (1992 est.)

@Qatar:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 1,210 km
paved : 1,089 km
unpaved: 121 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 235 km; natural gas 400 km

Ports and harbors: Doha, Halul Island, Umm Sa'id

Merchant marine:
total: 19 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 512,456 GRT/850,858 DWT
ships by type : combination ore/oil 2, container 3, cargo 11, oil
tanker 3 (1996 est.)

Airports: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
over 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Public Security

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 286,178 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 150,398 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 5,432 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $400 million (1996 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.5% (1996 est.)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: territorial dispute with Bahrain over the
Hawar Islands; maritime boundary with Bahrain; in 1996, agreed with
Saudi Arabia to demarcate border per 1992 accord; that process is
ongoing
______________________________________________________________________

REUNION

(overseas department of France)

@Reunion:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, island in the Indian Ocean, east of
Madagascar

Geographic coordinates: 21 06 S, 55 36 E

Map references: World

Area:
total: 2,510 sq km
land: 2,500 sq km
water : 10 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Rhode Island

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 201 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical, but temperature moderates with elevation; cool and
dry from May to November, hot and rainy from November to April

Terrain: mostly rugged and mountainous; fertile lowlands along coast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Piton des Neiges 3,069 m

Natural resources: fish, arable land

Land use:
arable land: 17%
permanent crops: 2%
permanent pastures: 5%
forests and woodland : 35%
other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 60 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic, devastating cyclones (December to April);
Piton de la Fournaise on the southeastern coast is an active volcano

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

@Reunion:People

Population: 692,204 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 32% (male 114,655; female 109,301)
15-64 years: 62% (male 211,112; female 217,897)
65 years and over: 6% (male 16,211; female 23,028) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.87% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.4 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.71 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 75.08 years
male: 72.03 years
female: 78.29 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.69 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Reunionese (singular and plural)
adjective : Reunionese

Ethnic groups: French, African, Malagasy, Chinese, Pakistani, Indian

Religions: Roman Catholic 94%, Hindu, Islam, Buddhist

Languages: French (official), Creole widely used

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 79%
male: 76%
female: 80% (1982 est.)

@Reunion:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Department of Reunion
conventional short form: Reunion
local long form: none
local short form : Ile de la Reunion

Data code: RE

Dependency status: overseas department of France

Government type: NA

National capital: Saint-Denis

Administrative divisions: none (overseas department of France); there
are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
government, but there are four arrondissements, 24 communes, and 47
cantons

Independence: none (overseas department of France)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President of France Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May
1995), represented by Prefect Robert POMMIES (since NA 1996)
head of government : President of the General Council Christophe PAYET
(since 4 April 1994) and President of the Regional Council Margarite
SUDRE (since 25 June 1993)
cabinet: NA
elections: prefect appointed by the president of France on the advice
of the French Ministry of the Interior; the presidents of the General
and Regional Councils are elected by the members of those councils,
who vote on party lines

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council (47 seats; members are
elected by direct popular vote to serve six-year terms) and unicameral
Regional Council (45 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote
to serve six-year terms)
elections : General Council - last held NA March 1994 (next to be held
NA 2000); Regional Council - last held 25 June 1993 (next to be held
NA 1999)
election results: General Council - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - PCR 12, PS 12, UDF 11, RPR 5, others 7; Regional
Council - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - UPF 17,
Free-Dom Movement 13, PCR 9, PS 6
note : Reunion elects 3 representatives to the French Senate;
elections last held 24 September 1992 (next to be held NA); results -
percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - RPR 1, FRA 1,
independent 1; Reunion also elects 5 deputies to the French National
Assembly; elections last held 21 and 28 March 1993 (next to be held as
a special election on 25 May - 1 June 1997); results - percent of vote
by party - NA; seats by party - PS 1, PCR 1, UPF 1, RPR 1, UDF-CDS 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeals or Cour d'Appel

Political parties and leaders: Rally for the Republic or RPR [Andre'
Maurice PIHOUEE]; Union for French Democracy or UDF [Ibrahim DINDAN];
Communist Party of Reunion or PCR [Paul VERGES]; France-Reunion Future
or FRA [Andre THIEN AH KOON]; Socialist Party or PS [Jean-Claude
FRUTEAU]; Social Democrats or CDS; Union for France or UPF (includes
RPR and UDF); Free-DOM Movement [Marguerite SUDRE]; National Front
(FN), Alix MOREL

International organization participation: FZ, WFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas department of
France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas department of
France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy has traditionally been based on
agriculture. Sugarcane has been the primary crop for more than a
century, and in some years it accounts for 85% of exports. The
government has been pushing the development of a tourist industry to
relieve high unemployment, which recently amounted to one-third of the
labor force. The gap in Reunion between the well-off and the poor is
extraordinary and accounts for the persistent social tensions. The
white and Indian communities are substantially better off than other
segments of the population, often approaching European standards,
whereas indigenous groups suffer the poverty and unemployment typical
of the poorer nations of the African continent. The outbreak of severe
rioting in February 1991 illustrates the seriousness of socioeconomic
tensions. The economic well-being of Reunion depends heavily on
continued financial assistance from France.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $2.9 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.7% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $4,300 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry : NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 242,169 (1993)
by occupation: agriculture 30%, industry 21%, services 49% (1981)

Unemployment rate: 35% (1994)

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA

Industries: sugar, rum, cigarettes, handicraft items

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: 1.09 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,670 kWh (1994)

Agriculture - products: sugarcane, vanilla, tobacco, tropical fruits,
vegetables, corn

Exports:
total value: $171.776 million (f.o.b., 1994)
commodities: sugar 63%, rum and molasses 4%, perfume essences 2%,
lobster 3%, (1993)
partners: France, Mauritius, Bahrain, South Africa, Italy, Madagascar

Imports:
total value: $2.354 billion (c.i.f., 1994)
commodities : manufactured goods, food, beverages, tobacco, machinery
and transportation equipment, raw materials, and petroleum products
partners: France, Mauritius, Bahrain, South Africa, Italy, Madagascar

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: substantial annual subsidies from France

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.4169 (January 1997),
5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520 (1994), 5.6632 (1993), 5.2938
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Reunion:Communications

Telephones: 191,647 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: adequate system; principal center is Saint-Denis
domestic : modern open wire and microwave radio relay network
international: radiotelephone communication to Comoros, France,
Madagascar; new microwave route to Mauritius; satellite earth station
- 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 13, shortwave 0

Radios: 151,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (repeaters 18)

Televisions: 116,181 (1992 est.)

@Reunion:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 2,784 km
paved: 2,187 km
unpaved: 597 km (1987 est.)

Ports and harbors: Le Port, Pointe des Galets

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2 (1996)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: French forces (Army, Navy, Air Force, and
Gendarmerie)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 176,600 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 92,170 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 5,724 (1997 est.)

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

ROMANIA

@Romania:Geography

Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Black Sea, between
Bulgaria and Ukraine

Geographic coordinates: 46 00 N, 25 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 237,500 sq km
land: 230,340 sq km
water : 7,160 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Oregon

Land boundaries:
total : 2,508 km
border countries: Bulgaria 608 km, Hungary 443 km, Moldova 450 km,
Serbia and Montenegro 476 km (all with Serbia), Ukraine (north) 362
km, Ukraine (south) 169 km

Coastline: 225 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 24 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow and fog;
sunny summers with frequent showers and thunderstorms

Terrain: central Transylvanian Basin is separated from the Plain of
Moldavia on the east by the Carpathian Mountains and separated from
the Walachian Plain on the south by the Transylvanian Alps

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Black Sea 0 m
highest point : Moldoveanu 2,544 m

Natural resources: petroleum (reserves declining), timber, natural
gas, coal, iron ore, salt

Land use:
arable land: 41%
permanent crops: 3%
permanent pastures : 21%
forests and woodland: 29%
other: 6% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 31,020 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: earthquakes most severe in south and southwest;
geologic structure and climate promote landslides

Environment - current issues: soil erosion and degradation; water
pollution; air pollution in south from industrial effluents;
contamination of Danube delta wetlands

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Air Pollution, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate
Change, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol

Geography - note: controls most easily traversable land route between
the Balkans, Moldova, and Ukraine

@Romania:People

Population: 22,463,077 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 19% (male 2,223,136; female 2,130,497)
15-64 years : 68% (male 7,586,237; female 7,679,992)
65 years and over: 13% (male 1,186,948; female 1,656,267) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: -0.28% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 9.8 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 11.75 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.88 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.72 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 19.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 70.11 years
male : 66.28 years
female: 74.13 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.23 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Romanian(s)
adjective: Romanian

Ethnic groups: Romanian 89.1%, Hungarian 8.9%, German 0.4%, Ukrainian,
Serb, Croat, Russian, Turk, and Gypsy 1.6%

Religions: Romanian Orthodox 70%, Roman Catholic 6% (of which 3% are
Uniate), Protestant 6%, unaffiliated 18%

Languages: Romanian, Hungarian, German

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 97%
male : 98%
female: 95% (1992 est.)

@Romania:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form : Romania
local long form: none
local short form: Romania

Data code: RO

Government type: republic

National capital: Bucharest

Administrative divisions: 40 counties (judete, singular - judet) and 1
municipality* (municipiu); Alba, Arad, Arges, Bacau, Bihor,
Bistrita-Nasaud, Botosani, Braila, Brasov, Bucuresti*, Buzau,
Calarasi, Caras-Severin, Cluj, Constanta, Covasna, Dimbovita, Dolj,
Galati, Gorj, Giurgiu, Harghita, Hunedoara, Ialomita, Iasi, Maramures,
Mehedinti, Mures, Neamt, Olt, Prahova, Salaj, Satu Mare, Sibiu,
Suceava, Teleorman, Timis, Tulcea, Vaslui, Vilcea, Vrancea

Independence: 1881 (from Turkey; republic proclaimed 30 December 1947)

National holiday: National Day of Romania, 1 December (1990)

Constitution: 8 December 1991

Legal system: former mixture of civil law system and communist legal
theory; is now based on the Constitution of France's Fifth Republic

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Emil CONSTANTINESCU (since 29 November
1996)
head of government: Prime Minister Victor CIORBEA (since 12 December
1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister
elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
election last held 3 November 1996, with runoff between the top two
candidates held 17 November 1996 (next to be held NA 2000); prime
minister appointed by the president
election results: percent of vote - Emil CONSTANTINESCU 54.4%, Ion
ILIESCU 45.6%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Parlament consists of the
Senate or Senat (143 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote
on a proportional representation to serve four-year terms) and the
Chamber of Deputies or Adunarea Deputatilor (343 seats; members are
elected by direct popular vote on a proportional representation to
serve four-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 3 November 1996 (next to be held NA
2000); Chamber of Deputies - last held 3 November 1996 (next to be
held NA 2000)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - CDR 30.7%, PDSR
23.1%, USD 13.2%, UDMR 6.8%, PRM 4.5%, PUNR 4.2%, others 17.5%; seats
by party - CDR 53, PDSR 41, USD 23, UDMR 11, PRM 8, PUNR 7; Chamber of
Deputies - percent of vote by party - CDR 30.2%, PDSR 21.5%, USD
12.9%, UDMR 6.6% PRM 4.5%, PUNR 4.4%, others 19.9%; seats by party -
CDR 122, PDSR 91, USD 53, UDMR 25, PRM 19, PUNR 18, ethnic minorities
15

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice, judges are appointed by the
president on recommendation of the Superior Council of Magistrates

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party or DP [Petre ROMAN];
Romanian Social Democratic Party or PSDR [Sergiu CUNESCU]; Party of
Social Democracy in Romania or PDSR [Adrian NASTASE]; Democratic Union
of Hungarians in Romania or UDMR [Bela MARKO]; National Liberal Party
or PNL [Mircea IONESCU-QUINTUS]; National Peasants' Christian and
Democratic Party or PNTCD [Ion DIACONESCU]; Romanian National Unity
Party or PUNR [Valeriu TABARA]; Socialist Labor Party or PSM [Ilie
VERDET]; Agrarian Democratic Party of Romania or PDAR [Victor SURDU];
The Democratic Convention or CDR [Ion DIACONESCU]; Romania Mare Party
(Greater Romanian Party) or PRM [Corneliu Vadim TUDOR]; Civic Alliance
Party or PAC [Nicolae MANOLESCU, chairman]; Liberal Party '93 or PL-93
[Dinu PATRICIU]; National Liberal Party-Democratic Convention or
PNL-CD [Nicolae CERVENI]; Socialist Party or PS [Tudor MOHORA]
note: to increase their voting strength several of the above-mentioned
parties united under umbrella organizations: PNTCD, PNL, and PNL-CD
form the bulk of the Democratic Convention or CDR [Ion DIACONESCU]; PD
and PSDR form the Union of Social Democrats or USD [Petre ROMAN]; and
PAC and PL-93 form the National Liberal Alliance or ANL [Nicolae
MANOLESCU]; PSM, PS, ANL, and numerous other small parties failed to
gain representation in the most recent election

Political pressure groups and leaders: various human rights and
professional associations

International organization participation: ACCT, BIS, BSEC, CCC, CE,
CEI, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, G- 9, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, NACC, NAM (guest), NSG, OAS
(observer), OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
UNIKOM, UPU, WCL, WEU (associate partner), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Mircea Dan GEOANA
chancery: 1607 23rd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 332-4846, 4848, 4851
FAX : [1] (202) 232-4748
consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Alfred H. MOSES
embassy: Strada Tudor Arghezi 7-9, Bucharest
mailing address: American Consulate General (Bucharest), Unit 1315,
APO AE 09213-1315
telephone: [40] (1) 210 01 49, 210 40 42
FAX: [40] (1) 210 03 95
branch office: Cluj-Napoca

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side),
yellow, and red; the national coat of arms that used to be centered in
the yellow band has been removed; now similar to the flags of Andorra
and Chad

Economy

Economy - overview: Romania, one of the poorer countries in Central
and Eastern Europe, began the transition from Communism with a largely
obsolete industrial base and a pattern of output unsuited to the
country's needs. Over the past seven years, economic restructuring has
lagged behind most other countries in the region. Consequently,
economic performance is declining, with slowing GDP growth, ballooning
budget deficits, accelerating inflation, a plunging exchange rate, and
anemic foreign investment. Unemployment was low at about 6% at the end
of 1996, but the rate will rise when restructuring gets underway. A
new government elected in November 1996 promises to accelerate
economic reform, restructuring, and privatization, introduce fiscal
and monetary austerity, reduce the state's role in the economy, and
open Romania to foreign investment. The government will tackle its
formidable economic problems in two stages, with an emergency plan
over the winter of 1996/97 to ensure social and political stability,
followed by a radical structural reform program over its remaining
three-and-one-half years aimed eventually at EU accession. At the same
time, it wants to keep campaign promises to increase benefits to
disadvantaged groups. Bucharest hopes to receive financial and
technical assistance from international financial institutions and
western governments and negotiations over a new IMF standby agreement
are underway. If reform stalls, however, Romania's bond rating - just
below investment grade - could fall and needed capital from both
public and private sources could quickly dry up. Rich agricultural and
oil resources are strengths for the future.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $113.2 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.1% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,200 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 20%
industry: 33.4%
services: 46.6% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 56.9% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 10.1 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: industry 28.8%, agriculture 36.4%, other 34.8% (1994)

Unemployment rate: 6.1% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $6 billion
expenditures: $7.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: mining, timber, construction materials, metallurgy,
chemicals, machine building, food processing, petroleum production and
refining

Industrial production growth rate: 7% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 22.06 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 52.48 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,245 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, corn, sugar beets, sunflower seed,
potatoes, grapes; milk, eggs, meat

Exports:
total value: $7.7 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: textiles and footwear 25.2%, metals and metal products
19.4%, fuels and mineral products 10.0%, chemicals 9.4%, other 36.0%
(1995)
partners : Germany 17.8%, Italy 15.6%, France 5.7%, Turkey 4.5%,
Netherlands 3.0%, China 3.0% (1995)

Imports:
total value : $93.8 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: fuels and minerals 25.1%, machinery and transport
equipment 19.4%, food and agricultural goods 6.1%, chemicals 9.0%,
other 40.4% (1995)
partners: Germany 17.1%, Italy 13.2%, Russia 12.6%, France 5.2%, US
4.2%, Egypt 4.1% (1995)

Debt - external: $7.8 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $81 million (1993)

Currency: 1 leu (L) = 100 bani

Exchange rates: lei (L) per US$1 - 5,970 (January 1997), 3,085.39
(1996), 2,033.28 (1995), 1,655.09 (1994), 760.05 (1993), 307.95 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Romania:Communications

Telephones: 2.6 million (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: poor service; 89% of telephone network is automatic; trunk
network is microwave radio relay; roughly 3,300 villages with no
service (February 1990 est.)
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat; new digital
international direct-dial exchanges are in Bucharest (1993 est.)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 12, FM 5, shortwave 0
note: in 1995, 135 local radio stations were registered

Radios: 4.64 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 436 cable TV stations, 66 local TV
stations

Televisions: 4.58 million (1992 est.)

@Romania:Transportation

Railways:
total : 11,365 km
broad gauge: 45 km 1.524-m gauge
standard gauge: 10,893 km 1.435-m gauge (3,723 km electrified; 3,060
km double track)
narrow gauge: 427 km 0.760-m gauge (1994)

Highways:
total : 153,170 km
paved: 78,117 km (including 113 km of expressways)
unpaved: 75,053 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,724 km (1984)

Pipelines: crude oil 2,800 km; petroleum products 1,429 km; natural
gas 6,400 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Braila, Constanta, Galati, Mangalia, Sulina, Tulcea

Merchant marine:
total: 234 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,445,810 GRT/3,654,660
DWT
ships by type: bulk 39, cargo 167, container 2, oil tanker 13,
passenger 1, passenger-cargo 1, railcar carrier 2, roll-on/roll-off
cargo 9
note : Romania owns an additional 18 ships (1,000 GRT or over)
totaling 1,025,108 DWT operating under the registries of The Bahamas,
Bermuda, Cyprus, Liberia, Malta, and Syria (1996 est.)

Airports: 156 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 27
over 3,047 m: 4
2,438 to 3,047 m: 9
1,524 to 2,437 m: 14 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 129
2,438 to 3,047 m : 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 17
under 914 m: 108 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces,
Paramilitary Forces, Civil Defense

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 5,884,704 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 4,955,267 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 201,752 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $650 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.5% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: dispute with Ukraine over continental shelf
of the Black Sea under which significant gas and oil deposits may
exist; agreed to two-year negotiating period, after which either party
can refer dispute to the International Court of Justice

Illicit drugs: important transshipment point for Southwest Asian
heroin transiting the Balkan route and small amounts of Latin American
cocaine bound for Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

RUSSIA

@Russia:Geography

Location: Northern Asia (that part west of the Urals is sometimes
included with Europe), bordering the Arctic Ocean, between Europe and
the North Pacific Ocean

Geographic coordinates: 60 00 N, 100 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total: 17,075,200 sq km
land: 16,995,800 sq km
water: 79,400 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than 1.8 times the size of the US

Land boundaries:
total : 19,917 km
border countries: Azerbaijan 284 km, Belarus 959 km, China (southeast)
3,605 km, China (south) 40 km, Estonia 294 km, Finland 1,313 km,
Georgia 723 km, Kazakstan 6,846 km, North Korea 19 km, Latvia 217 km,
Lithuania (Kaliningrad Oblast) 227 km, Mongolia 3,441 km, Norway 167
km, Poland (Kaliningrad Oblast) 206 km, Ukraine 1,576 km

Coastline: 37,653 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf : 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: ranges from steppes in the south through humid continental in
much of European Russia; subarctic in Siberia to tundra climate in the
polar north; winters vary from cool along Black Sea coast to frigid in
Siberia; summers vary from warm in the steppes to cool along Arctic
coast

Terrain: broad plain with low hills west of Urals; vast coniferous
forest and tundra in Siberia; uplands and mountains along southern
border regions

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caspian Sea -28 m
highest point: Mount El'brus 5,633 m

Natural resources: wide natural resource base including major deposits
of oil, natural gas, coal, and many strategic minerals, timber
note: formidable obstacles of climate, terrain, and distance hinder
exploitation of natural resources

Land use:
arable land : 8%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 4%
forests and woodland: 46%
other: 42% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 40,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: permafrost over much of Siberia is a major impediment
to development; volcanic activity in the Kuril Islands; volcanoes and
earthquakes on the Kamchatka Peninsula

Environment - current issues: air pollution from heavy industry,
emissions of coal-fired electric plants, and transportation in major
cities; industrial and agricultural pollution of inland waterways and
sea coasts; deforestation; soil erosion; soil contamination from
improper application of agricultural chemicals; scattered areas of
sometimes intense radioactive contamination

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: largest country in the world in terms of area but
unfavorably located in relation to major sea lanes of the world;
despite its size, much of the country lacks proper soils and climates
(either too cold or too dry) for agriculture

@Russia:People

Population: 147,305,569 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 20% (male 15,258,810; female 14,683,485)
15-64 years: 67% (male 47,945,470; female 51,067,792)
65 years and over: 13% (male 5,645,915; female 12,704,097) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: -0.29% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 9.52 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 14.84 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.38 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.44 male(s)/female
total population: 0.88 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 23.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 64.81 years
male: 58.39 years
female: 71.56 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.35 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Russian(s)
adjective: Russian

Ethnic groups: Russian 81.5%, Tatar 3.8%, Ukrainian 3%, Chuvash 1.2%,
Bashkir 0.9%, Byelorussian 0.8%, Moldavian 0.7%, other 8.1%

Religions: Russian Orthodox, Muslim, other

Languages: Russian, other

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98%
male : 100%
female: 97% (1989 est.)

@Russia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Russian Federation
conventional short form: Russia
local long form: Rossiyskaya Federatsiya
local short form: Rossiya
former: Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic

Data code: RS

Government type: federation

National capital: Moscow

Administrative divisions: 49 oblasts (oblastey, singular - oblast'),
21 autonomous republics* (avtonomnyk respublik, singular - avtonomnaya
respublika), 10 autonomous okrugs**(avtonomnykh okrugov, singular -
avtonomnyy okrug), 6 krays*** (krayev, singular - kray), 2 federal
cities (singular - gorod)****, and 1 autonomous
oblast*****(avtonomnaya oblast'); Adygeya (Maykop)*, Aginskiy
Buryatskiy (Aginskoye)**, Altay (Gorno-Altaysk)*, Altayskiy
(Barnaul)***, Amurskaya (Blagoveshchensk), Arkhangel'skaya,
Astrakhanskaya, Bashkortostan (Ufa)*, Belgorodskaya, Bryanskaya,
Buryatiya (Ulan-Ude)*, Chechnya (Groznyy)*, Chelyabinskaya,
Chitinskaya, Chukotskiy (Anadyr')**, Chuvashiya (Cheboksary)*,
Dagestan (Makhachkala)*, Evenkiyskiy (Tura)**, Ingushetiya (Nazran')*,
Irkutskaya, Ivanovskaya, Kabardino-Balkariya (Nal'chik)*,
Kaliningradskaya, Kalmykiya (Elista)*, Kaluzkskaya, Kamchatskaya
(Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy), Karachayevo-Cherkesiya (Cherkessk)*,
Kareliya (Petrozavodsk)*, Kemerovskaya, Khabarovskiy***, Khakasiya
(Abakan)*, Khanty-Mansiyskiy (Khanty-Mansiysk)**, Kirovskaya, Komi
(Syktyvkar)*, Koryakskiy (Palana)**, Kostromskaya, Krasnodarskiy***,
Krasnoyarskiy***, Kurganskaya, Kurskaya, Leningradskaya, Lipetskaya,
Magadanskaya, Mariy-El (Yoshkar-Ola)*, Mordoviya (Saransk)*,
Moskovskaya, Moskva****, Murmanskaya, Nenetskiy (Nar'yan-Mar)**,
Nizhegorodskaya, Novgorodskaya, Novosibirskaya, Omskaya,
Orenburgskaya, Penzenskaya, Permskaya, Komi-Permyatskiy (Kudymkar)**,
Primorskiy (Vladivostok)***, Pskovskaya, Rostovskaya, Ryazanskaya,
Sakha (Yakutiya)*, Sakhalinskaya (Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk), Samarskaya,
Sankt-Peterburg****, Saratovskaya, Severnaya Osetiya-Alaniya
(Vladikavkaz)*, Smolenskaya, Stavropol'skiy***, Sverdlovskaya
(Yekaterinburg), Tambovskaya, Tatarstan (Kazan')*, Taymyrskiy
(Dudinka)**, Tomskaya, Tul'skaya, Tverskaya, Tyumenskaya, Tyva
(Kyzyl)*, Udmurtiya (Izhevsk)*, Ul'yanovskaya, Ust'-Ordynskiy
Buryatskiy (Ust'-Ordynskiy)**, Vladimirskaya, Volgogradskaya,
Vologodskaya, Voronezhskaya, Yamalo-Nenetskiy (Salekhard)**,
Yaroslavskaya, Yevreyskaya*****; note - when using a place name with
an adjectival ending 'skaya' or 'skiy', the word Oblast' or Avonomnyy
Okrug or Kray should be added to the place name
note : the autonomous republics of Chechnya and Ingushetia were
formerly the autonomous republic of Checheno-Ingushetia (the boundary
between Chechnya and Ingushetia has yet to be determined); the cities
of Moscow and St. Petersburg are federal cities; administrative
divisions have the same names as their administrative centers
(exceptions have the administrative center name following in
parentheses)

Independence: 24 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, June 12 (1990)

Constitution: adopted 12 December 1993

Legal system: based on civil law system; judicial review of
legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Boris Nikolayevich YEL'TSIN (since 12 June
1991)
head of government: Premier and Chairman of the Russian Federation
Government Viktor Stepanovich CHERNOMYRDIN (since 14 December 1992),
First Deputy Premiers and First Deputy Chairmen of the Government
Anatoliy Borisovich CHUBAYS (since NA March 1997), Boris Y. NEMTSOV
(since NA March 1997)
cabinet: Ministries of the Government or "Government" appointed by the
president
note: there is also a Presidential Administration that drafts
presidential edicts and provides staff and policy support to the
entire executive branch; a Security Council that was originally
established as a presidential advisory body in June 1991 with
responsibility for managing individual and state security; a Defense
Council and a Foreign Policy Council formed in July 1996 and October
1996 respectively
elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
election last held 16 June 1996 with runoff election on 3 July 1996
(next to be held NA June 2000); note - no vice president; if the
president dies in office, cannot exercise his powers because of ill
health, is impeached, or resigns, the premier succeeds him; the
premier serves as acting president until a new presidential election
is held, which must be within three months; premier and deputy
premiers appointed by the president with the approval of the Duma
election results: Boris Nikolayevich YEL'TSIN elected president;
percent of vote in runoff - YEL'TSIN 54%, Gennadiy ZYUGANOV 40%

Legislative branch: bicameral Federal Assembly or Federalnoe Sobranie
consists of the Federation Council or Sovet Federatsii (178 seats,
filled ex-officio by the top executive and legislative officials in
each of the 89 federal administrative units - oblasts, krays,
republics, autonomous okrugs and oblasts, and the cities of Moscow and
St. Petersburg; members serve four-year terms) and the State Duma or
Gosudarstvennaya Duma (450 seats, half elected in single-member
districts and half elected from national party lists; members are
elected by direct popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : State Duma - last held 17 December 1995 (next to be held
NA December 1999)
election results: State Duma - percent of vote received by parties
clearing the 5% threshold entitling them to a proportional share of
the 225 party list seats - Communist Party of the Russian Federation
22.3%, Liberal Democratic Party of Russia 11.2%, Our Home Is Russia
10.1%, Yabloko Bloc 6.9%; seats by party - Communist Party of the
Russian Federation 157, independents 78, Our Home Is Russia 55,
Liberal Democratic Party of Russia 51, Yabloko Bloc 45, Agrarian Party
of Russia 20, Russia's Democratic Choice 9, Power To the People 9,
Congress of Russian Communities 5, Forward, Russia! 3, Women of Russia
3, other parties 15

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, judges are appointed by the
Federation Council on recommendation of the president; Supreme Court,
judges are appointed by the Federation Council on recommendation of
the president; Superior Court of Arbitration, judges are appointed by
the Federation Council on recommendation of the president

Political parties and leaders:
pro-market democrats : Yabloko Bloc [Grigoriy YAVLINSKIY]; Russia's
Democratic Choice Party [Yegor GAYDAR]; Forward, Russia! [Boris
FEDOROV]
centrists/special interest parties: Our Home Is Russia [Viktor
CHERNOMYRDIN]; Russian People's Republican Party [Aleksandr LEBED];
Congress of Russian Communities [Dmitriy ROGOZIN]; Women of Russia
[Alevtina FEDULOVA and Yekaterina LAKHOVA]
anti-market and/or ultranationalist : Communist Party of the Russian
Federation [Gennadiy ZYUGANOV]; Liberal Democratic Party of Russia
[Vladimir ZHIRINOVSKIY]; Agrarian Party [Mikhail LAPSHIN]; Power To
the People [Nikolay RYZHKOV and Sergey BABURIN]; Russian Communist
Workers' Party [Viktor ANPILOV and Viktor TYULKIN]
note: some 269 political parties, blocs, and associations tried to
gather enough signatures to run slates of candidates in the 17
December 1995 Duma elections; 43 succeeded

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: BIS (pending member), BSEC,
CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN (observer), CIS, EBRD, ECE, ESCAP, IAEA, IBRD,
ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MTCR, NACC, NSG, OAS
(observer), OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UN Security Council, UNAVEM III,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMIH, UNMOP,
UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UNTSO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
(applicant), ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Yuliy Mikhaylovich VORONTSOV
chancery: 2650 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone : [1] (202) 298-5700 through 5704
FAX: [1] (202) 298-5735
consulate(s) general: New York, San Francisco, and Seattle

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires John F. TEFFT
embassy : Novinskiy Bul'var 19/23, Moscow
mailing address: APO AE 09721
telephone: [7] (095) 252-24-51 through 59
FAX: [7] (095) 956-42-61
consulate(s) general: St. Petersburg, Vladivostok, Yekaterinburg

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of white (top), blue,
and red

Economy

Economy - overview: Russia, a vast country with a wealth of natural
resources, a well-educated population, and a diverse, but declining,
industrial base, continues to experience formidable difficulties in
moving from its old centrally planned economy to a modern market
economy. Most of 1996 was a lost year for economic reforms, with
government officials focused in the first half of the year on
President YEL'TSIN's reelection and then on his medical problems. The
only major success was in the fight against inflation, which fell from
131% in 1995 to 22% in 1996. Russia failed to make any progress in
restructuring its social welfare programs to target the most needy -
among whom are many of the old pensioners - or to pass needed tax
reform. While approximately 75% of industry has now been privatized,
the agricultural sector has undergone little reform since the break-up
of the Soviet Union. Stockholder rights remain weak while crime and
corruption are rampant in much of the economy. Many enterprises
continue to operate without hard budget constraints, resulting in
barter trade and increased inter-enterprise debts. According to
official statistics, the Russian economy declined for the fifth
straight year since the beginning of reforms, with GDP in 1996 falling
by 6% and industrial output by 5%. The true size of the Russian
economy remains controversial, however, with estimates of unreported
economic activity ranging from 20%-50% of GDP. Indeed, according to
Russian statistics, the Russian consumer has seen a small improvement
in the last several years, with real average incomes growing by about
8% from early 1993 to late 1996. The share of the Russian population
living below the poverty line is said to have dropped from one-third
in early 1993 to one-fifth in late 1996. Few Russians lack basic
necessities, and ownership of consumer goods such as VCRs and
automobiles has increased markedly. The growth of wage and pension
arrears slowed in the second half of 1996, and the government pledged
to clear all budget-funded wage and pension arrears by the end of
1997. The government continued to be plagued with tax collection
problems during 1996, forcing it to cut its planned spending by 18%. A
crackdown on major tax debtors at the end of the year had only limited
success. Spending by all levels of government remains high, between
40%-45% of GDP. The economy is continuing its integration into world
markets. Russia's trade surplus, after adjustment for unreported
"shuttle" trade, grew to a record $28.5 billion in 1996, according to
official Russian statistics. Export growth, which slowed from 18% to
9%, was due mostly to increased raw material prices. After increasing
by 15% in 1995, imports dipped by 2% in 1996 as Russian demand for
Western consumer goods slackened. Russia is continuing to make
progress in its WTrO negotiations; the government has made quick
accession one of its major policy goals. The continued unsettled
economic and political situation has discouraged foreign investment,
which totaled only $6.5 billion in 1996, including $2.1 billion in
direct investment; furthermore, capital flight continues to exceed in
volume the inflow of foreign capital. The central bank estimates that
$30 billion in US currency circulates in the Russian economy. In March
1997, YEL'TSIN signaled his intention to restart stalled economic
reforms by reorganizing the cabinet, bringing in a new team of
ministers with strong reform credentials.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $767 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: -6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,200 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 22% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 73 million (1996)
by occupation : NA

Unemployment rate: 9.3% (December 1996) (according to ILO definition)
with considerable additional underemployment

Budget:
revenues : $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: complete range of mining and extractive industries
producing coal, oil, gas, chemicals, and metals; all forms of machine
building from rolling mills to high-performance aircraft and space
vehicles; shipbuilding; road and rail transportation equipment;
communications equipment; agricultural machinery, tractors, and
construction equipment; electric power generating and transmitting
equipment; medical and scientific instruments; consumer durables,
textiles, foodstuffs, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: -5% (1996)

Electricity - capacity: 214.69 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 833.16 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 5,114 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grain, sugar beets, sunflower seed,
vegetables, fruits (because of its northern location does not grow
citrus, cotton, tea, and other warm climate products); meat, milk

Exports:
total value: $88.3 billion (1996)
commodities : petroleum and petroleum products, natural gas, wood and
wood products, metals, chemicals, and a wide variety of civilian and
military manufactures
partners: Europe, North America, Japan, Third World countries

Imports:
total value: $59.8 billion (1996)
commodities : machinery and equipment, consumer goods, medicines,
meat, grain, sugar, semifinished metal products
partners: Europe, North America, Japan, Third World countries

Debt - external: $130 billion (yearend 1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $13 billion (1990-96)
note : US commitments, including Ex-Im, $15 billion (1990-96); other
countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1990-96), $125 billion

Currency: 1 ruble (R) = 100 kopeks

Exchange rates: rubles per US$1 - 5,727 (March 1997), 5,121 (1996),
4,559 (1995), 2,191 (1994), 992 (1993)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Russia:Communications

Telephones: 25.4 million (1993 est.)

Telephone system: total pay phones for long distant calls 34,100;
enlisting foreign help, by means of joint ventures, to speed up the
modernization of its telecommunications system; in 1992, only 661,000
new telephones were installed compared with 855,000 in 1991, and in
1992 the number of unsatisfied applications for telephones reached
11,000,000; expanded access to international electronic mail service
available via Sprint network; the inadequacy of Russian
telecommunications is a severe handicap to the economy, especially
with respect to international connections
domestic: NMT-450 analog cellular telephone networks are operational
and growing in Moscow and St. Petersburg; intercity fiber-optic cable
installation remains limited
international: international traffic is inadequately handled by a
system of satellites, landlines, microwave radio relay, and outdated
submarine cables; much of this traffic passes through the
international gateway switch in Moscow which carries most of the
international traffic for the other countries of the Commonwealth of
Independent States; a new Russian Intersputnik satellite will link
Moscow and St. Petersburg with Rome from whence calls will be relayed
to destinations in Europe and overseas; satellite earth stations - NA
Intelsat, 4 Intersputnik (2 Atlantic Ocean Region and 2 Indian Ocean
Region), NA Eutelsat, 1 Inmarsat (Pacific Ocean Region), and NA Orbita

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA; note - there are
about 1,050 (including AM, FM, and shortwave) radio broadcast stations
throughout the country

Radios: 50 million (1993 est.)(radio receivers with multiple speaker
systems for program diffusion 74,300,000)

Television broadcast stations: 7,183

Televisions: 54.85 million (1992 est.)

@Russia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 154,000 km; note - 87,000 km in common carrier service (38,000
km electrified); 67,000 km serve specific industries and are not
available for common carrier use
broad gauge: 154,000 km 1.520-m gauge (1 January 1994)

Highways:
total : 948,000 km (including 416,000 km which serve specific
industries or farms and are not maintained by governmental highway
maintenance departments)
paved: 336,000 km
unpaved: 612,000 km (including 411,000 km of graveled or other forms
of macadam surface and 201,000 km of unstabilized earth) (1995 est.)

Waterways: total navigable routes in general use 101,000 km; routes
with navigation guides serving the Russian River Fleet 95,900 km;
routes with night navigational aids 60,400 km; man-made navigable
routes 16,900 km (1 January 1994)

Pipelines: crude oil 48,000 km; petroleum products 15,000 km; natural
gas 140,000 km (30 June 1993)

Ports and harbors: Arkhangel'sk, Astrakhan', Kaliningrad, Kazan',
Khabarovsk, Kholmsk, Krasnoyarsk, Moscow, Murmansk, Nakhodka,
Nevel'sk, Novorossiysk, Petropavlovsk, St. Petersburg, Rostov, Sochi,
Tuapse, Vladivostok, Volgograd, Vostochnyy, Vyborg

Merchant marine:
total: 660 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,731,677 GRT/7,940,756
DWT
ships by type: barge carrier 1, bulk 24, cargo 348, chemical tanker 1,
combination bulk 21, combination ore/oil 15, container 28,
multifunction large-load carrier 3, oil tanker 136, passenger 6,
passenger-cargo 4, refrigerated cargo 20, roll-on/roll-off cargo 38,
short-sea passenger 13, specialized tanker 2
note: Russia owns an additional 137 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
2,466,872 DWT operating under the registries of The Bahamas, Cyprus,
Honduras, Liberia, Malta, Panama, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Singapore, and Vanuatu (1996 est.)

Airports: 2,517 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 630
over 3,047 m : 54
2,438 to 3,047 m: 202
1,524 to 2,437 m : 108
914 to 1,523 m: 115
under 914 m: 151 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1,887
over 3,047 m : 25
2,438 to 3,047 m: 45
1,524 to 2,437 m: 134
914 to 1,523 m: 291
under 914 m: 1,392 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Ground Forces, Navy, Air Forces, Air Defense
Forces, Strategic Rocket Forces

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 38,449,126 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 29,996,967 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 1,115,858 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA
note : the Intelligence Community estimates that defense spending in
Russia fell by about 10% in real terms in 1996, reducing Russian
defense outlays to about one-sixth of peak Soviet levels in the late
1980s (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: inherited disputes from former USSR
including sections of the boundary with China; islands of Etorofu,
Kunashiri, and Shikotan and the Habomai group occupied by the Soviet
Union in 1945, administered by Russia, claimed by Japan; Caspian Sea
boundaries are not yet determined among Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakstan,
Russia, and Turkmenistan; potential dispute with Ukraine over Crimea;
Estonian and Russian negotiators reached a technical order agreement
in December 1996, which Estonia is prepared to sign and ratify in
January 1997; Estonia had claimed over 2,000 sq km of Russian
territory in the Narva and Pechora regions - based on boundary
established under the 1920 Peace Treaty of Tartu; based on the 1920
Treaty of Riga, Latvia had claimed the Abrene/Pytalovo section of the
border ceded by the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic to Russia in
1944; has made no territorial claim in Antarctica (but has reserved
the right to do so) and does not recognize the claims of any other
nation; dispute with Lithuania over the position of the riparian and
maritime boundary with Kaliningrad Oblast; Svalbard is the focus of a
maritime boundary dispute in the Barents Sea between Norway and Russia

Illicit drugs: limited cultivation of cannabis and opium poppy, mostly
for domestic consumption; government has active eradication program;
increasingly used as transshipment point for Southwest and Southeast
Asian opiates and cannabis and Latin American cocaine to Western
Europe and the US
______________________________________________________________________

RWANDA

Introduction

Current issues: following the outbreak of genocidal strife in Rwanda
in April 1994 between Tutsi and Hutu factions, more than 2 million
refugees fled to neighboring Burundi, Tanzania, Uganda and Democratic
Republic of the Congo, formerly Zaire; according to the UN High
Commission on Refugees, in 1996 and early 1997 nearly 1,300,000 Hutus
returned to Rwanda; of these, 720,000 returned from Zaire, 480,000
from Tanzania, 88,000 from Burundi, and 10,000 from Uganda

@Rwanda:Geography

Location: Central Africa, east of Democratic Republic of the Congo

Geographic coordinates: 2 00 S, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 26,340 sq km
land: 24,950 sq km
water: 1,390 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
total: 893 km
border countries: Burundi 290 km, Democratic Republic of the Congo 217
km, Tanzania 217 km, Uganda 169 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; two rainy seasons (February to April, November to
January); mild in mountains with frost and snow possible

Terrain: mostly grassy uplands and hills; relief is mountainous with
altitude declining from west to east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Rusizi River 950 m
highest point : Volcan Karisimbi 4,519 m

Natural resources: gold, cassiterite (tin ore), wolframite (tungsten
ore), natural gas, hydropower

Land use:
arable land: 35%
permanent crops: 13%
permanent pastures : 18%
forests and woodland: 22%
other: 12% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 40 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts; the volcanic Virunga mountains are
in the northwest along the border with Democratic Republic of the
Congo

Environment - current issues: deforestation results from uncontrolled
cutting of trees for fuel; overgrazing; soil exhaustion; soil erosion

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban
signed, but not ratified : Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the
Sea

Geography - note: landlocked; predominantly rural population

@Rwanda:People

Population: 7,737,537 (July 1997 est.)
note : genocide and civil war in 1994 killed more than 1 million
Rwandans and forced more than 2 million to flee to neighboring
countries

Age structure:
0-14 years: 45% (male 1,769,247; female 1,757,957)
15-64 years: 52% (male 1,978,076; female 2,018,141)
65 years and over: 3% (male 88,556; female 125,560) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 8.24% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 38.73 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 21.06 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 64.78 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)
note: following the outbreak of genocidal strife in Rwanda in April
1994 between Tutsi and Hutu factions, more than 2 million refugees
fled to neighboring Burundi, Tanzania, Uganda, and Democratic Republic
of the Congo, formerly Zaire; according to the UN High Commission on
Refugees, in 1996 and early 1997 nearly 1,300,000 Hutus returned to
Rwanda; of these 720,000 returned from Democratic Republic of the
Congo, 480,000 from Tanzania, 88,000 from Burundi, and 10,000 from
Uganda

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 118.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 39.11 years
male : 38.64 years
female: 39.6 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.93 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Rwandan(s)
adjective: Rwandan

Ethnic groups: Hutu 80%, Tutsi 19%, Twa (Pygmoid) 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 65%, Protestant 9%, Muslim 1%, indigenous
beliefs and other 25%

Languages: Kinyarwanda (official) universal Bantu vernacular, French
(official), English (official), Kiswahili (Swahili) used in commercial
centers

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 60.5%
male: 69.8%
female: 51.6% (1995 est.)

@Rwanda:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Rwandese Republic
conventional short form : Rwanda
local long form: Republika y'u Rwanda
local short form: Rwanda

Data code: RW

Government type: republic; presidential, multiparty system

National capital: Kigali

Administrative divisions: 10 prefectures (prefectures, singular -
prefecture in French; plural - NA, singular - prefegitura in
Kinyarwanda); Butare, Byumba, Cyangugu, Gikongoro, Gisenyi, Gitarama,
Kibungo, Kibuye, Kigali, Ruhengeri

Independence: 1 July 1962 (from Belgium-administered UN trusteeship)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 July (1962)

Constitution: on 5 May 1995, the Transitional National Assembly
adopted a new constitution which included elements of the constitution
of 18 June 1991 as well as provisions of the 1993 Arusha peace accord
and the November 1994 multi-party protocol of understanding

Legal system: based on German and Belgian civil law systems and
customary law; judicial review of legislative acts in the Supreme
Court; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Pasteur BIZIMUNGU (since 19 July 1994); Vice
President Maj. Gen. Paul KAGAME (since 19 July 1994)
head of government: Prime Minister Celestin RWIGEMA (since 1 September
1995)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections : current president installed by force by the Tutsi Rwandan
Patriotic Front; normally the president is elected by popular vote for
a five-year term; elections last held NA (next to be held NA); prime
minister appointed by the president

Legislative branch: unicameral Transitional National Assembly or
Assemblee Nationale de Transition (70 seats; members were
predetermined by the Arusha peace accord to serve NA-year terms)
elections: last held 26 December 1988 ( next to be held NA); note -
the Transitional National Assembly is a power-sharing body established
on 12 December 1994 following a multi-party protocol of understanding
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - RPF
19, MDR 13, PSD 13, PL 13, PDC 6, PSR 2, PDI 2, other 2; note - the
distribution of seats was predetermined

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, consists of the Court of
Cassation and the Council of State in joint session

Political parties and leaders: significant parties include: Rwandan
Patriotic Front or RPF [Alexis KANYARENGWE, chairman]; Democratic
Republican Movement or MDR; Liberal Party or PL; Democratic and
Socialist Party or PSD; Christian Democratic Party or PDC; Islamic
Democratic Party or PDI; Rwandan Socialist Party or PSR; National
Movement for Democracy and Development or MRND, former ruling party

Political pressure groups and leaders: Rwanda Patriotic Army or RPA,
the RPF military wing [Maj. Gen. Paul KAGAME, commander]; Rally for
the Democracy and Return (RDR)

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEEAC,
CEPGL, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NAM, OAU, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Theogene N. RUDASINGWA
chancery: (temporary) Suites C1 and C2, 2141 Wisconsin Avenue, NW,
Washington, DC 20007
telephone : [1] (202) 232-2882
FAX: [1] (202) 232-4544

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Robert GRIBBIN III
embassy: Boulevard de la Revolution, Kigali
mailing address: B. P. 28, Kigali
telephone : [250] 756 01 through 03, 721 26, 771 47
FAX: [250] 721 28

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of red (hoist side),
yellow, and green with a large black letter R centered in the yellow
band; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia; similar to the
flag of Guinea, which has a plain yellow band

Economy

Economy - overview: Rwanda is a poor African nation suffering bitterly
from ethnic-based civil war. The agricultural sector dominates the
economy; coffee and tea normally make up 80%-90% of exports. The
amount of fertile land is limited, however, and deforestation and soil
erosion continue to reduce the production potential. Manufacturing
focuses mainly on the processing of agricultural products. A
structural adjustment program with the World Bank began in October
1990. Ethnic-based insurgency since 1990 has devastated wide areas,
especially in the north, and displaced hundreds of thousands of
people. A peace accord in mid-1993 temporarily ended most of the
fighting, but resumption of large-scale civil warfare in April 1994 in
the capital city Kigali and elsewhere took 500,000 lives in that year
alone and severely damaged already poor economic prospects. Sketchy
data suggest that GDP dropped 50% in 1994 and came back partially, by
25%, in 1995. Plentiful rains helped agriculture in 1996, and outside
aid continued to support this desperately poor economy. The economy
continues to suffer massively from failure to maintain the
infrastructure, looting, neglect of important cash crops, and lack of
health care facilities. Because of the accumulated damage to capital
plant and the decline in public discipline, recovery of domestic
production will proceed slowly.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $3.8 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $400 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 52%
industry: 13%
services: 35% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 22% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 3.6 million
by occupation: agriculture 93%, government and services 5%, industry
and commerce 2%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: mining of cassiterite (tin ore) and wolframite (tungsten
ore), tin, cement, processing of agricultural products, small-scale
beverage production, soap, furniture, shoes, plastic goods, textiles,
cigarettes

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 60,000 kW

Electricity - production: 190 million kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: 23 kWh (1993 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, tea, pyrethrum (insecticide made from
chrysanthemums), bananas, beans, sorghum, potatoes; livestock

Exports:
total value: $51.2 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: coffee 63%, tea, cassiterite, wolframite, pyrethrum
partners : Brazil, EU

Imports:
total value: $237.3 million (f.o.b.,1995 est.)
commodities: textiles, foodstuffs, machines and equipment, capital
goods, steel, petroleum products, cement and construction material
partners: US, EU, Kenya, Tanzania

Debt - external: $1 billion (December 1995)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note: in October 1990 Rwanda launched a Structural Adjustment Program
with the IMF; since September 1991, the EU has given $46 million and
the US $25 million in support of this program (1993)

Currency: 1 Rwandan franc (RF) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Rwandan francs (RF) per US$1 - 309.85 (December 1996),
306.82 (1996), 262.20 (1995), 144.31 (1993), 133.35 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Rwanda:Communications

Telephones: 6,400 (1983 est.)

Telephone system: telephone system does not provide service to the
general public but is intended for business and government use
domestic : the capital, Kigali, is connected to the centers of the
prefectures by microwave radio relay; the remainder of the network
depends on wire and HF radiotelephone
international: international connections employ microwave radio relay
to neighboring countries and satellite communications to more distant
countries; satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean) in
Kigali (includes telex and telefax service)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 630,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: NA

@Rwanda:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 12,000 km
paved: 1,000 km
unpaved: 11,000 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: Lac Kivu navigable by shallow-draft barges and native craft

Ports and harbors: Cyangugu, Gisenyi, Kibuye

Airports: 7 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 6
over 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 2
under 914 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Gendarmerie

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,806,832 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 920,343 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $112.5 million (1992)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 7% (1992)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

SAINT HELENA

(dependent territory of the UK)

@Saint Helena:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, island in the South Atlantic Ocean, west of
Angola, about two-thirds of the way from South America to Africa

Geographic coordinates: 15 56 S, 5 42 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 410 sq km
land: 410 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Ascension, Gough Island, Inaccessible Island,
Nightingale Island, and Tristan da Cunha

Area - comparative: slightly more than two times the size of
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 60 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; marine; mild, tempered by trade winds

Terrain: rugged, volcanic; small scattered plateaus and plains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Queen Mary's Peak 2,060 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
arable land: 6%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures : 6%
forests and woodland: 6%
other: 82% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: active volcanism on Tristan da Cunha

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: Napoleon Bonaparte's place of exile and burial (his
remains were taken to Paris in 1840); harbors at least 40 species of
plants unknown anywhere else in the world; Ascension is a breeding
ground for sea turtles and sooty terns

@Saint Helena:People

Population: 7,036 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 20% (male 722; female 698)
15-64 years : 71% (male 2,621; female 2,396)
65 years and over: 9% (male 240; female 359) (1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.78% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 14.21 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.4 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.04 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.09 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.67 male(s)/female
total population: 1.04 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 29.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 75.58 years
male : 72.53 years
female: 78.79 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.5 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Saint Helenian(s)
adjective: Saint Helenian

Ethnic groups: African descent, white

Religions: Anglican (majority), Baptist, Seventh-Day Adventist, Roman
Catholic

Languages: English

Literacy:
definition : age 20 and over can read and write
total population: 97%
male: 97%
female: 98% (1987 est.)

@Saint Helena:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Saint Helena

Data code: SH

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK

Government type: NA

National capital: Jamestown

Administrative divisions: 1 administrative area and 2 dependencies*;
Ascension*, Saint Helena, Tristan da Cunha*

Independence: none (dependent territory of the UK)

National holiday: Celebration of the Birthday of the Queen, 10 June
1989 (second Saturday in June)

Constitution: 1 January 1989

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: NA years of age

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952)
head of government: Governor and Commander in Chief David Leslie
SMALLMAN (since NA 1995)
cabinet: Executive Council consists of the governor, two ex-officio
officers, and six elected members of the Legislative Council
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor is
appointed by the queen

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council (16 seats,
including the governor, 2 ex-officio and 12 elected members; members
are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held NA July 1993 (next to be held NA July 1997)
election results : percent of vote - NA; seats - independents 15

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: ICFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (dependent territory of
the UK)

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
quadrant and the Saint Helenian shield centered on the outer half of
the flag; the shield features a rocky coastline and three-masted
sailing ship

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy depends primarily on financial
assistance from the UK. The local population earns some income from
fishing, the raising of livestock, and sales of handicrafts. Because
there are few jobs, a large proportion of the work force has left to
seek employment overseas.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : NA%
industry: NA%
services : NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 2,416 (1991 est.)
by occupation: professional, technical, and related workers 8.7%,
managerial, administrative, and clerical 12.8%, sales people 8.1%,
farmer, fishermen, etc. 5.4%, craftspersons, production process
workers 14.7%, others 50.3% (1987)
note : a large proportion of the work force has left to seek
employment overseas

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $11.2 million
expenditures: $11 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY92/93)

Industries: crafts (furniture, lacework, fancy woodwork), fishing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: maize, potatoes, vegetables; timber production
being developed; crawfishing on Tristan da Cunha

Exports:
total value : $704,000 (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: fish (frozen and salt-dried skipjack, tuna), handicrafts
partners : South Africa, UK

Imports:
total value: $14.434 million (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: food, beverages, tobacco, fuel oils, animal feed,
building materials, motor vehicles and parts, machinery and parts
partners : UK, South Africa

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Saint Helenian pound (£S) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Saint Helenian pounds (£S) per US$1 - 0.6023 (January
1997), 0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995), 0.6529 (1994), 0.6658 (1993),
0.5664 (1992); note - the Saint Helenian pound is at par with the
British pound

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Saint Helena:Communications

Telephones: 550

Telephone system:
domestic : automatic network; HF radiotelephone to Ascension, then
into worldwide submarine cable and satellite networks
international: major coaxial submarine cable relay point between South
Africa, Portugal, and UK at Ascension; satellite earth stations - 2
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 2,500 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: NA

Communications - note: Gough Island has a meteorological station

@Saint Helena:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : NA km (mainland 118 km, Ascension NA km, Tristan da Cunha NA
km)
paved: 180.7 km (mainland 98 km, Ascension 80 km, Tristan da Cunha
2.70 km)
unpaved: NA km (mainland 20 km, Ascension NA km, Tristan da Cunha NA
km)

Ports and harbors: Georgetown (on Ascension), Jamestown

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
over 3,047 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

SAINT KITTS AND NEVIS

@Saint Kitts and Nevis:Geography

Location: Caribbean, islands in the Caribbean Sea, about one-third of
the way from Puerto Rico to Trinidad and Tobago

Geographic coordinates: 17 20 N, 62 45 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 269 sq km
land: 269 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 135 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
territorial sea : 12 nm
contiguous zone: 24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental
margin

Climate: subtropical tempered by constant sea breezes; little seasonal
temperature variation; rainy season (May to November)

Terrain: volcanic with mountainous interiors

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Mount Liamuiga 1,156 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land: 22%
permanent crops : 17%
permanent pastures: 3%
forests and woodland: 17%
other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hurricanes (July to October)

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

@Saint Kitts and Nevis:People

Population: 41,803 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 34% (male 7,285; female 6,945)
15-64 years: 60% (male 12,471; female 12,395)
65 years and over : 6% (male 1,107; female 1,600) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.1% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.08 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.85 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -3.18 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.69 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 18.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 67.22 years
male: 64.18 years
female: 70.44 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.49 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Kittsian(s), Nevisian(s)
adjective: Kittsian, Nevisian

Ethnic groups: black

Religions: Anglican, other Protestant sects, Roman Catholic

Languages: English

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
total population: 97%
male : 97%
female: 98% (1980 est.)

@Saint Kitts and Nevis:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis
conventional short form: Saint Kitts and Nevis
former: Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis

Data code: SC

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: Basseterre

Administrative divisions: 14 parishes; Christ Church Nichola Town,
Saint Anne Sandy Point, Saint George Basseterre, Saint George
Gingerland, Saint James Windward, Saint John Capisterre, Saint John
Figtree, Saint Mary Cayon, Saint Paul Capisterre, Saint Paul
Charlestown, Saint Peter Basseterre, Saint Thomas Lowland, Saint
Thomas Middle Island, Trinity Palmetto Point

Independence: 19 September 1983 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 19 September (1983)

Constitution: 19 September 1983

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General Dr. Cuthbert Montraville SEBASTIAN
(since 1 January 1996)
head of government : Prime Minister Dr. Denzil DOUGLAS (since 6 July
1995) and Deputy Prime Minister Sam CONDOR (since 6 July 1995)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general in consultation
with the prime minister
elections : none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; following
legislative elections, the leader of the majority party or leader of a
majority coalition is usually appointed prime minister by the governor
general; deputy prime minister appointed by the governor general

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Assembly (14 seats, 11
popularly elected from single member constituencies; members serve
five-year terms)
elections: last held 3 July 1995 (next to be held by July 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - SKLNP 58%, PAM 41%; seats
by party - SKNLP 7, PAM 1, NRP 1, CCM 2

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (based on Saint
Lucia); one judge of the Supreme Court resides in Saint Kitts

Political parties and leaders: People's Action Movement (PAM), Dr.
Kennedy SIMMONDS; Saint Kitts and Nevis Labor Party (SKNLP), Dr.
Denzil DOUGLAS; Nevis Reformation Party (NRP), Joseph PARRY; Concerned
Citizens Movement (CCM), Vance AMORY

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CDB, ECLAC,
FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
Interpol, IOC, OAS, OECS, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO,
WIPO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Osbert LIBURD
chancery: 3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016
telephone: [1] (202) 686-2636
FAX: [1] (202) 686-5740

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Saint Kitts and Nevis; US interests are monitored by the embassy in
Bridgetown, Barbados

Flag description: divided diagonally from the lower hoist side by a
broad black band bearing two white five-pointed stars; the black band
is edged in yellow; the upper triangle is green, the lower triangle is
red

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy has traditionally depended on the
growing and processing of sugarcane; decreasing world prices have hurt
the industry in recent years. Tourism and export-oriented
manufacturing have assumed larger roles. Most food is imported. The
newly elected government has undertaken a program designed to
revitalize the faltering sugar sector. It is also working to improve
revenue collection in order to better fund social programs.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $235 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,700 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 6%
industry: 22%
services: 72% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: -0.9% (1995)

Labor force:
total : 18,172 (June 1995)
by occupation: services 69%, manufacturing 31%

Unemployment rate: 4.3% (May 1995)

Budget:
revenues: $100.2 million
expenditures: $100.1 million, including capital expenditures of $41.4
million (1996 est.)

Industries: sugar processing, tourism, cotton, salt, copra, clothing,
footwear, beverages

Industrial production growth rate: NA %

Electricity - capacity: 15,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 42 million kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: sugarcane, rice, yams, vegetables, bananas;
fishing potential not fully exploited

Exports:
total value: $35.4 million (f.o.b., 1994 est.)
commodities: machinery, food, electronics, beverages and tobacco
partners: US 46.6%, UK 26.4%, Caricom nations 9.8% (1994)

Imports:
total value : $112.4 million (f.o.b., 1994 est.)
commodities: machinery, manufactures, food, fuels
partners: US 45%, Caricom nations 18.8%, UK 12.5%, Canada 4.2%, Japan
4.2%, (1994)

Debt - external: $45.3 million (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.7000 (fixed
rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Saint Kitts and Nevis:Communications

Telephones: 3,800 (1986 est.)

Telephone system: good interisland VHF/UHF/SHF radiotelephone
connections and international link via Antigua and Barbuda and Saint
Martin (Guadeloupe and Netherlands Antilles)
domestic : interisland links are handled by VHF/UHF/SHF radiotelephone
international: international calls are carried by radiotelephone to
Antigua and Barbuda and from there switched to submarine cable or to
Intelsat, or carried to Saint Martin (Guadeloupe and Netherlands
Antilles) by radiotelephone and switched to Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 25,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 4

Televisions: 9,500 (1993 est.)

@Saint Kitts and Nevis:Transportation

Railways:
total: 58 km
narrow gauge: 58 km 0.762-m gauge on Saint Kitts to serve sugarcane
plantations (1995)

Highways:
total : 310 km
paved: 132 km
unpaved: 178 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Basseterre, Charlestown

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Saint Kitts and Nevis Police Force, Coast
Guard

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment points for South American drugs destined
for the US
______________________________________________________________________

SAINT LUCIA

@Saint Lucia:Geography

Location: Caribbean, island between the Caribbean Sea and North
Atlantic Ocean, north of Trinidad and Tobago

Geographic coordinates: 13 53 N, 60 68 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 620 sq km
land: 610 sq km
water : 10 sq km

Area - comparative: 3.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 158 km

Maritime claims: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
contiguous zone: 24 nm
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm or to the edge of the continental
margin
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, moderated by northeast trade winds; dry season from
January to April, rainy season from May to August

Terrain: volcanic and mountainous with some broad, fertile valleys

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Mount Gimie 950 m

Natural resources: forests, sandy beaches, minerals (pumice), mineral
springs, geothermal potential

Land use:
arable land: 8%
permanent crops : 21%
permanent pastures: 5%
forests and woodland: 13%
other: 53% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hurricanes and volcanic activity

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion,
particularly in the northern region

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

@Saint Lucia:People

Population: 150,630 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 35% (male 26,430; female 26,018)
15-64 years: 60% (male 44,117; female 45,922)
65 years and over: 5% (male 3,091; female 5,052) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.14% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.31 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.71 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -6.22 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.61 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 17.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 71.36 years
male : 67.74 years
female: 75.23 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.44 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Saint Lucian(s)
adjective: Saint Lucian

Ethnic groups: black 90%, mixed 6%, East Indian 3%, white 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 90%, Protestant 7%, Anglican 3%

Languages: English (official), French patois

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
total population: 67%
male: 65%
female : 69% (1980 est.)

@Saint Lucia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Saint Lucia

Data code: ST

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Castries

Administrative divisions: 11 quarters; Anse La Raye, Castries,
Choiseul, Dauphin, Dennery, Gros Islet, Laborie, Micoud, Praslin,
Soufriere, Vieux Fort

Independence: 22 February 1979 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 22 February (1979)

Constitution: 22 February 1979

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General William George MALLET (since 1 June
1996)
head of government : Prime Minister Vaughn LEWIS (since 31 March 1996)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
the prime minister
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; following
legislative elections, the leader of the majority party or leader of a
majority coalition is usually appointed prime minister by the governor
general

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (an
11-member body, six appointed on the advice of the prime minister,
three on the advice of the leader of the opposition, and two after
consultation with religious, economic, and social groups) and the
House of Assembly (17 seats; members are elected by popular vote from
single member constituencies to serve five-year terms)
elections: House of Assembly - last held 27 April 1992 (next to be
held NA May 1997)
election results: House of Assembly - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - UWP 11, SLP 6

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court, jurisdiction extends
to Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, the British Virgin Islands,
Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, and
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

Political parties and leaders: United Workers' Party (UWP), Vaughn
LEWIS; Saint Lucia Labor Party (SLP), Kenneth ANTHONY; Saint Lucia
Freedom Party (SLFP), Martinus FRANCOIS

International organization participation: ACCT (associate), ACP, C,
Caricom, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol,
IOC, ISO (subscriber), NAM, OAS, OECS, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Dr. Joseph Edsel EDMUNDS
chancery: 3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016
telephone: [1] (202) 364-6792 through 6795
FAX: [1] (202) 364-6728
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Saint Lucia; the Ambassador to Saint Lucia resides in Bridgetown
(Barbados)

Flag description: blue with a gold isosceles triangle below a black
arrowhead; the upper edges of the arrowhead have a white border

Economy

Economy - overview: Though foreign investment in manufacturing and
information processing in recent years has increased Saint Lucia's
industrial base, the economy remains vulnerable due to its heavy
dependence on banana production, which is subject to periodic droughts
and tropical storms. Indeed, the destructive effect of Tropical Storm
Iris in mid-1995 caused the loss of 20% of the year's banana crop.
Increased competition from Latin American bananas will probably
further reduce market prices, exacerbating Saint Lucia's need to
diversify its economy in coming years, e.g., by further expanding
tourism, manufacturing, and construction.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $695 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $4,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 13.8%
industry: 17.4%
services: 68.8% (1992 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 43,800
by occupation: agriculture 43.4%, services 38.9%, industry and
commerce 17.7% (1983 est.)

Unemployment rate: 25% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $361.5 million
expenditures: $311 million, including capital expenditures of $104
million (1995 est.)

Industries: clothing, assembly of electronic components, beverages,
corrugated cardboard boxes, tourism, lime processing, coconut
processing

Industrial production growth rate: NA %

Electricity - capacity: 34,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: 801 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: bananas, coconuts, vegetables, citrus, root
crops, cocoa

Exports:
total value: $104.1 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: bananas 60%, clothing, cocoa, vegetables, fruits, coconut
oil
partners: UK 56%, US 22%, Caricom countries 19% (1991)

Imports:
total value: $270.5 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: manufactured goods 21%, machinery and transportation
equipment 21%, food and live animals, chemicals, fuels
partners: US 34%, Caricom countries 17%, UK 14%, Japan 7%, Canada 4%
(1991)

Debt - external: $115 million (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.7000
(February 1997; fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Saint Lucia:Communications

Telephones: 26,000 (1992 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: system is automatically switched
international: direct microwave radio relay link with Martinique and
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; tropospheric scatter to Barbados;
international calls beyond these countries are carried by Intelsat
from Martinique

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 104,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 ( two commercial stations and one
cable)

Televisions: 26,000 (1992 est.)

@Saint Lucia:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 760 km
paved: 500 km
unpaved : 260 km

Ports and harbors: Castries, Vieux Fort

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Saint Lucia Police Force, Coast Guard

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $5 million (1991); note - for
police forces

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2% (1991)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transit point for South American drugs destined for the
US and Europe
______________________________________________________________________

SAINT PIERRE AND MIQUELON

(territorial collectivity of France)

@Saint Pierre and Miquelon:Geography

Location: Northern North America, islands in the North Atlantic Ocean,
south of Newfoundland (Canada)

Geographic coordinates: 46 50 N, 56 20 E

Map references: North America

Area:
total: 242 sq km
land: 242 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes eight small islands in the Saint Pierre and the
Miquelon groups

Area - comparative: 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 120 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: cold and wet, with much mist and fog; spring and autumn are
windy

Terrain: mostly barren rock

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Morne de la Grande Montagne 240 m

Natural resources: fish, deepwater ports

Land use:
arable land: 13%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: 4%
other: 83% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: persistent fog throughout the year can be a maritime
hazard

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: vegetation scanty

@Saint Pierre and Miquelon:People

Population: 6,862 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over : NA

Population growth rate: 0.76% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 12.63 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.59 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.59 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over : NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 9.26 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 76.64 years
male: 75.07 years
female: 78.53 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.62 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Frenchman(men), Frenchwoman(women)
adjective: French

Ethnic groups: Basques and Bretons (French fishermen)

Religions: Roman Catholic 99%

Languages: French

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99%
male: 99%
female: 99% (1982 est.)

@Saint Pierre and Miquelon:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Territorial Collectivity of Saint Pierre and
Miquelon
conventional short form: Saint Pierre and Miquelon
local long form: Departement de Saint-Pierre et Miquelon
local short form: Saint-Pierre et Miquelon

Data code: SB

Dependency status: self-governing territorial collectivity of France

Government type: NA

National capital: Saint-Pierre

Administrative divisions: none (territorial collectivity of France)
note : there are no first-order administrative divisions approved by
the US Government, but there are two communes - St. Pierre, Miquelon

Independence: none (territorial collectivity of France; has been under
French control since 1763)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French law with special adaptations for local
conditions, such as housing and taxation

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President of France Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May
1995), represented by Prefect Jean-Francois CARENCO (since NA)
head of government : President of the General Council Bernard LE
SOAVEC (since NA 1996)
cabinet: NA
elections: prefect appointed by the president of France on the advice
of the French Ministry of Interior; president of the General Council
is elected by the members of the council

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council or Conseil General (19
seats, 15 from Saint Pierre and 4 from Miquelon; members are elected
by popular vote to serve six-year terms)
elections: elections last held NA April 1994 (next to be held NA April
2000)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - RPR
15, other 4
note: Saint Pierre and Miquelon elect 1 seat to the French Senate;
elections last held NA September 1995 (next to be held NA September
2004); results - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - RPR
1; Saint Pierre and Miquelon also elects 1 seat to the French National
Assembly; elections last held 21 and 28 March 1993 (next to be held 25
May-1 June 1997 - special election); results - percent of vote by
party - UDF 73.78%; seats by party - UDF 1

Judicial branch: Superior Tribunal of Appeals or Tribunal Superieur
d'Appel

Political parties and leaders: Socialist Party or PS; Rassemblement
pour la Republique or RPR; Union pour la Democratie Francaise or UDF

International organization participation: FZ, WFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territorial collectivity of
France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territorial collectivity
of France)

Flag description: a yellow sailing ship rides on a dark blue
background with a black wave line under the ship; on the hoist side, a
vertical band is divided into three parts: the top part is red with a
green diagonal cross extending to the corners overlaid by a white
cross dividing the square into four sections; the middle part has a
white background with an ermine pattern; the third part has a red
background with two stylized yellow lions outlined in black, one on
top of the other; the flag of France is used for official occasions

Economy

Economy - overview: The inhabitants have traditionally earned their
livelihood by fishing and by servicing fishing fleets operating off
the coast of Newfoundland. The economy has been declining, however,
because the number of ships stopping at Saint Pierre has dropped
steadily over the years. In 1992, an arbitration panel awarded the
islands an exclusive economic zone of 12,348 sq km to settle a
longstanding territorial dispute with Canada, although it represents
only 25% of what France had sought. The islands are heavily subsidized
by France. Imports come primarily from Canada and France.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $74 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $11,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 2,980 (1994)
by occupation : NA

Unemployment rate: 9.3% (1995)

Budget:
revenues: $28 million
expenditures : $28 million, including capital expenditures of $7.8
million (1992 est.)

Industries: fish processing and supply base for fishing fleets;
tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: vegetables; cattle, sheep, pigs; fish catch of
14,800 metric tons (1994)

Exports:
total value: $5 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities : fish and fish products, fox and mink pelts
partners: US 58%, France 17%, UK 11%, Canada, Portugal (1990)

Imports:
total value: $70.2 million (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: meat, clothing, fuel, electrical equipment, machinery,
building materials
partners : Canada, France, US, Netherlands, UK

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.4169 (January 1997),
5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520 (1994), 5.6632 (1993), 5.2938
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Saint Pierre and Miquelon:Communications

Telephones: 3,650 (1994 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : NA
international: radiotelephone communication with most countries in the
world; 1 earth station in French domestic satellite system

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 3,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (programs from France, Canada, and
the US are rebroadcast)

Televisions: 2,000 (1992 est.)

@Saint Pierre and Miquelon:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 114 km
paved: 69 km
unpaved: 45 km (1994 est.)

Ports and harbors: Saint Pierre

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 2

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: focus of maritime boundary dispute between
Canada and France; in 1992 an arbitration panel awarded the islands an
exclusive economic zone area of 12,348 sq km to settle the dispute
______________________________________________________________________

SAINT VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
the Grenadines]

@Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:Geography

Location: Caribbean, islands in the Caribbean Sea, north of Trinidad
and Tobago

Geographic coordinates: 13 15 N, 61 12 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total : 340 sq km
land: 340 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: twice the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 84 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; little seasonal temperature variation; rainy season
(May to November)

Terrain: volcanic, mountainous

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Soufriere 1,234 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land: 10%
permanent crops: 18%
permanent pastures: 5%
forests and woodland: 36%
other: 31% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hurricanes; Soufriere volcano on the island of Saint
Vincent is a constant threat

Environment - current issues: pollution of coastal waters and
shorelines from discharges by pleasure yachts and other effluents; in
some areas pollution is severe enough to make swimming prohibitive

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

Geography - note: the administration of the islands of the Grenadines
group is divided between Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Grenada

@Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:People

Population: 119,092 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 32% (male 19,208; female 18,571)
15-64 years: 63% (male 37,555; female 37,166)
65 years and over: 5% (male 2,719; female 3,873) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.62% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 19.07 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.35 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -7.52 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 16.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 73.22 years
male: 71.71 years
female: 74.78 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.01 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Saint Vincentian(s) or Vincentian(s)
adjective: Saint Vincentian or Vincentian

Ethnic groups: black, white, East Indian, Carib Amerindian

Religions: Anglican, Methodist, Roman Catholic, Seventh-Day Adventist

Languages: English, French patois

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
total population : 96%
male: 96%
female: 96% (1970 est.)

@Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

Data code: VC

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: Kingstown

Administrative divisions: 6 parishes; Charlotte, Grenadines, Saint
Andrew, Saint David, Saint George, Saint Patrick

Independence: 27 October 1979 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 October (1979)

Constitution: 27 October 1979

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General David JACK (since 29 September 1989)
head of government: Prime Minister James Fitz-Allen MITCHELL (since 30
July 1984)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
the prime minister
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; following
legislative elections, the leader of the majority party is usually
appointed prime minister by the governor general; deputy prime
minister appointed by the governor general on the advice of the prime
minister

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Assembly (21 seats, 15 elected
representatives and 6 appointed senators; members are elected by
popular vote from single member constituencies to serve five-year
terms)
elections: last held 21 February 1994 (next to be held by NA May 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - NDP
12, ULP 3

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (based on Saint
Lucia); one judge of the Supreme Court resides in Saint Vincent

Political parties and leaders: New Democratic Party (NDP), James F.
MITCHELL; United People's Movement (UPM), Adrian SAUNDERS; National
Reform Party (NRP), Joel MIGUEL; Unity Labor Party (ULP),Vincent
BEACHE - formed by the coalition of Saint Vincent Labor Party (SVLP)
and the Movement for National Unity (MNU)

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CDB, ECLAC,
FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, OAS, OECS, OPANAL,
UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Kingsley C.A. LAYNE
chancery : 3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016
telephone: [1] (202) 364-6730
FAX: [1] (202) 364-6736

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; the Ambassador to Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines resides in Bridgetown (Barbados)

Flag description: three vertical bands of blue (hoist side), gold
(double width), and green; the gold band bears three green diamonds
arranged in a V pattern

Economy

Economy - overview: Agriculture, dominated by banana production, is
the most important sector of this lower middle income economy. The
services sector, based mostly on a growing tourist industry, is also
important. The government has been relatively unsuccessful at
introducing new industries, and high unemployment rates of 35%-40%
continue. The continuing dependence on a single crop represents the
biggest obstacle to the islands' development; tropical storms wiped
out substantial portions of crops in both 1994 and 1995. The tourism
sector has considerable potential for development over the next
decade.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $259 million (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,190 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 12%
industry: 18%
services: 70% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 67,000 (1984 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 26%, industry 17%, services 57% (1980 est.)

Unemployment rate: 35%-40% (1994 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $80 million
expenditures: $118 million, including capital expenditures of $39
million (1996 est.)

Industries: food processing, cement, furniture, clothing, starch

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 20,000 kW (1993)

Electricity - production: 61.6 million kWh (1993)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 480 kWh (1993)

Agriculture - products: bananas, coconuts, sweet potatoes, spices;
small numbers of cattle, sheep, pigs, goats; small fish catch used
locally

Exports:
total value: $55 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : bananas, eddoes and dasheen (taro), arrowroot starch,
tennis racquets
partners: Caricom countries 57%, UK 29%, US 9% (1994)

Imports:
total value : $122 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, chemicals and
fertilizers, minerals and fuels
partners: US 35%, Caricom countries 27%, UK 12% (1994)

Debt - external: $93 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.7000
(February 1997; fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:Communications

Telephones: 6,189 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: islandwide, fully automatic telephone system; VHF/UHF
radiotelephone from Saint Vincent to the other islands of the
Grenadines
international: VHF/UHF radiotelephone from Saint Vincent to Barbados;
new SHF radiotelephone to Grenada and to Saint Lucia; access to
Intelsat earth station in Martinique through Saint Lucia

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 76,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 cable

Televisions: 20,600 (1992 est.)

@Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 800 km
paved : 450 km
unpaved: 350 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Kingstown

Merchant marine:
total: 692 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,545,742 GRT/10,306,453
DWT
ships by type: bulk 114, cargo 349, chemical tanker 25, combination
bulk 9, combination ore/oil 6, container 36, liquefied gas tanker 4,
livestock carrier 5, multi-function large load carrier 1, oil tanker
65, passenger 3, passenger-cargo 1, refrigerated cargo 35,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 34, short-sea passenger 3, specialized tanker
1, vehicle carrier 1
note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 24 countries
among which are Croatia 29, Slovenia 9, China 9, Greece 5, Norway 3,
Ukraine 3, UAE 3, Germany 2, Russia 2, Syria 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 6 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 6
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Police
Force, Coast Guard

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment points for South American drugs destined
for the US and Europe
______________________________________________________________________

SAN MARINO

@San Marino:Geography

Location: Southern Europe, an enclave in central Italy

Geographic coordinates: 43 46 N, 12 25 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 60 sq km
land: 60 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
total: 39 km
border countries: Italy 39 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: Mediterranean; mild to cool winters; warm, sunny summers

Terrain: rugged mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Fiume Ausa 55 m
highest point: Monte Titano 749 m

Natural resources: building stone

Land use:
arable land: 17%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures : NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: 83% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Nuclear Test Ban
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution

Geography - note: landlocked; smallest independent state in Europe
after the Holy See and Monaco; dominated by the Apennines

@San Marino:People

Population: 24,714 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 16% (male 1,993; female 1,992)
15-64 years : 68% (male 8,442; female 8,270)
65 years and over: 16% (male 1,683; female 2,334) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.76% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 10.68 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.97 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 4.86 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.72 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 81.37 years
male: 77.42 years
female: 85.32 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.51 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Sammarinese (singular and plural)
adjective: Sammarinese

Ethnic groups: Sammarinese, Italian

Religions: Roman Catholic

Languages: Italian

Literacy:
definition: age 10 and over can read and write
total population: 96%
male: 97%
female: 95% (1976 est.)

@San Marino:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of San Marino
conventional short form: San Marino
local long form : Repubblica di San Marino
local short form: San Marino

Data code: SM

Government type: republic

National capital: San Marino

Administrative divisions: 9 municipalities (castelli, singular -
castello); Acquaviva, Borgo Maggiore, Chiesanuova, Domagnano, Faetano,
Fiorentino, Monte Giardino, San Marino, Serravalle

Independence: 301 AD (by tradition)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Foundation of the Republic, 3
September

Constitution: 8 October 1600; electoral law of 1926 serves some of the
functions of a constitution

Legal system: based on civil law system with Italian law influences;
has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: co-chiefs of state Captain Regent Piero Paolo
GASPERONI and Captain Regent Pietro BUGLI (for the period 1 April-30
September 1996)
head of government: Secretary of State for Foreign and Political
Affairs Gabriele GATTI (since NA July 1986)
cabinet: Congress of State elected by the Great and General Council
for a five-year term
elections : co-chiefs of state (captain regents) elected by the Great
and General Council for a six-month term; election last held NA March
1996 (next to be held NA September 1996); secretary of state for
foreign and political affairs elected by the Great and General Council
for a five-year term; election last held NA 1993 (next to be held NA
1998)
election results: Giancarlo VENTURINI and Maurizio RATTINI elected
captain regents; percent of legislative vote - NA; Gabriele GATTI
elected secretary of state for foreign and political affairs; percent
of legislative vote - NA
note: the popularly elected parliament (Great and General Council)
selects two of its members to serve as the Captains Regent (Co-Chiefs
of State) for a six-month period; they preside over meetings of the
Great and General Council and its cabinet (Congress of State) which
has ten other members, all selected by the Great and General Council;
assisting the Captains Regent are three Secretaries of State - Foreign
Affairs, Internal Affairs, and Finance - and several additional
secretaries; the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has assumed
many of the prerogatives of a prime minister

Legislative branch: unicameral Great and General Council or Consiglio
Grande e Generale (60 seats; members are elected by direct popular
vote to serve five-year terms)
elections : last held 30 May 1993 (next to be held by NA May 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - PDCS 41.4%, PSS 23.7%,
PDP 18.6%, AP 7.7%, MD 5.3%, RC 3.3%; seats by party - PDCS 26, PSS
14, PDP 11, AP 4, MD 3, RC 2

Judicial branch: Council of Twelve or Consiglio dei XII

Political parties and leaders: Christian Democratic Party or PDCS
[Cesare GASPERONI, secretary general]; Democratic Progressive Party or
PDP (formerly San Marino Communist Party or PSS) [Claudio FELICI,
secretary general]; San Marino Socialist Party or PSS [Maurizio
RATTINI, secretary general]; Democratic Movement or MD [Massimo
TONTI]; Popular Alliance or AP [Tito MASI]; Communist Refoundation or
RC [Paolo GIOVAGNOLI]

International organization participation: CE, ECE, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NAM (guest), OSCE, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US: San Marino does not have an
embassy in the US
honorary consulate(s) general: Washington and New York
honorary consulate(s): Detroit

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in San Marino; the US Consul General in Florence (Italy) is accredited
to San Marino

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and light
blue with the national coat of arms superimposed in the center; the
coat of arms has a shield (featuring three towers on three peaks)
flanked by a wreath, below a crown and above a scroll bearing the word
LIBERTAS (Liberty)

Economy

Economy - overview: The tourist sector contributes over 50% of GDP. In
1995 more than 3.3 million tourists visited San Marino. The key
industries are banking, wearing apparel, electronics, and ceramics.
Main agricultural products are wine and cheeses. The per capita level
of output and standard of living are comparable to those of Italy,
which supplies much of its food.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $408 million (1994 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.8% (1994 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $16,900 (1994 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5.3% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 15,600 (1995)
by occupation: industry 40%, agriculture 2% (1993)

Unemployment rate: 3.6% (April 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $320 million
expenditures: $320 million, including capital expenditures of $26
million (1995 est.)

Industries: tourism, textiles, electronics, ceramics, cement, wine

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW
note: electricity supplied by Italy

Electricity - production: NA kWh
note: electricity supplied by Italy

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: wheat, grapes, maize, olives; cattle, pigs,
horses, meat, cheese, hides

Exports: trade data are included with the statistics for Italy;
commodities: building stone, lime, wood, chestnuts, wheat, wine, baked
goods, hides, and ceramics

Imports: trade data are included with the statistics for Italy;
commodities: wide variety of consumer manufactures, food

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Italian lire (Lit) = 100 centesimi; note - also mints its
own coins

Exchange rates: Italian lire (Lit) per US$1 - 1,568.1 (January 1997),
1,542.9 (1996), 1,628.9 (1995), 1,612.4 (1994), 1,573.7 (1993),
1,232.4 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@San Marino:Communications

Telephones: 15,000 (1995 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: automatic telephone system completely integrated into
Italian system
international: microwave radio relay and cable connections to Italian
network; no satellite earth stations

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA (1 private radio
broadcast station)

Radios: 12,535 (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1991 est.)
note: receives broadcasts from Italy

Televisions: 7,500 (1992 est.)

@San Marino:Transportation

Railways: 0 km; note - there is a 1.5 km cable railway connecting the
city of San Marino to Borgo Maggiore

Highways:
total: 220 km
paved : NA km
unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: none

Military

Military branches: Voluntary Military Force, Police Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $3.7 million (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE

@Sao Tome and Principe:Geography

Location: Western Africa, island in the Gulf of Guinea, straddling the
Equator, west of Gabon

Geographic coordinates: 1 00 N, 7 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 960 sq km
land: 960 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: more than five times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 209 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; one rainy season (October to May)

Terrain: volcanic, mountainous

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Pico de Sao Tome 2,024 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 36%
permanent pastures: 1%
forests and woodland : NA%
other: 61% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion and
exhaustion

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea
signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Climate Change,
Desertification

@Sao Tome and Principe:People

Population: 147,865 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 40% (male 29,815; female 29,307)
15-64 years: 55% (male 40,830; female 41,056)
65 years and over : 5% (male 3,053; female 3,804) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.54% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 33.77 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.4 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.8 male(s)/female
total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 60.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 64.09 years
male : 62.15 years
female: 66.08 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.22 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Sao Tomean(s)
adjective: Sao Tomean

Ethnic groups: mestico, angolares (descendants of Angolan slaves),
forros (descendants of freed slaves), servicais (contract laborers
from Angola, Mozambique, and Cape Verde), tongas (children of
servicais born on the islands), Europeans (primarily Portuguese)

Religions: Roman Catholic, Evangelical Protestant, Seventh-Day
Adventist

Languages: Portuguese (official)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 73%
male: 85%
female : 62% (1991 est.)

@Sao Tome and Principe:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe
conventional short form: Sao Tome and Principe
local long form: Republica Democratica de Sao Tome e Principe
local short form: Sao Tome e Principe

Data code: TP

Government type: republic

National capital: Sao Tome

Administrative divisions: 2 districts (concelhos, singular -
concelho); Principe, Sao Tome

Independence: 12 July 1975 (from Portugal)

National holiday: Independence Day, 12 July (1975)

Constitution: approved March 1990; effective 10 September 1990

Legal system: based on Portuguese legal system and customary law; has
not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Miguel TROVOADA (since 4 April 1991)
head of government: Prime Minister Raul Wagner BRAGANCA NETO (since 20
November 1996)
cabinet : Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
proposal of the prime minister
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 30 June and 15 July 1996 (next to be held in 2001);
prime minister chosen by the National Assembly and approved by the
president
election results : Miguel TROVOADA reelected president in Sao Tome's
second multiparty presidential election; percent of vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assembleia
Nacional (55 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
serve five-year terms)
elections: parliament dissolved by President TROVOADA in July 1994;
early elections held 2 October 1994 (next to be held October 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - MLSTP 49%, PCD-GR 25.5%,
ADI 25.5%; seats by party - MLSTP 27, PCD-GR 14, ADI 14

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the National
Peoples Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Party for Democratic
Convergence-Reflection Group or PCD-GR [Armindo AGUIAR, secretary
general]; Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe or
MLSTP [Francisco Fortunas PIRES]; Christian Democratic Front or FDC
[Alphonse Dos SANTOS]; Democratic Opposition Coalition or CODO;
Independent Democratic Action or ADI [Carlos NEVES]; other small
parties

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, CEEAC, ECA, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat
(nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NAM, OAU, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Sao Tome and Principe does not
have an embassy in the US, but does have a Permanent Mission to the
UN, headed by First Secretary Domingos AUGUSTO Ferreira, located at
122 East 42nd Street, Suite 1604, New York, NY 10168, telephone [1]
(212) 697-4211

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Sao Tome and Principe; the Ambassador to Gabon is accredited to Sao
Tome and Principe on a nonresident basis and makes periodic visits to
the islands

Flag description: three horizontal bands of green (top), yellow
(double width), and green with two black five-pointed stars placed
side by side in the center of the yellow band and a red isosceles
triangle based on the hoist side; uses the popular pan-African colors
of Ethiopia

Economy

Economy - overview: This small poor island economy has become
increasingly dependent on cocoa since independence over 20 years ago.
However, cocoa production has substantially declined because of
drought and mismanagement. The resulting shortage of cocoa for export
has created a persistent balance-of-payments problem. Sao Tome has to
import all fuels, most manufactured goods, consumer goods, and a
significant amount of food. Over the years, it has been unable to
service its external debt and has had to depend on concessional aid
and debt rescheduling. Considerable potential exists for development
of a tourist industry, and the government has taken steps to expand
facilities in recent years. The government also has attempted to
reduce price controls and subsidies, but economic growth has remained
sluggish.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $149 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.6% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,000 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 28%
industry: 14%
services: 58% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 38% (1994 est.)

Labor force: most of population mainly engaged in subsistence
agriculture and fishing; there are shortages of skilled workers

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $58 million
expenditures: $114 million, including capital expenditures of $54
million (1993 est.)

Industries: light construction, textiles, soap, beer; fish processing;
timber

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 6,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 12 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: cocoa, coconuts, palm kernels, copra,
cinnamon, pepper, coffee, bananas, papaya, beans; poultry; fish

Exports:
total value: $7.8 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: cocoa 85%-90%, copra, coffee, palm oil
partners: Netherlands 75.7%, Germany 1.2%, Portugal 1.1%

Imports:
total value : $26.2 million (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: machinery and electrical equipment, food products,
petroleum products
partners: Portugal 32.2%, France 16.8%, Belgium 6.6%, Japan, Angola

Debt - external: $250 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 dobra (Db) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates: dobras (Db) per US$1 - 2,500 (November 1996), 1,610
(May 1995), 129.59 (1 July 1993), 230 (1992), 260.0 (November 1991)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Sao Tome and Principe:Communications

Telephones: 2,200 (1986 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: minimal system
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 33,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1992 est.)

Televisions: NA

@Sao Tome and Principe:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 310 km
paved: 211 km
unpaved: 99 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Santo Antonio, Sao Tome

Merchant marine:
total : 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,096 GRT/1,105 DWT
(1996 est.)

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Security Police

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 36,127 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 18,898 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

SAUDI ARABIA

@Saudi Arabia:Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea,
north of Yemen

Geographic coordinates: 25 00 N, 45 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 1,960,582 sq km
land: 1,960,582 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than one-fifth the size of the US

Land boundaries:
total: 4,415 km
border countries: Iraq 814 km, Jordan 728 km, Kuwait 222 km, Oman 676
km, Qatar 60 km, UAE 457 km, Yemen 1,458 km

Coastline: 2,640 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 18 nm
continental shelf: not specified
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: harsh, dry desert with great extremes of temperature

Terrain: mostly uninhabited, sandy desert

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
highest point: Jabal Sawda' 3,133 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, gold, copper

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 56%
forests and woodland: 1%
other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 4,350 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent sand and dust storms

Environment - current issues: desertification; depletion of
underground water resources; the lack of perennial rivers or permanent
water bodies has prompted the development of extensive seawater
desalination facilities; coastal pollution from oil spills

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of
the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: extensive coastlines on Persian Gulf and Red Sea
provide great leverage on shipping (especially crude oil) through
Persian Gulf and Suez Canal

@Saudi Arabia:People

Population: 20,087,965 (July 1997 est.)
note : includes 5,164,790 non-nationals (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 4,389,113; female 4,252,034)
15-64 years: 55% (male 6,561,725; female 4,410,589)
65 years and over: 2% (male 246,894; female 227,610) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.42% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 37.94 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.18 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.49 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.49 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.08 male(s)/female
total population: 1.26 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 43.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 69.51 years
male: 67.72 years
female: 71.4 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.41 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Saudi(s)
adjective: Saudi or Saudi Arabian

Ethnic groups: Arab 90%, Afro-Asian 10%

Religions: Muslim 100%

Languages: Arabic

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 62.8%
male: 71.5%
female: 50.2% (1995 est.)

@Saudi Arabia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
conventional short form: Saudi Arabia
local long form: Al Mamlakah al Arabiyah as Suudiyah
local short form: Al Arabiyah as Suudiyah

Data code: SA

Government type: monarchy

National capital: Riyadh

Administrative divisions: 13 provinces (mintaqah, singular -
mintaqat); Al Bahah, Al Hudud Ash Shamaliyah, Al Jawf, Al Madinah, Al
Qasim, Ar Riyad, Ash Sharqiyah (Eastern Province), 'Asir, Hail, Jizan,
Makkah, Najran, Tabuk

Independence: 23 September 1932 (unification)

National holiday: Unification of the Kingdom, 23 September (1932)

Constitution: none; governed according to Shari'a (Islamic law)

Legal system: based on Islamic law, several secular codes have been
introduced; commercial disputes handled by special committees; has not
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: none

Executive branch:
chief of state: King and Prime Minister FAHD bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud
(since 13 June 1982); Crown Prince and First Deputy Prime Minister
ABDALLAH bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud (half-brother to the king, heir to
the throne since 13 June 1982, regent from 1 January to 22 February
1996); note - the king is both the chief of state and head of
government
head of government: King and Prime Minister FAHD bin Abd al-Aziz Al
Saud (since 13 June 1982); Crown Prince and First Deputy Prime
Minister ABDALLAH bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud (half-brother to the king,
heir to the throne since 13 June 1982, regent from 1 January to 22
February 1996); note - the king is both the chief of state and head of
government
cabinet: Council of Ministers is appointed by the king and includes
many royal family members
elections: none; the king is an absolute monarch

Legislative branch: a consultative council (60 members and a chairman
appointed by the king for four-year terms)

Judicial branch: Supreme Council of Justice

Political parties and leaders: none allowed

International organization participation: ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF,
BIS (pending member), CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-19, G-77, GCC, IAEA, IBRD,
ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OAS (observer), OIC,
OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO
(applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador BANDAR bin Sultan bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud
chancery: 601 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037
telephone: [1] (202) 342-3800
consulate(s) general : Houston, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Wyche FOWLER, Jr.
embassy : Collector Road M, Diplomatic Quarter, Riyadh
mailing address: American Embassy-Riyadh, Unit 61307, APO AE
09803-1307; International Mail: P. O. Box 94309, Riyadh 11693
telephone: [966] (1) 488-3800
FAX : [966] (1) 488-7360
consulate(s) general: Dhahran, Jiddah (Jeddah)

Flag description: green with large white Arabic script (that may be
translated as There is no God but God; Muhammad is the Messenger of
God) above a white horizontal saber (the tip points to the hoist
side); green is the traditional color of Islam

Economy

Economy - overview: This is a well-to-do oil-based economy with strong
government controls over major economic activities. About 40% of GDP
comes from the private sector. Economic (as well as political) ties
with the US are especially strong. The petroleum sector accounts for
roughly 75% of budget revenues, 35% of GDP, and 90% of export
earnings. Saudi Arabia has the largest reserves of petroleum in the
world (26% of the proved total), ranks as the largest exporter of
petroleum, and plays a leading role in OPEC. For the 1990s the
government intends to bring its budget, which has been in deficit
since 1983, back into balance, and to encourage private economic
activity. Roughly four million foreign workers play an important role
in the Saudi economy, for example, in the oil and service sectors. For
over a decade, Saudi Arabia's domestic and international outlays have
outstripped its income, and the government has cut its foreign
assistance and is beginning to rein in domestic programs. A
substantial rise in oil prices was the key to a successful 1996. For
1997, the country looks to its policies of maintaining moderate fiscal
reforms, restraining public spending, and encouraging non-oil exports.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $205.6 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $10,600 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 9%
industry: 50%
services: 41% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1% (1996 est.)

Labor force: 6 million-7 million
by occupation: government 40%, industry, construction, and oil 25%,
services 30%, agriculture 5%
note: 35.87% of the population in the 15-64 age group is non-national
(July 1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 6.5% (1992 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $43.7 billion
expenditures: $48.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: crude oil production, petroleum refining, basic
petrochemicals, cement, two small steel-rolling mills, construction,
fertilizer, plastics

Industrial production growth rate: 17% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 20.9 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 62.75 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,228 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, barley, tomatoes, melons, dates,
citrus; mutton, chickens, eggs, milk

Exports:
total value: $53.1 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: petroleum and petroleum products 90%
partners: Japan 18%, US 15%, South Korea 10%, Singapore 7%, France 4%
(1995 est.)

Imports:
total value : $25.5 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, chemicals, motor
vehicles, textiles
partners: US 21%, UK 9%, Germany 8%, Japan 8%, Switzerland 5%, France
5% (1995 est.)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
donor: pledged $100 million in 1993 to fund reconstruction of Lebanon

Currency: 1 Saudi riyal (SR) = 100 halalah

Exchange rates: Saudi riyals (SR) per US$1 - 3.7450 (fixed rate since
June 1986)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Saudi Arabia:Communications

Telephones: 1.46 million (1993)

Telephone system: modern system
domestic: extensive microwave radio relay and coaxial and fiber-optic
cable systems
international: microwave radio relay to Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait,
Qatar, UAE, Yemen, and Sudan; coaxial cable to Kuwait and Jordan;
submarine cable to Djibouti, Egypt and Bahrain; satellite earth
stations - 5 Intelsat (3 Atlantic Ocean and 2 Indian Ocean), 1
Arabsat, and 1 Inmarsat (Indian Ocean region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 43, FM 13, shortwave 0

Radios: 5 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 80

Televisions: 4.5 million (1993 est.)

@Saudi Arabia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,390 km
standard gauge: 1,390 km 1.435-m gauge (448 km double track) (1992)

Highways:
total: 159,000 km
paved: 67,893 km
unpaved: 91,107 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 6,400 km; petroleum products 150 km; natural gas
2,200 km (includes natural gas liquids 1,600 km)

Ports and harbors: Ad Dammam, Al Jubayl, Duba, Jiddah, Jizan, Rabigh,
Ra's al Khafji, Al Mishab, Ras Tanura, Yanbu' al Bahr, Yanbu' al
Sinaiyah

Merchant marine:
total : 79 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 998,503 GRT/1,417,265
DWT
ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 12, chemical tanker 7, container 3,
liquefied gas tanker 1, livestock carrier 5, oil tanker 24, passenger
1, refrigerated cargo 4, roll-on/roll-off cargo 12, short-sea
passenger 9 (1996 est.)

Airports: 174 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 79
over 3,047 m: 30
2,438 to 3,047 m: 11
1,524 to 2,437 m: 22
914 to 1,523 m : 3
under 914 m: 13 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 95
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m: 66
914 to 1,523 m : 24 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Land Force (Army), Navy, Air Force, Air Defense
Force, National Guard, Coast Guard, Frontier Forces, Public Security
Force, Ministry of Interior Forces

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 5,498,492 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 3,057,533 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 176,060 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $13.3 billion (1996 budget)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 10% (1996); note - based on
1996 budget figure

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: large section of boundary with Yemen not
defined; location and status of boundary with UAE is not final, de
facto boundary reflects 1974 agreement; Kuwaiti ownership of Qaruh and
Umm al Maradim islands is disputed by Saudi Arabia; in 1996, agreed
with Qatar to demarcate border per 1992 accord; that process is
ongoing

Illicit drugs: death penalty for traffickers; increasing consumption
of heroin and cocaine
______________________________________________________________________

SENEGAL

@Senegal:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean, between
Guinea-Bissau and Mauritania

Geographic coordinates: 14 00 N, 14 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 196,190 sq km
land: 192,000 sq km
water: 4,190 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than South Dakota

Land boundaries:
total: 2,640 km
border countries: The Gambia 740 km, Guinea 330 km, Guinea-Bissau 338
km, Mali 419 km, Mauritania 813 km

Coastline: 531 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; rainy season (May to November) has
strong southeast winds; dry season (December to April) dominated by
hot, dry, harmattan wind

Terrain: generally low, rolling, plains rising to foothills in
southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point : unnamed location in the Futa Jaldon foothills 581 m

Natural resources: fish, phosphates, iron ore

Land use:
arable land : 12%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 16%
forests and woodland: 54%
other: 18% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 710 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: lowlands seasonally flooded; periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: wildlife populations threatened by
poaching; deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification;
overfishing

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Marine Dumping

Geography - note: The Gambia is almost an enclave of Senegal

@Senegal:People

Population: 9,403,546 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 48% (male 2,259,765; female 2,270,363)
15-64 years: 49% (male 2,190,263; female 2,418,385)
65 years and over: 3% (male 130,742; female 134,028) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.35% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 44.91 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 11.4 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.91 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.98 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 62.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 56.93 years
male: 54.15 years
female: 59.79 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.24 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Senegalese (singular and plural)
adjective: Senegalese

Ethnic groups: Wolof 36%, Fulani 17%, Serer 17%, Toucouleur 9%, Diola
9%, Mandingo 9%, European and Lebanese 1%, other 2%

Religions: Muslim 92%, indigenous beliefs 6%, Christian 2% (mostly
Roman Catholic)

Languages: French (official), Wolof, Pulaar, Diola, Mandingo

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 33.1%
male: 43%
female: 23.2% (1995 est.)

@Senegal:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Senegal
conventional short form: Senegal
local long form : Republique du Senegal
local short form: Senegal

Data code: SG

Government type: republic under multiparty democratic rule

National capital: Dakar

Administrative divisions: 10 regions (regions, singular - region);
Dakar, Diourbel, Fatick, Kaolack, Kolda, Louga, Saint-Louis,
Tambacounda, Thies, Ziguinchor

Independence: 4 April 1960 from France; complete independence was
achieved upon dissolution of federation with Mali on 20 August 1960
(The Gambia and Senegal signed an agreement on 12 December 1981 that
called for the creation of a loose confederation to be known as
Senegambia, but the agreement was dissolved on 30 September 1989)

National holiday: Independence Day, 4 April (1960)

Constitution: 3 March 1963, revised 1991

Legal system: based on French civil law system; judicial review of
legislative acts in Constitutional Court; the Council of State audits
the government's accounting office; Senegal has not accepted
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Abdou DIOUF (since 1 January 1981)
head of government: Prime Minister Habib THIAM (since 7 April 1991)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister in
consultation with the president
elections : president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
election last held 21 February 1993 (next to be held NA February
2000); prime minister appointed by the president
election results: Abdou DIOUF reelected president; percent of vote -
Abdou DIOUF (PS) 58.4%, Abdoulaye WADE (PDS) 32.03%, other 9.57%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
Nationale (120 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 9 May 1993 (next to be held NA May 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - PS 70%, PDS 23%, other
7%; seats by party - PS 84, PDS 27, LD-MPT 3, AND/JEF-PADS 3, PIT 2,
UDS-R 1

Judicial branch: under the terms of a reform of the judicial system
implemented in 1992, the principal organs of the judiciary are as
follows; Constitutional Court; Council of State; Court of Final
Appeals or Cour de Cessation; Court of Appeals

Political parties and leaders: African Party for Democracy and
Socialism or AND/JEF-PADS [Landing SAVANE, secretary-general];
Democratic League-Labor Party Movement or LD-MPT [Dr. Abdoulaye
BATHILY]; Democratic and Patriotic Convention or CDP Garab-Gi [Dr. Iba
Der THIAM]; Independent Labor Party or PIT [Amath DANSOKHO]; Let Us
Unite Senegal (coalition of African Party for Democracy and Socialism
and National Democratic Rally); National Democratic Rally or RND
[Madier DIOUF]; Senegalese Democratic Party or PDS [Abdoulaye WADE];
Senegalese Democratic Union-Renewal or UDS-R [Mamadou Puritain FALL];
Socialist Party or PS [President Abdou DIOUF]; other small
uninfluential parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: students; teachers; labor;
Muslim Brotherhoods

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA,
ECOWAS, FAO, FZ, G-15, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol,
IOC, IOM, ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, PCA, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UPU, WADB, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Mamadou Mansour SECK
chancery: 2112 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone : [1] (202) 234-0540, 0541

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Dane Farnsworth SMITH, Jr. (5 August
1996)
embassy: Avenue Jean XXIII at the corner of Avenue Kleber, Dakar
mailing address: B. P. 49, Dakar
telephone: [221] 23 42 96, 23 34 24
FAX: [221] 22 29 91

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side),
yellow, and red with a small green five-pointed star centered in the
yellow band; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia

Economy

Economy - overview: In 1994 Senegal embarked on its most concerted
structural adjustment effort yet to exploit the 50% devaluation of the
currencies of the 14 Francophone African nations which took place on
12 January of that year. After years of foot-dragging, the government
passed a liberalized labor code which should lower the cost of labor
and improve the manufacturing sector's competitiveness. Inroads also
have been made in closing tax loopholes, eliminating monopoly power in
several sectors, and privatizing state-owned firms. At the same time,
the government is holding the line on current fiscal expenditure under
the watchful eyes of international organizations on which it depends
for substantial support. The IMF, in mid-1995, announced that the
government met most economic targets as called for in its Enhanced
Structural Adjustment Facility agreement and released the second $50
million tranche. The country's narrow tax and resource base,
environmental degradation, and untamed growth of the population will
continue to hold back improvement in living standards over the medium
term. According to the draft budget, GDP will again rise by 5% in
1997.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $15.6 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,700 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 21%
industry: 19%
services: 60% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7.8% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 2.509 million (77% are engaged in subsistence farming; 175,000
wage earners)
by occupation: private sector 40%, government and parapublic 60%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $876 million
expenditures: NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: agricultural and fish processing, phosphate mining,
petroleum refining, construction materials

Industrial production growth rate: 2% (1994)

Electricity - capacity: 303,440 kW

Electricity - production: 1.027 billion kWh (1997 est.)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 109 kWh (1997 est.)

Agriculture - products: peanuts, millet, corn, sorghum, rice, cotton,
tomatoes, green vegetables; cattle, poultry, pigs; fish

Exports:
total value: $968 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: fish, ground nuts (peanuts), petroleum products,
phosphates, cotton
partners : France, other EU countries, Cote d'Ivoire, Mali

Imports:
total value: $1.22 billion (f.o.b., 1995.)
commodities: foods and beverages, consumer goods, capital goods,
petroleum products
partners: France 30%, other EU countries, Nigeria, Cameroon, Cote
d'Ivoire, Algeria, China, Japan

Debt - external: $4.1 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $439 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1966), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note: beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF
100 per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since
1948

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Senegal:Communications

Telephones: 81,988 (1995 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: above-average urban system; microwave radio relay, coaxial
cable and fiber optic cable in trunk system
international : 4 submarine cables; satellite earth station - 1
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 8, FM 6, shortwave 1

Radios: 850,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 61,000 (1993 est.)

@Senegal:Transportation

Railways:
total: 904 km
narrow gauge: 904 km 1.000-meter gauge (70 km double track) (1995)

Highways:
total: 14,580 km
paved: 4,214 km
unpaved: 10,366 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 897 km total; 785 km on the Senegal river, and 112 km on
the Saloum river

Ports and harbors: Dakar, Kaolack, Matam, Podor, Richard-Toll,
Saint-Louis, Ziguinchor

Merchant marine:
total: 1 bulk ship, 1,995 GRT/3,775 DWT (1996 est.)

Airports: 17 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 10
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 7
1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Gendarmerie,
National Police (Surete Nationale)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,938,693 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,012,181 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 94,397 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $81 million (1996 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.1% (1996 est.)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: short section of boundary with The Gambia is
indefinite

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for Southwest and Southeast Asian
heroin moving to Europe and North America; illicit cultivator of
cannabis
______________________________________________________________________

SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO

Introduction

Current issues: Serbia and Montenegro have asserted the formation of a
joint independent state, but this entity has not been formally
recognized as a state by the US; the US view is that the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) has dissolved and that none of
the successor republics represents its continuation.

@Serbia and Montenegro:Geography

Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Adriatic Sea, between
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina

Geographic coordinates: 44 00 N, 21 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 102,350 sq km (Serbia 88,412 sq km; Montenegro 13,938 sq km)
land: 102,136 sq km (Serbia 88,412 sq km; Montenegro 13,724 sq km)
water: 214 sq km (Serbia 0 sq km; Montenegro 214 sq km)

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Kentucky (Serbia is slightly
larger than Maine; Montenegro is slightly smaller than Connecticut)

Land boundaries:
total: 2,246 km
border countries : Albania 287 km (114 km with Serbia, 173 km with
Montenegro), Bosnia and Herzegovina 527 km (312 km with Serbia, 215 km
with Montenegro), Bulgaria 318 km (with Serbia), Croatia (north) 241
km (with Serbia), Croatia (south) 25 km (with Montenegro), Hungary 151
km (with Serbia), The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 221 km
(with Serbia), Romania 476 km (with Serbia)
note: the internal boundary between Montenegro and Serbia is 211 km

Coastline: 199 km (Montenegro 199 km, Serbia 0 km)

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: in the north, continental climate (cold winter and hot, humid
summers with well distributed rainfall); central portion, continental
and Mediterranean climate; to the south, Adriatic climate along the
coast, hot, dry summers and autumns and relatively cold winters with
heavy snowfall inland

Terrain: extremely varied; to the north, rich fertile plains; to the
east, limestone ranges and basins; to the southeast, ancient mountain
and hills; to the southwest, extremely high shoreline with no islands
off the coast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Adriatic Sea 0 m
highest point: Daravica 2,656 m

Natural resources: oil, gas, coal, antimony, copper, lead, zinc,
nickel, gold, pyrite, chrome

Land use:
arable land: NA%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures : NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: destructive earthquakes

Environment - current issues: pollution of coastal waters from sewage
outlets, especially in tourist-related areas such as Kotor; air
pollution around Belgrade and other industrial cities; water pollution
from industrial wastes dumped into the Sava which flows into the
Danube

Environment - international agreements:
party to: none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: controls one of the major land routes from Western
Europe to Turkey and the Near East; strategic location along the
Adriatic coast

@Serbia and Montenegro:People

Population: 11,223,853 (July 1997 est.) (Montenegro - 680,212; Serbia
- 10,543,641)

Age structure:
0-14 years : Montenegro - 22% (male 78,101; female 73,067); Serbia -
21% (male 1,146,238; female 1,066,842)
15-64 years: Montenegro - 68% (male 231,641; female 227,245); Serbia -
67% (male 3,544,055; female 3,495,673)
65 years and over: Montenegro - 10% (male 28,880; female 41,278);
Serbia - 12% (male 555,592; female 735,241) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: Montenegro - 0.00%; Serbia - -0.13% (1997
est.)

Birth rate: Montenegro - 13.93 births/1,000 population; Serbia - 12.68
births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: Montenegro - 7.33 deaths/1,000 population; Serbia - 9.64
deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: Montenegro: -6.61 migrant(s)/1,000 population;
Serbia: -4.34 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : Montenegro - 1.09 male(s)/female; Serbia - 1.08
male(s)/female
under 15 years: Montenegro - 1.07 male(s)/female; Serbia - 1.07
male(s)/female
15-64 years: Montenegro - 1.02 male(s)/female; Serbia - 1.01
male(s)/female
65 years and over: Montenegro - 0.70 male(s)/female; Serbia - 0.76
male(s)/female
all ages : Montenegro - 0.99 male(s)/female Serbia - 0.99
male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: Montenegro - 11.50 deaths/1,000 live births;
Serbia - 17.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : Montenegro - 75.96 years; Serbia - 72.9 years
male: Montenegro - 72.48 years; Serbia - 70.51 years
female: Montenegro - 79.76 Serbia - 75.47 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: Montenegro - 1.80 children born/woman; Serbia -
1.76 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Serb(s) and Montenegrin(s)
adjective: Serbian and Montenegrin

Ethnic groups: Serbs 63%, Albanians 14%, Montenegrins 6%, Hungarians
4%, other 13%

Religions: Orthodox 65%, Muslim 19%, Roman Catholic 4%, Protestant 1%,
other 11%

Languages: Serbo-Croatian 95%, Albanian 5%

Literacy: NA

@Serbia and Montenegro:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Serbia and Montenegro
local long form: none
local short form: Srbija-Crna Gora
note : Serbia and Montenegro has self-proclaimed itself the "Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia," but the US view is that the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) has dissolved and that none of the
successor republics represents its continuation

Data code: Serbia - SR; Montenegro - MW

Government type: republic

National capital: Belgrade

Administrative divisions: 2 republics (pokajine, singular - pokajina);
and 2 nominally autonomous provinces*; Kosovo*, Montenegro, Serbia,
Vojvodina*

Independence: 11 April 1992 (Federal Republic of Yugoslavia formed as
self-proclaimed successor to the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia - SFRY)

National holiday: St. Vitus Day, 28 June

Constitution: 27 April 1992

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 16 years of age, if employed; 18 years of age, universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Zoran LILIC (since 25 June 1993); note -
Slobodan MILOSEVIC is president of Serbia (since 9 December 1990);
Momir BULATOVIC is president of Montenegro (since 23 December 1990)
head of government: Prime Minister Radoje KONTIC (since 29 December
1992); Deputy Prime Ministers Jovan ZEBIC (since NA March 1993), Uros
KLIKOVAC (since 15 September 1994), and Nikola SAINOVIC (since 15
September 1995)
cabinet: Federal Executive Council
elections: president elected by the Federal Assembly for a four-year
term; election last held 25 June 1993 (next to be held NA 1997); prime
minister nominated by the president
election results : Zoran LILIC elected president; percent of
legislative vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Federal Assembly or Savezna Skupstina
consists of the Chamber of Republics or Vece Republika (40 seats, 20
Serbian, 20 Montenegrin; members distributed on the basis of party
representation in the republican assemblies to serve four-year terms)
and the Chamber of Citizens or Vece Gradjana (138 seats, 108 Serbian
with half elected by constituency majorities and half by proportional
representation, 30 Montenegrin with six elected by constituency and 24
proportionally; members serve four-year terms)
elections: Chamber of Republics - last held 24 December 1996 (next to
be held NA 2000); Chamber of Citizens - last held 3 November 1996
(next to be held NA 2000)
election results : Chamber of Republics - percent of vote by party -
NA; seats by party - NA; note - seats are filled on a proportional
basis to reflect the composition of the legislatures of the republics
of Montenegro and Serbia; Chamber of Citizens - percent of vote by
party - NA; seats by party - SPS/JUL/ND 64, Zajedno 22, DPSCG 20, SRS
16, NS 8, SVM 3, other 5; note - Zajedno coalition includes SPO, DS,
GSS

Judicial branch: Federal Court or Savezni Sud, judges are elected by
the Federal Assembly; Constitutional Court, judges are elected by the
Federal Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Serbian Socialist Party or SPS (former
Communist Party) [Slobodan MILOSEVIC]; Serbian Radical Party or SRS
[Vojislav SESELJ]; Serbian Renewal Movement or SPO [Vuk DRASKOVIC,
president]; Democratic Party or DS [Zoran DJINDJIC]; Democratic Party
of Serbia or DSS [Vojislav KOSTUNICA]; Democratic Party of Socialists
of Montenegro or DPSCG [Momir BULATOVIC, president]; People's Party of
Montenegro or NS [Milan PAROSKI]; Liberal Alliance of Montenegro
[Slavko PEROVIC]; Democratic Community of Vojvodina Hungarians or DZVM
[Sandor PALL]; League of Communists-Movement for Yugoslavia or SK-PJ
[Dragan ATANASOVSKI]; Democratic Alliance of Kosovo or LDK [Dr.
Ibrahim RUGOVA, president]; Party of Democratic Action or SDA
[Sulejman UGLJANIN]; Civic Alliance of Serbia or GSS [Vesna PESIC,
chairman]; Socialist Party of Montenegro or SP [leader NA]; Yugoslav
United Left or JUL [Mirjana MARKOVIC (MILOSEVIC's wife)]; New
Democracy or ND [Dusan MIHAJLOVIC]; Alliance of Vojvodina Hungarians
or SVM

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

Diplomatic representation in the US: the US and Serbia and Montenegro
do not maintain full diplomatic relations; the Embassy of the former
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continues to function in the
US
chief of mission : Ambassador (vacant); Counselor, Charge d'Affaires
ad interim Nebojsa VUJOVIC
chancery: 2410 California St. NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 462-6566

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US and Serbia and
Montenegro do not maintain full diplomatic relations
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Chief of Mission Richard M.
MILES
embassy: Kneza Milosa 50, 11000 Belgrade
mailing address : American Embassy, Belgrade, United States Department
of State, Washington, DC 20521-5070
telephone: [381] (11) 645655
FAX: [381] (11) 645332

Economy

Economy - overview: The swift collapse of the Yugoslav federation in
1991 has been followed by highly destructive warfare, the
destabilization of republic boundaries, and the breakup of important
interrepublic trade flows. Output in Serbia and Montenegro dropped by
half in 1992-93. Like the other former Yugoslav republics, it had
depended on its sister republics for large amounts of energy and
manufactures. Wide differences in climate, mineral resources, and
levels of technology among the republics accentuated this
interdependence, as did the communist practice of concentrating much
industrial output in a small number of giant plants. The breakup of
many of the trade links, the sharp drop in output as industrial plants
lost suppliers and markets, and the destruction of physical assets in
the fighting all have contributed to the economic difficulties of the
republics. One singular factor in the economic situation of Serbia and
Montenegro is the continuation in office of a communist government
that is primarily interested in political and military mastery, not
economic reform. Hyperinflation ended with the establishment of a new
currency unit in June 1993; prices were relatively stable in 1995.
Reliable statistics are hard to come by; the GDP estimate is extremely
rough. The economic boom anticipated by the government after the
suspension of UN sanctions in December 1995 failed to materialize in
1996 and early 1997, exacerbating the regime's financial problems.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $21 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,900 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 25%
industry : 50%
services: 25% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 79% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total : 2.178 million
by occupation: industry 41%, services 35%, trade and tourism 12%,
transportation and communication 7%, agriculture 5% (1994)

Unemployment rate: more than 35% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: machine building (aircraft, trucks, and automobiles; tanks
and weapons; electrical equipment; agricultural machinery); metallurgy
(steel, aluminum, copper, lead, zinc, chromium, antimony, bismuth,
cadmium); mining (coal, bauxite, nonferrous ore, iron ore, limestone);
consumer goods (textiles, footwear, foodstuffs, appliances);
electronics, petroleum products, chemicals, and pharmaceuticals

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 11.78 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 33.77 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,798 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: cereals, fruits, vegetables, tobacco, olives;
cattle, sheep, goats

Exports:
total value : $1.4 billion (1995 est.)
commodities: manufactured goods, food and live animals, raw materials
partners: Russia, Italy, Germany

Imports:
total value: $2.4 billion (1995 est.)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment, fuels and lubricants,
manufactured goods, chemicals, food and live animals, raw materials
partners : Germany, Italy, Russia

Debt - external: $11.2 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Yugoslav New Dinar (YD) = 100 paras

Exchange rates: Yugoslav New Dinars (YD) per US $1 - official rate:
4.9 (September 1996) 1.5 (early 1995); black market rate: 2 to 3
(early 1995)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Serbia and Montenegro:Communications

Telephones: 700,000

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international : satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: 27 (public or state-owned 1, private 26)

Radios: 2.015 million

Television broadcast stations: 8 (state owned 1, privately owned 7)
plus 1 Satellite TV down link and 48 cable distribution systems

Televisions: 1 million

@Serbia and Montenegro:Transportation

Railways:
total: 3,960 km
standard gauge: 3,960 km 1.435-m gauge (1,341 km electrified) (1994)

Highways:
total: 47,000 km
paved : 28,059 km
unpaved: 18,941 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: NA km

Pipelines: crude oil 415 km; petroleum products 130 km; natural gas
2,110 km

Ports and harbors: Bar, Belgrade, Kotor, Novi Sad, Pancevo, Tivat

Merchant marine:
total: 22 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 353,202 GRT/594,745 DWT
(Montenegro owns 21 ships totaling 326,133 GRT/544,600 DWT -
controlled by Montenegrin beneficial owners; Serbia owns 1 bulk
carrier totaling 17,069 GRT/50,145 DWT - controlled by Serbian
beneficial owners)
ships by type: bulk 9, cargo 8, container 3, short-sea passenger ferry
1
note: Montenegrin ships operate under the flags of Malta, Panama, and
Cyprus; the Serbian ship operates under the flag of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines; no ships remain under Yugoslav flag (1996 est.)

Airports: 44 (Serbia 39, Montenegro 5) (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 28
over 3,047 m: 2 (Serbia 2, Montenegro 0)
2,438 to 3,047 m: 5 (Serbia 3, Montenegro 2)
1,524 to 2,437 m: 5 (Serbia 4, Montenegro 1)
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (Serbia 2, Montenegro 0)
under 914 m : 14 (Serbia 14, Montenegro 0)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 16
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2 (Serbia 2, Montenegro 0)
914 to 1,523 m: 14 (Serbia 12, Montenegro 2) (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: People's Army (includes Ground Forces with internal
and border troops, Naval Forces, and Air and Air Defense Forces),
Civil Defense

Military manpower - military age: Montenegro - 19; Serbia - NA

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: Montenegro - 187,041; Serbia - 2,734,293 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: Montenegro - 150,933
(1997 est.); Serbia - 2,191,041 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: Montenegro -
5,518; Serbia - NA (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 6.5 billion dinars (1995 est.);
note - conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the
current exchange rate could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 24% (1995 est.)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: disputes with Bosnia and Herzegovina over
Serbian populated areas; Albanian majority in Kosovo seeks
independence from Serbian republic; Eastern Slavonia, which was held
by ethnic Serbs during the ethnic conflict, is currently being
overseen by the UN Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia;
reintegration of Eastern Slavonia into Croatia will occur in 1997;
Serbia and Montenegro is disputing Croatia's claim to the Prevlaka
Peninsula in southern Croatia because it controls the entrance to
Kotor Bay in Montenegro; Prevlaka is currently under observation by
the UN military observer mission in Prevlaka (UNMOP)

Illicit drugs: major transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin
moving to Western Europe on the Balkan route
______________________________________________________________________

SEYCHELLES

@Seychelles:Geography

Location: Eastern Africa, group of islands in the Indian Ocean,
northeast of Madagascar

Geographic coordinates: 4 35 S, 55 40 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 455 sq km
land: 455 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 491 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; humid; cooler season during southeast
monsoon (late May to September); warmer season during northwest
monsoon (March to May)

Terrain: Mahe Group is granitic, narrow coastal strip, rocky, hilly;
others are coral, flat, elevated reefs

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point : Morne Seychellois 905 m

Natural resources: fish, copra, cinnamon trees

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 13%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: 11%
other: 74% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: lies outside the cyclone belt, so severe storms are
rare; short droughts possible

Environment - current issues: water supply depends on catchments to
collect rain water

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

Geography - note: 40 granitic and about 50 coralline islands

@Seychelles:People

Population: 78,107 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 30.2% (male 11,885; female 11,708)
15-64 years: 63.5% (male 24,336; female 25,293)
65 years and over: 6.3% (male 1,698; female 3,187) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.7% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 20.53 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.14 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -6.4 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.53 male(s)/female
total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 12.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 69.57 years
male: 64.81 years
female: 74.47 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.06 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Seychellois (singular and plural)
adjective: Seychelles

Ethnic groups: Seychellois (mixture of Asians, Africans, Europeans)

Religions: Roman Catholic 90%, Anglican 8%, other 2%

Languages: English (official), French (official), Creole

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 58%
male: 56%
female: 60% (1971 est.)

@Seychelles:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Seychelles
conventional short form: Seychelles

Data code: SE

Government type: republic

National capital: Victoria

Administrative divisions: 23 administrative districts; Anse aux Pins,
Anse Boileau, Anse Etoile, Anse Louis, Anse Royale, Baie Lazare, Baie
Sainte Anne, Beau Vallon, Bel Air, Bel Ombre, Cascade, Glacis, Grand'
Anse (on Mahe Island), Grand' Anse (on Praslin Island), La Digue, La
Riviere Anglaise, Mont Buxton, Mont Fleuri, Plaisance, Pointe Larue,
Port Glaud, Saint Louis, Takamaka

Independence: 29 June 1976 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 18 June (1993) (adoption of new
constitution)

Constitution: 18 June 1993

Legal system: based on English common law, French civil law, and
customary law

Suffrage: 17 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President France Albert RENE (since 5 June 1977); note
- the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President France Albert RENE (since 5 June 1977);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 20-23 July 1993 (next to be held NA 1998)
election results : President France Albert RENE reelected; percent of
vote - France Albert RENE (SPPF) 59.5%, Sir James MANCHAM (DP) 36.72%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
Nationale (33 seats, 22 popularly elected by direct vote, 11 allocated
on a proportional basis to parties winning at least 9 percent of the
vote; members serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 20-23 July 1993 (next to be held NA 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - SPPF 82%, DP 15%, UO 3%;
seats by party (elected) - SPPF 21, DP 1; seats by party (awarded) -
SPPF 6, DP 4, UO 1
note: the 11 awarded seats are apportioned according to the share of
each party in the total vote

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal; Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: ruling party - Seychelles People's
Progressive Front or SPPF [France Albert RENE]; Democratic Party or DP
[Sir James MANCHAM]; United Opposition or UO [Wavel RAMKALAWAN] - a
coalition of the following parties: Seychelles Party or PS [Wavel
RAMKALAWAN], Seychelles Democratic Movement or MSPD[Jacques HONDOUL],
and Seychelles Liberal Party or SLP [Ogilvie BERLOUIS]; New Democratic
Party [Christopher GILL (former member of DP)]

Political pressure groups and leaders: trade unions; Roman Catholic
Church

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, C, ECA,
FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires ad interim
Claude MOREL
chancery: (temporary) care of the Permanent Mission of Seychelles to
the United Nations, 820 Second Avenue, Suite 900F, New York, NY 10017
telephone: [1] (212) 972-1785
FAX : [1] (212) 972-1786

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: the ambassador to Mauritius is accredited to the
Seychelles

Flag description: five oblique bands of blue (hoist side), yellow,
red, white, and green (bottom) radiating from the bottom of the hoist
side

Economy

Economy - overview: Since independence in 1976, per capita output in
this Indian Ocean archipelago has grown to roughly seven times the old
near-subsistence level, led by the tourist sector, which employs about
30% of the labor force and provides more than 70% of hard currency
earnings. In recent years the government has encouraged foreign
investment in order to upgrade hotels and other services. At the same
time, the government has moved to reduce the dependence on tourism by
promoting the development of farming, fishing, and small-scale
manufacturing. The vulnerability of the tourist sector was illustrated
by the sharp drop in 1991-92 due largely to the Gulf war. Although the
industry has rebounded, the government recognizes the continuing need
for upgrading the sector in the face of stiff international
competition.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $450 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.1% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,000 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 3.6%
industry: 15%
services: 81.4% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: -0.3% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 26,000 (1996)
by occupation: industry and commerce 31%, services 21%, government
20%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing 12%, other 16% (1985)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $220 million
expenditures: $241 million, including capital expenditures of $36
million (1994 est.)

Industries: tourism; fishing; processing of coconuts and vanilla, coir
(coconut fiber) rope, boat building, printing, furniture; beverages

Industrial production growth rate: 4% (1992)

Electricity - capacity: 33,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 110 million kWh (1992)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,582 kWh (1992 est.)

Agriculture - products: coconuts, cinnamon, vanilla, sweet potatoes,
cassava (tapioca), bananas; broiler chickens; tuna fishing (expansion
under way)

Exports:
total value: $56.1 million ( f.o.b. 1995)
commodities: fish, cinnamon bark, copra, petroleum products
(re-exports)
partners : France, UK, China, Germany, Japan (1993)

Imports:
total value: $238 million (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: manufactured goods, food, petroleum products, tobacco,
beverages, machinery and transportation equipment
partners: China, Singapore, South Africa, UK (1993)

Debt - external: $170 million (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Seychelles rupee (SRe) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Seychelles rupees (SRe) per US$1 - 4.9968 (January
1997), 4.9700 (1996), 4.7620 (1995), 5.0559 (1994), 5.1815 (1993),
5.1220 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Seychelles:Communications

Telephones: 13,000 (1995 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : radiotelephone communications between islands in the
archipelago
international: direct radiotelephone communications with adjacent
island countries and African coastal countries; satellite earth
station - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 35,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (in a government network)

Televisions: 6,000 (1993 est.)

@Seychelles:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 270 km
paved: 170 km
unpaved: 100 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Victoria

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 14 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 12
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 5
under 914 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Coast Guard, Marines, National Guard,
Presidential Protection Unit, Police Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 21,860 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 11,030 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $13.7 million (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims Tromelin Island
______________________________________________________________________

SIERRA LEONE

@Sierra Leone:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean, between
Guinea and Liberia

Geographic coordinates: 8 30 N, 11 30 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 71,740 sq km
land: 71,620 sq km
water : 120 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than South Carolina

Land boundaries:
total: 958 km
border countries: Guinea 652 km, Liberia 306 km

Coastline: 402 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 200 nm
continental shelf : 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; summer rainy season (May to December);
winter dry season (December to April)

Terrain: coastal belt of mangrove swamps, wooded hill country, upland
plateau, mountains in east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Loma Mansa (Bintimani) 1,948 m

Natural resources: diamonds, titanium ore, bauxite, iron ore, gold,
chromite

Land use:
arable land: 7%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 31%
forests and woodland: 28%
other : 33% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 290 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dry, sand-laden harmattan winds blow from the Sahara
(November to May); sandstorms, dust storms

Environment - current issues: rapid population growth pressuring the
environment; overharvesting of timber, expansion of cattle grazing,
and slash-and-burn agriculture have resulted in deforestation and soil
exhaustion; civil war depleting natural resources; overfishing

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of the
Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Environmental Modification

@Sierra Leone:People

Population: 4,891,546 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 45% (male 1,084,736; female 1,119,802)
15-64 years: 52% (male 1,216,111; female 1,320,847)
65 years and over: 3% (male 76,371; female 73,679) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.54% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 46.67 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 17.75 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 6.5 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.04 male(s)/female
total population : 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 132.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 48.02 years
male: 45.06 years
female: 51.07 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.29 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Sierra Leonean(s)
adjective: Sierra Leonean

Ethnic groups: 13 native African tribes 99% (Temne 30%, Mende 30%,
other 39%), Creole, European, Lebanese, and Asian 1%

Religions: Muslim 60%, indigenous beliefs 30%, Christian 10%

Languages: English (official, regular use limited to literate
minority), Mende (principal vernacular in the south), Temne (principal
vernacular in the north), Krio (the language of the re-settled
ex-slave population of the Freetown area and is lingua franca)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write in English, Mende,
Temne, or Arabic
total population: 31.4%
male: 45.4%
female: 18.2% (1995 est.)

@Sierra Leone:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Sierra Leone
conventional short form: Sierra Leone

Data code: SL

Government type: constitutional democracy

National capital: Freetown

Administrative divisions: 3 provinces and 1 area*; Eastern, Northern,
Southern, Western*

Independence: 27 April 1961 (from UK)

National holiday: Republic Day, 27 April (1961)

Constitution: 1 October 1991; subsequently amended several times

Legal system: based on English law and customary laws indigenous to
local tribes; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Ahmad Tejan KABBAH (inaugurated 29 March
1996); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
head of government: President Ahmad Tejan KABBAH (inaugurated 29 March
1996); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
cabinet : Ministers of State appointed by the president with the
approval of the House of Representatives; the cabinet is responsible
to the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election held 26-27 February 1996 (next to be held NA 2001); note -
president's tenure of office is limited to 2 five-year terms
election results : Ahmad Tejan KABBAH elected president; percent of
popular vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Representatives (80 seats, 68
elected, 12 filled by paramount chiefs elected in separate elections;
members serve NA-year terms)
elections : last held NA February 1996 (next to be held NA)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - SLPP
27, UNPP 17, PDP 12, APC 5, NUP 4, DCP 3; note - first elections since
the former House of Representatives was shut down by the military coup
of 29 April 1992

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: 15 parties registered for the February
1996 elections; National Peoples Party or NPP [Andrew TURAY];
Democratic Center Party or DCP [Abu KOROMA]; Peoples Progressive Party
or PPP [Edward KAMARA, chairman]; Coalition for Progress Party or CPP
[Geredine WILLIAMS-SARHO]; National Unity Movement or NUM; United
National Peoples Party or UNPP; Peoples Democratic Party or PDP
[Thaimu BANGURA, chairman]; All Peoples Congress or APC [S. A. T.
KOROMA, chairman]; National Republican Party or NRP; Social Democratic
Party or SDP; Peoples National Convention or PNC [I. B. KARGBO,
chairman]; National Unity Party or NUP [A. O. D. GEORGE, chairman];
Sierra Leone Peoples Party or SLPP [Paul DUNBAR, chairman]; National
Democratic Alliance or NDA; National Alliance for Democracy Party or
NADP

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC,
ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador John Ernest LEIGH
chancery: 1701 19th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 939-9261 through 9263
FAX: [1] (202) 483-1793

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador John L. HIRSCH
embassy: Corner of Walpole and Siaka Stevens Streets, Freetown
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone: [232] (22) 226481 through 226485
FAX : [232] (22) 225471

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of light green (top),
white, and light blue

Economy

Economy - overview: Sierra Leone has substantial mineral,
agricultural, and fishery resources. However, the economic and social
infrastructure is not well developed, and serious social disorders
continue to hamper economic development. Agriculture employs about
two-thirds of the working population, with subsistence agriculture
dominating the sector. Manufacturing consists mainly of the processing
of raw materials and of light manufacturing for the domestic market.
The mining of diamonds, bauxite, and rutile is the major source of
hard currency. The government has worked hard to meet its IMF- and
World Bank-mandated stabilization targets, holding down fiscal
deficits and retiring much of its domestic debt, but at a steep cost
in terms of forgone capital investments and social spending. Moreover,
the economic infrastructure has nearly collapsed due to neglect and
war-related disruptions in the mining and agricultural export sectors.
The continuing civil war in Liberia has led to a large influx of
refugees, who place additional burdens on Sierra Leone's fragile
economy.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $4.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $980 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 49%
industry: 21%
services: 30% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5.6% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 1.369 million (1981 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 65%, industry 19%, services 16% (1981 est.)
note: only about 65,000 wage earners (1985)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $75 million
expenditures: $128 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY94/95 est.)

Industries: mining (diamonds, bauxite, rutile); small-scale
manufacturing (beverages, textiles, cigarettes, footwear); petroleum
refining

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 119,000 kW (1991)

Electricity - production: 185 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 43 kWh (1991 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, coffee, cocoa, palm kernels, palm oil,
peanuts; poultry, cattle, sheep, pigs; fish

Exports:
total value: $39.3 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: rutile, diamonds, bauxite, coffee, cocoa, fish
partners: US 20%, Belgium 20%, Spain 13%, UK 6%, other Western Europe

Imports:
total value: $140 million (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, fuels and lubricants
partners: Cote d'Ivoire, EU countries, India

Debt - external: $1.4 billion (1994)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 leone (Le) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: leones (Le) per US$1 - 908.08 (January 1997), 920.73
(1996), 755.22 (1995), 586.74 (1994), 567.46 (1993), 499.44 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Sierra Leone:Communications

Telephones: 17,526 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: marginal telephone and telegraph service
domestic: national microwave radio relay system made unserviceable by
military activities
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 980,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: 45,000 (1992 est.)

@Sierra Leone:Transportation

Railways:
total : 84 km used on a limited basis because the mine at Marampa is
closed
narrow gauge: 84 km 1.067-m gauge

Highways:
total: 11,674 km
paved: 1,284 km
unpaved : 10,390 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 800 km; 600 km navigable year round

Ports and harbors: Bonthe, Freetown, Pepel

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 4 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
over 3,047 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Police, Security Forces

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 1,037,049 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 503,252 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $14 million (FY92/93)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.6% (FY92/93)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

SINGAPORE

@Singapore:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, islands between Malaysia and Indonesia

Geographic coordinates: 1 22 N, 103 48 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 647.5 sq km
land: 637.5 sq km
water: 10 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than 3.5 times the size of
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 193 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone : within and beyond territorial sea, as defined
in treaties and practice
territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid, rainy; no pronounced rainy or dry
seasons; thunderstorms occur on 40% of all days (67% of days in April)

Terrain: lowland; gently undulating central plateau contains water
catchment area and nature preserve

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Singapore Strait 0 m
highest point: Bukit Timah 166 m

Natural resources: fish, deepwater ports

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 6%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: 5%
other : 87% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: industrial pollution; limited natural
fresh water resources; limited land availability presents waste
disposal problems

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of
the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution
signed, but not ratified : Climate Change

Geography - note: focal point for Southeast Asian sea routes

@Singapore:People

Population: 3,440,693 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 21% (male 378,651; female 357,070)
15-64 years: 72% (male 1,237,478; female 1,239,494)
65 years and over: 7% (male 101,536; female 126,464) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.67% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 14.13 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.68 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 7.27 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.08 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.8 male(s)/female
total population : 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 3.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 78.15 years
male: 75.14 years
female: 81.4 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.46 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Singaporean(s)
adjective: Singapore

Ethnic groups: Chinese 76.4%, Malay 14.9%, Indian 6.4%, other 2.3%

Religions: Buddhist (Chinese), Muslim (Malays), Christian, Hindu,
Sikh, Taoist, Confucianist

Languages: Chinese (official), Malay (official and national), Tamil
(official), English (official)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 91.1%
male: 95.9%
female: 86.3% (1995 est.)

@Singapore:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Singapore
conventional short form: Singapore

Data code: SN

Government type: republic within Commonwealth

National capital: Singapore

Administrative divisions: none

Independence: 9 August 1965 (from Malaysia)

National holiday: National Day, 9 August (1965)

Constitution: 3 June 1959, amended 1965 (based on preindependence
State of Singapore Constitution)

Legal system: based on English common law; has not accepted compulsory
ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state : President ONG Teng Cheong (since 1 September 1993)
head of government: Prime Minister GOH Chok Tong (since 28 November
1990) and Deputy Prime Ministers LEE Hsien Loong (since 28 November
1990) and Tony TAN Keng Yam (since 1 August 1995)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president, responsible to Parliament
elections : president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
election last held 28 August 1993 (next to be held NA August 1999);
following legislative elections, the leader of the majority party or
the leader of a majority coalition is usually appointed prime minister
by the president; deputy prime ministers appointed by the president
election results: ONG Teng Cheong elected president in the country's
first popular election for president; percent of vote - ONG Teng
Cheong 59%, CHUA Kim Yeow 41%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (83 seats; members elected
by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 2 January 1997 (next to be held by 2002)
election results: percent of vote by party - PAP 65% (in contested
constituencies), other 35%; seats by party - PAP 81, WP 1, SPP 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chief justice is appointed by the
president with the advice of the prime minister, other judges are
appointed by the president with the advice of the chief justice; Court
of Appeals

Political parties and leaders:
government : People's Action Party (PAP), GOH Chok Tong, secretary
general
opposition: Singapore Democratic Party (SDP), CHEE Soon Juan; Workers'
Party (WP), J. B. JEYARETNAM; National Solidarity Party (NSP), C. K.
TAN; Singapore People's Party (SPP), CHIAM See Tong

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, BIS
(pending member), C, CCC, CP, ESCAP, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
ICFTU, ICRM, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, Mekong Group, NAM, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNIKOM,
UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador CHAN Heng Chee
chancery: 3501 International Place NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 537-3100
FAX: [1] (202) 537-0876

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Timothy A. CHORBA
embassy : 27 Napier Road, Singapore 258508
mailing address: FPO AP 96534
telephone: [65] 476-9100
FAX: [65] 476-9340

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and white;
near the hoist side of the red band, there is a vertical, white
crescent (closed portion is toward the hoist side) partially enclosing
five white five-pointed stars arranged in a circle

Economy

Economy - overview: Singapore has an open economy with strong service
and manufacturing sectors and excellent international trading links
derived from its entrepot history. A slump in global demand for
electronics slowed Singapore's export growth in 1996, and as a result,
real GDP grew 6.5%, down from 8.9% in 1995. The government predicts
growth will be in the 5%-7% range in 1997. Rising labor costs continue
to be a threat to Singapore's competitiveness, and the government's
strategy to address this problem includes increasing productivity,
improving infrastructure, and encouraging higher value-added
industries. In applied technology, per capita output, investment, and
labor discipline, Singapore has key attributes of a developed country.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $72.2 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6.5% (1996)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $21,200 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NEGL%
industry: 28%
services : 72%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.3% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 1.801 million (1996 est.)
by occupation : financial, business, and other services 33.5%,
manufacturing 25.6%, commerce 22.9%, construction 6.6%, other 11.4%
(1994)

Unemployment rate: 2.7% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $18.5 billion
expenditures: $13.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $4.4
billion (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: petroleum refining, electronics, oil drilling equipment,
rubber processing and rubber products, processed food and beverages,
ship repair, entrepot trade, financial services, biotechnology

Industrial production growth rate: 7% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 4.51 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 22.1 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 7,002 kWh (1995)

Agriculture - products: rubber, copra, fruit, vegetables; poultry

Exports:
total value: $144.8 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: computer equipment, rubber and rubber products, petroleum
products, telecommunications equipment
partners: Malaysia 19%, US 18%, Hong Kong 9%, Japan 8%, Thailand 6%
(1995)

Imports:
total value: $151.1 billion (1996 est., including goods for reexport)
commodities: aircraft, petroleum, chemicals, foodstuffs
partners: Japan 21%, Malaysia 15%, US 15%, Thailand 5%, Taiwan 4%,
South Korea 4% (1995)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Singapore dollar (S$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Singapore dollars (S$) per US$1 - 1.4061 (January
1997), 1.4100 (1996), 1.4174 (1995), 1.5274 (1994), 1.6158 (1993),
1.6290 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Singapore:Communications

Telephones: 1.23 million (1993 est.)

Telephone system: good domestic facilities; good international service
domestic: NA
international: submarine cables to Malaysia (Sabah and Peninsular
Malaysia), Indonesia, and the Philippines; satellite earth stations -
2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 1 Pacific Ocean), and 1 Inmarsat
(Pacific Ocean region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 13, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1996)

Televisions: 1.05 million (1992 est.)

@Singapore:Transportation

Railways:
total: 38.6 km
narrow gauge: 38.6 km 1.000-m gauge
note: there is a 67 km mass transit system with 42 stations

Highways:
total: 2,972 km
paved: 2,892 km (including 132 km of expressways)
unpaved : 80 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Singapore

Merchant marine:
total : 737 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 15,420,046
GRT/24,508,019 DWT
ships by type: bulk 122, cargo 123, chemical tanker 24, combination
bulk 8, combination ore/oil 6, container 115, liquefied gas tanker 23,
livestock carrier 1, multifunction large-load carrier 6, oil tanker
259, refrigerated cargo 7, roll-on/roll-off cargo 14, short-sea
passenger 1, specialized tanker 4, vehicle carrier 24
note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 24 countries
among which are Japan 42, Denmark 33, Hong Kong 26, Germany 22,
Thailand 17, Sweden 15, Belgium 11, China 10, US 10, and Indonesia 8;
Singapore also owns an additional 220 ships (1,000 GRT or over)
totaling 10,289,213 DWT that operate under the registries of The
Bahamas, Cyprus, Hong Kong, Honduras, Liberia, Malta, Malaysia,
Panama, Thailand, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Vanuatu (1996
est.)

Airports: 8 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 8
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 3
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, People's Defense Force,
Police Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,034,380 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 756,649 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $3.64 billion (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 5.2% (FY95/96)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: two islands in dispute with Malaysia

Illicit drugs: transit point for Golden Triangle heroin going to the
US, Western Europe, and the Third World; also a money-laundering
center
______________________________________________________________________

SLOVAKIA

@Slovakia:Geography

Location: Central Europe, south of Poland

Geographic coordinates: 48 40 N, 19 30 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 48,845 sq km
land: 48,800 sq km
water: 45 sq km

Area - comparative: about twice the size of New Hampshire

Land boundaries:
total: 1,355 km
border countries: Austria 91 km, Czech Republic 215 km, Hungary 515
km, Poland 444 km, Ukraine 90 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; cool summers; cold, cloudy, humid winters

Terrain: rugged mountains in the central and northern part and
lowlands in the south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Bodrok River 94 m
highest point: Gerlachovka 2,655 m

Natural resources: brown coal and lignite; small amounts of iron ore,
copper and manganese ore; salt

Land use:
arable land: 31%
permanent crops : 3%
permanent pastures: 17%
forests and woodland: 41%
other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: air pollution from metallurgical plants
presents human health risks; acid rain damaging forests

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law
of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol

Geography - note: landlocked

@Slovakia:People

Population: 5,387,665 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 21% (male 588,511; female 563,090)
15-64 years : 68% (male 1,802,132; female 1,831,119)
65 years and over: 11% (male 233,476; female 369,337) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.12% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 10.37 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.58 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.37 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.63 male(s)/female
total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 10 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 72.91 years
male : 69.11 years
female: 76.9 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.34 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Slovak(s)
adjective: Slovak

Ethnic groups: Slovak 85.7%, Hungarian 10.7%, Gypsy 1.5% (the 1992
census figures underreport the Gypsy/Romany community, which could
reach 500,000 or more), Czech 1%, Ruthenian 0.3%, Ukrainian 0.3%,
German 0.1%, Polish 0.1%, other 0.3%

Religions: Roman Catholic 60.3%, atheist 9.7%, Protestant 8.4%,
Orthodox 4.1%, other 17.5%

Languages: Slovak (official), Hungarian

Literacy: NA

@Slovakia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Slovak Republic
conventional short form: Slovakia
local long form: Slovenska Republika
local short form: Slovensko

Data code: LO

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Bratislava

Administrative divisions: 4 departments (kraje, singular - kraj)
Bratislava, Zapadoslovensky, Stredoslovensky, Vychodoslovensky
note: an article in the Slovakian press mentions there are 8
departments named Bratislava, Banska Bystrica, Kosice, Nitra, Presov,
Trnava, Trencin, and Zilina

Independence: 1 January 1993 (from Czechoslovakia)

National holiday: Slovak Constitution Day, 1 September (1992);
Anniversary of Slovak National Uprising, 29 August (1944)

Constitution: ratified 1 September 1992, fully effective 1 January
1993

Legal system: civil law system based on Austro-Hungarian codes; has
not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction; legal code modified to
comply with the obligations of Organization on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and to expunge Marxist-Leninist legal
theory

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Michal KOVAC (since 8 February 1993)
head of government : Prime Minister Vladimir MECIAR (since 12 December
1994)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president on the recommendation of
the prime minister
elections: president elected by National Council for a five-year term;
election last held 8 February 1993 (next to be held March 1998);
following National Council elections, the leader of the majority party
or the leader of a majority coalition is usually appointed prime
minister by the president
election results: Michal KOVAC elected president; percent of
parliamentary vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Council of the Slovak Republic
or Narodna Rada Slovensky Repubiky (150 seats; members are elected by
popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 30 September-1 October 1994 (next to be held by
October 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - HZDS 35%, SDL 10.4%,
Hungarian coalition (Hungarian Christian Democrats, Hungarian Civic
Party, Coexistence) 10.2%, KDH 10.1%, DU 8.6%, ZRS 7.3%, SNS 5.4%;
seats by party - governing coalition 83 (HZDS 61, ZRS 13, SNS 9),
opposition 67 (SDL 18, Hungarian coalition 17, KDH 17, DU 15)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are elected by the National
Parliament

Political parties and leaders: Movement for a Democratic Slovakia or
HZDS [Vladimir MECIAR, chairman]; Party of the Democratic Left or SDL
[Jozef MIGAS, chairman]; Hungarian Christian Democratic Movement or
MKDH [Vojtech BUGAR]; Hungarian Civic Party or MOS [Laszlo A. NAGY,
president]; Coexistence [Miklos DURAY, chairman]; Christian Democratic
Movement or KDH [Jan CARNOGURSKY, chairman]; Democratic Union or DU
[Jozef MORAVCIK, chairman]; Association of Slovak Workers or ZRS [Jan
LUPTAK, chairman]; Slovak National Party or SNS [Jan SLOTA, chairman];
Slovak Green Alternative or SZA [Zora LAZAROVA, chairwoman]; Farmers'
Party of Slovakia or RSS [Pavel DELINGA, chairman]; Social Democratic
Party of Slovakia or SSDS [Jaroslav WOLF, chairman]; Party of Greens
in Slovakia or SZS [Jozef POKORNY, chaiman]; Democratic Party or DS
[Jan LANGOS, chairman]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Party of Entrepreneurs and
Businessmen of Slovakia; Christian Social Union; Confederation of
Trade Unions or KOZ; Metal Workers Unions or KOVO and METALURG;
Association of Employers of Slovakia; Association of Towns and
Villages or ZMOS

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS, BSEC
(observer), CCC, CE (guest), CEI, CERN, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant),
FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Inmarsat, Intelsat, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
NACC, NSG, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
UNTAES, UPU, WEU (associate partner), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Branislav LICHARDUS
chancery: (temporary) Suite 250, 2201 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington,
DC 20007
telephone : [1] (202) 965-5160
FAX: [1] (202) 965-5166

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Ralph R. JOHNSON
embassy: Hviezdoslavovo Namestie 4, 81102 Bratislava
mailing address : use embassy street address
telephone: [42] (7) 533-0861, 533-3338
FAX: [42] (7) 533-5439

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of white (top), blue,
and red superimposed with the Slovak cross in a shield centered on the
hoist side; the cross is white centered on a background of red and
blue

Economy

Economy - overview: Since the establishment of the Slovak Republic on
1 January 1993, Slovakia has continued the difficult transformation
from a centrally controlled economy to a modern market-oriented
economy. Macroeconomic performance improved steadily in 1994-96, but
privatization progressed only in fits and starts. Strong export
performance boosted GDP growth to 4.8% in 1994 after a four-year
decline. GDP surged to 7.4% growth in 1995 and should be only slightly
less in 1996, the fastest growth in Central and Eastern Europe.
Unemployment fell to about 12% in 1996 and inflation dropped from 26%
in 1993 to 5.5% in 1996, the lowest in the region. Foreign debt of
$4.6 billion also is the lowest in the region and the second lowest
per capita. Private activity now makes up roughly two-thirds of GDP.
Positive international financial performance has led Standard & Poor's
to raise its rating of the National Bank of Slovakia's foreign
currency debt to just one step below investment grade. Although Slovak
economic performance continues to be impressive, many warning signs of
possible danger ahead have been raised. Aggregate demand has surged in
the form of increased personal and government consumption. At the same
time that the budget deficit is growing, the money supply has been
rapidly increasing, which could apply upward pressure on inflation.
The trade and current account deficits both are mounting as imports
soar and exports sag. Perhaps most troubling, Slovakia continues to
have difficulty attracting foreign investment because of perceived
political problems and halting progress on restructuring and
privatization. The government projects 6.4% growth in 1997 and 5% in
1998. Continuing economic recovery in western Europe should boost
exports and production, but Slovakia's image with foreign creditors
and investors could suffer setbacks in 1997 if progress on
privatization and restructuring stalls.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $42.8 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $8,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 5.4%
industry: 39.9%
services: 54.7% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5.5% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 2.538 million
by occupation : industry 29.3%, agriculture 8.9%, construction 8.0%,
transport and communication 8.2%, services 45.6% (1994)

Unemployment rate: 12% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $5.3 billion
expenditures : $5.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995)

Industries: metal and metal products; food and beverages; electricity,
gas, coke, oil, and nuclear fuel; chemicals and manmade fibers;
machinery; paper and printing; earthenware and ceramics; transport
vehicles; textiles; electrical and optical apparatus; rubber products

Industrial production growth rate: 2.8% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 7.12 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 23.6 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 4,400 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grains, potatoes, sugar beets, hops, fruit;
hogs, cattle, poultry; forest products

Exports:
total value: $8.1 billion (January-November 1996)
commodities : machinery and transport equipment 18.7%; chemicals
13.4%; miscellaneous manufactured goods 13.1%; raw materials 5.0%
(1995)
partners: EU 37.4%, Central Europe Free Trade Agreement 44.3% (Czech
Republic 35.2%), FSU 7.1% (1995)

Imports:
total value : $9.6 billion (f.o.b., January-November 1996)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment 29.0%; fuels 18.0%;
intermediate manufactured goods 17.6%; miscellaneous manufactured
goods 8.0% (1995)
partners: EU 34.7%, Central Europe Free Trade Agreement 32.9% (Czech
Republic 27.5%), FSU 19.5% (1995)

Debt - external: $4.6 billion hard currency indebtedness (1995 est.)

Economic aid: NA

Currency: 1 koruna (Sk) = 100 halierov

Exchange rates: koruny (Sk) per US$1 - 31.50 (January 1997), 30.654
(1996), 29.713 (1995), 32.045 (1994), 30.770 (1993), 28.26 (1992),
29.53 (1991); note - values before 1993 reflect Czechoslovak exchange
rate

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Slovakia:Communications

Telephones: 1,362,178 (1992 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA; note - there are
22 private broadcast stations and 1 public (state) broadcast station

Radios: 915,000 (1995 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 56 private broadcast stations, 1 public
(state) broadcast station (1995 est.)

Televisions: 1.2 million (1995 est.)

@Slovakia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 3,660 km
broad gauge: 102 km 1.520-m gauge
standard gauge : 3,507 km 1.435-m gauge (1424 km electrified)
narrow gauge: 51 km (46 km 1,000-m gauge; 5 km 0.750-m gauge) (1995)

Highways:
total: 17,868 km
paved: 17,654 km (including 198 km of expressways)
unpaved: 214 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 172 km on the Danube

Pipelines: petroleum products NA km; natural gas 2,700 km

Ports and harbors: Bratislava, Komarno

Merchant marine:
total: 4 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 17,010 GRT/22,039
DWT (1996 est.)

Airports: 37 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 12
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m: 4 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 25
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m : 10
under 914 m: 11 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Air and Air Defense Forces, Reserve Force
(Home Guards)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,462,052 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 1,118,955 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 48,245 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $423 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.7% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Gabcikovo Dam dispute with Hungary;
unresolved property issues with Czech Republic over redistribution of
former Czechoslovak federal property

Illicit drugs: minor transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin
and hashish bound for Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

SLOVENIA

@Slovenia:Geography

Location: Southeastern Europe, eastern Alps bordering the Adriatic
Sea, between Austria and Croatia

Geographic coordinates: 46 00 N, 15 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total : 20,256 sq km
land: 20,256 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries:
total: 1,334 km
border countries: Austria 330 km, Croatia 670 km, Italy 232 km,
Hungary 102 km

Coastline: 46.6 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: Mediterranean climate on the coast, continental climate with
mild to hot summers and cold winters in the plateaus and valleys to
the east

Terrain: a short coastal strip on the Adriatic, an alpine mountain
region adjacent to Italy, mixed mountain and valleys with numerous
rivers to the east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Adriatic Sea 0 m
highest point: Triglav 2,864 m

Natural resources: lignite coal, lead, zinc, mercury, uranium, silver

Land use:
arable land: 12%
permanent crops : 3%
permanent pastures: 28%
forests and woodland: 51%
other: 6% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding and earthquakes

Environment - current issues: Sava River polluted with domestic and
industrial waste; pollution of coastal waters with heavy metals and
toxic chemicals; forest damage near Koper from air pollution
(originating at metallurgical and chemical plants) and resulting acid
rain

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94

@Slovenia:People

Population: 1,973,096 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 17% (male 173,932; female 165,167)
15-64 years : 70% (male 690,309; female 686,440)
65 years and over: 13% (male 92,926; female 164,322) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.06% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 8.91 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.54 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.02 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.57 male(s)/female
total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 74.93 years
male: 71.24 years
female: 78.84 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.22 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Slovene(s)
adjective: Slovenian

Ethnic groups: Slovene 91%, Croat 3%, Serb 2%, Muslim 1%, other 3%

Religions: Roman Catholic 70.8% (including 2% Uniate), Lutheran 1%,
Muslim 1%, other 27.2%

Languages: Slovenian 91%, Serbo-Croatian 6%, other 3%

Literacy:
definition: NA
total population : 99%
male: NA%
female: NA%

@Slovenia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Slovenia
conventional short form : Slovenia
local long form: Republika Slovenije
local short form: Slovenija

Data code: SI

Government type: emerging democracy

National capital: Ljubljana

Administrative divisions: 136 municipalities (obcine, singular -
obcina) and 11 urban municipalities* (obcine mestne, singular - obcina
mestna) Ajdovscina, Beltinci, Bled, Bohinj, Borovnica, Bovec, Brda,
Brezice, Brezovica, Cankova-Tisina, Celje*, Cerklje na Gorenjskem,
Cerknica, Cerkno, Crensovci, Crna na Koroskem, Crnomelj,
Destrnik-Trnovska Vas, Divaca, Dobrepolje, Dobrova-Horjul-Polhov
Gradec, Dol pri Ljubljani, Domzale, Dornava, Dravograd, Duplek,
Gorenja Vas-Poljane, Gorisnica, Gornja Radgona, Gornji Grad, Gornji
Petrovci, Grosuplje, Hodos Salovci, Hrastnik, Hrpelje-Kozina, Idrija,
Ig, Ilirska Bistrica, Ivancna Gorica, Izola, Jesenice, Jursinci,
Kamnik, Kanal, Kidricevo, Kobarid, Kobilje, Kocevje, Komen, Koper*,
Kozje, Kranj*, Kranjska Gora, Krsko, Kungota, Kuzma, Lasko, Lenart,
Lendava, Litija, Ljubljana*, Ljubno, Ljutomer, Logatec, Loska Dolina,
Loski Potok, Luce, Lukovica, Majsperk, Maribor*, Medvode, Menges,
Metlika, Mezica, Miren-Kostanjevica, Mislinja, Moravce, Moravske
Toplice, Mozirje, Murska Sobota*, Muta, Naklo, Nazarje, Nova Gorica*,
Novo Mesto*, Odranci, Ormoz, Osilnica, Pesnica, Piran, Pivka,
Podcetrtek, Podvelka-Ribnica, Postojna, Preddvor, Ptuj*, Puconci,
Race-Fram, Radece, Radenci, Radlje ob Dravi, Radovljica,
Ravne-Prevalje, Ribnica, Rogasevci, Rogaska Slatina, Rogatec, Ruse,
Semic, Sencur, Sentilj, Sentjernej, Sentjur pri Celju, Sevnica,
Sezana, Skocjan, Skofja Loka, Skofljica, Slovenj Gradec*, Slovenska
Bistrica, Slovenske Konjice, Smarje pri Jelsah, Smartno ob Paki,
Sostanj, Starse Store, Sveti Jurij, Tolmin, Trbovlje, Trebnje, Trzic,
Turnisce, Velenje*, Velike Lasce, Videm, Vipava, Vitanje, Vodice
Vojnik, Vrhnika, Vuzenica, Zagorje ob Savi, Zalec, Zavrc, Zelezniki,
Ziri, Zrece

Independence: 25 June 1991 (from Yugoslavia)

National holiday: National Statehood Day, 25 June (1991)

Constitution: adopted 23 December 1991, effective 23 December 1991

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal (16 years of age, if employed)

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Milan KUCAN (since 22 April 1990)
head of government: Prime Minister Janez DRNOVSEK (since 14 May 1992)
cabinet: Council of Ministers nominated by the prime minister and
elected by the National Assembly
elections : president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 6 December 1992 (next to be held NA 1997);
following National Assembly elections, the leader of the majority
party or the leader of a majority coalition is usually nominated to
become prime minister by the president and elected by the National
Assembly; election last held NA November 1996 (next to be held NA
November 2000)
election results: Milan KUCAN elected president; percent of vote -
63.9%; Janez DRNOVSEK elected prime minister; percent of National
Assembly vote - 51%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Drzavni Zbor (90
seats, 40 are directly elected and 50 are selected on a proportional
basis; note - the numbers of directly elected and proportionally
elected seats varies with each election; members are elected by
popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : National Assembly - last held 10 November 1996 (next to be
held Fall 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - LDS 27.01%, SLS 19.38%,
SDS 16.13%, SKD 9.62%, ZLDS 9.03%, DeSUS 4.32%, SNS 3.22%; seats by
party - LDS 25, SLS 19, SDS 16, SKD 10, ZLSD 9, DeSUS 5, SNS 4,
Hungarian minority 1, Italian minority 1; note - seating as of January
1997 is as follows: LDS 25, SLS 19, SDS 16, SKD 9, ZLSD 9, DeSUS 5,
SNS 4, Hungarian minority 1, Italian minority 1, independents 1
note: the National Council or Drzavni Svet is an advisory body with
limited legislative powers; it may propose laws and ask to review any
National Assembly decisions; in the election of 6 December 1992, 40
members were elected to represent local, professional, and
socioeconomic interests (next election to be held in the fall of 1997)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are elected by the National
Assembly on recommendation of the Judicial Council; Constitutional
Court, judges elected for nine-year terms by the National Assembly and
nominated by the president

Political parties and leaders: Liberal Democratic or LDS [Janez
DRNOVSEK, chairman]; Slovene Christian Democrats or SKD [Lozje
PETERLE, chairman]; Social Democratic Party of Slovenia or SDS [Janez
JANSA, chairman]; Slovene People's Party or SLS [Marjan PODOBNIK,
chairman]; United List (former Communists and allies) or ZLSD [Janez
KOCIJANCIC, chairman]; Slovene National Party or SNS [Zmago JELINCIC,
chairman]; Democratic Party of Retired (Persons) of Slovenia or DeSUS
[Joze GLOBACNIK]

Political pressure groups and leaders: none

International organization participation: CCC, CE, CEI, EBRD, ECE,
FAO, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU,
NACC (observer), NAM (guest), OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNIDO, UPU, WEU (associate partner), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Ernest PETRIC
chancery: 1525 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 667-5363
FAX: [1] (202) 667-4563
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Victor JACKOVICH
embassy: address NA, Ljubljana
mailing address: P.O. Box 254, Prazakova 4, 61000 Ljubljana; American
Embassy, Ljubljana, Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-7140
telephone : [386] (61) 301-427, 472, 485
FAX: [386] (61) 301-401

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of white (top), blue,
and red with the Slovenian seal (a shield with the image of Triglav,
Slovenia's highest peak, in white against a blue background at the
center, beneath it are two wavy blue lines depicting seas and rivers,
and above it, there are three six-sided stars arranged in an inverted
triangle which are taken from the coat of arms of the Counts of Celje,
the great Slovene dynastic house of the late 14th and early 15th
centuries); the seal is located in the upper hoist side of the flag
centered in the white and blue bands

Economy

Economy - overview: Slovenia appears to be making a solid economic
recovery, fulfilling the promise it showed at the time of Yugoslavia's
breakup. Its per capita GDP is now the highest in Central and Eastern
Europe and comparable to the levels in the poorer West European
countries. Slovenia has benefited from strong ties to Western Europe
and suffered comparatively small physical damage during Yugoslavia's
breakup. The beginning was difficult, however. Real GDP fell 15% in
1991-92, while inflation soared to 200% in 1992. The turning point
came in 1993, when real GDP grew 1%, unemployment leveled off, and
inflation slowed dramatically. In 1994, real GDP rose 5.5%, tapering
off to an estimated 3.5% in 1995 and an estimated 3% in 1996. The
government gets good marks from foreign observers for fiscal policy -
the budget deficit has not exceeded 1% of GDP in any year since 1991,
and the current account balance has remained in surplus throughout the
transition period, with the exception of 1995-96. The Slovene
privatization program, which began in 1994, involves about 1,400
firms, but less than half have been privatized. Growth in the near
term depends largely on economic revitalization in Western Europe
which buys 70% of Slovenia's exports. Slovenia itself must press on
with privatization, restructuring, the encouragement of foreign
investment, and the maintenance of a stable tolar.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $24 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $12,300 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 4.8%
industry: 33.2%
services : 62% (1996)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 8.8% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 857,400
by occupation: NA%

Unemployment rate: 13% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $8.48 billion
expenditures: $8.53 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: ferrous metallurgy and rolling mill products, aluminum
reduction and rolled products, lead and zinc smelting, electronics
(including military electronics), trucks, electric power equipment,
wood products, textiles, chemicals, machine tools

Industrial production growth rate: -1% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 2.361 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 12 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 5,362 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: potatoes, hops, wheat, sugar beets, corn,
grapes; cattle, sheep, poultry

Exports:
total value: $8.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities : machinery and transport equipment 31.4%, manufactured
goods 50.7%, chemicals 10.5%, food 3.8% (1995)
partners: Germany 28.9%, former Yugoslavia 16.5%, Italy 13.6%, France
8.6%, Austria 6.4%, US 3.3% (January-July 1996 est.)

Imports:
total value : $9.5 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: machinery and transport equipment 33.8%, manufactured
goods 30.4%, chemicals 12.1%, fuels and lubricants 6.6%, food 8.4%
(1995)
partners: Germany 22.3%, Italy 17.1%, former Yugoslavia 7.4%, France
9.2%, Austria 9.1%, US 3.2% (January-July 1996 est.)

Debt - external: $4.3 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $5 million (1993)

Currency: 1 tolar (SlT) = 100 stotins

Exchange rates: tolars (SlT) per US$1 - 141.15 (December 1996), 135.36
(1996), 118.52 (1995), 128.81 (1994), 113.24 (1993), 81.29 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Slovenia:Communications

Telephones: 527,800 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 5, shortwave 0
note: there are more than 20 regional and local radio broadcast
stations

Radios: 596,100 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 7
note: there are more than 20 local cable television broadcast stations

Televisions: 454,400 (1993 est.)

@Slovenia:Transportation

Railways:
total : 1,201 km
standard gauge: 1,201 km 1.435-m gauge (electrified 499 km) (1994)

Highways:
total: 14,760 km
paved: 11,808 km (including 218 km of expressways)
unpaved: 2,952 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: NA

Pipelines: crude oil 290 km; natural gas 305 km

Ports and harbors: Izola, Koper, Piran

Merchant marine:
total: 14 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 217,629 GRT/389,779 DWT
(controlled by Slovenian owners)
ships by type : bulk 9, cargo 5
note: ships operate under the flags of Antigua and Barbuda, Liberia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Singapore; no ships remain under
the Slovenian flag (1996 est.)

Airports: 14 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 10
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m : 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m: 5 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 4
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Slovene Defense Forces

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 531,797 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 423,918 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 15,572 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $298 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.5% to 1.7% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: maritime border dispute with Croatia over
direct access to the sea in the Adriatic; the border issue is
currently under negotiation; Italy is negotiating with Slovenia over
property and minority rights issues dating from World War II

Illicit drugs: transit point for Southwest Asian heroin bound for
Western Europe and for precursor chemicals
______________________________________________________________________

SOLOMON ISLANDS

@Solomon Islands:Geography

Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean, east
of Papua New Guinea

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 S, 159 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 28,450 sq km
land: 27,540 sq km
water: 910 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 5,313 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
continental shelf: 200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical monsoon; few extremes of temperature and weather

Terrain: mostly rugged mountains with some low coral atolls

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Makarakomburu 2,447 m

Natural resources: fish, forests, gold, bauxite, phosphates, lead,
zinc, nickel

Land use:
arable land: 1%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 1%
forests and woodland: 88%
other : 9% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons, but they are rarely destructive;
geologically active region with frequent earth tremors; volcanic
activity

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; much of the
surrounding coral reefs are dead or dying

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental Modification,
Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection,
Whaling
signed, but not ratified : Law of the Sea

@Solomon Islands:People

Population: 426,855 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 45% (male 98,797; female 95,162)
15-64 years : 52% (male 111,702; female 108,505)
65 years and over: 3% (male 6,345; female 6,344) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.3% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 37.3 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.31 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1 male(s)/female
total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 24.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 71.45 years
male: 68.96 years
female: 74.07 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.27 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Solomon Islander(s)
adjective: Solomon Islander

Ethnic groups: Melanesian 93%, Polynesian 4%, Micronesian 1.5%,
European 0.8%, Chinese 0.3%, other 0.4%

Religions: Anglican 34%, Roman Catholic 19%, Baptist 17%, United
(Methodist/Presbyterian) 11%, Seventh-Day Adventist 10%, other
Protestant 5%, traditional beliefs 4%

Languages: Melanesian pidgin in much of the country is lingua franca,
English spoken by 1%-2% of population
note: 120 indigenous languages

Literacy: NA

@Solomon Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Solomon Islands
former: British Solomon Islands

Data code: BP

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Honiara

Administrative divisions: 7 provinces and 1 town*; Central,
Guadalcanal, Honiara*, Isabel, Makira, Malaita, Temotu, Western
note: there may be two new provinces of Choiseul (Lauru) and
Rennell/Bellona and the administrative unit of Honiara may have been
abolished

Independence: 7 July 1978 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 7 July (1978)

Constitution: 7 July 1978

Legal system: common law

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General Moses PITAKAKA (since 10 June 1994)
head of government: Prime Minister Solomon MAMALONI (since 7 November
1994); Deputy Prime Minister Francis SAEMALA (since NA February 1997)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
the prime minister from among the members of Parliament
elections : none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor general
appointed by the queen on the advice of Parliament for up to five
years; following legislative elections, the leader of the majority
party or the leader of a majority coalition is usually elected prime
minister by Parliament; deputy prime minister appointed by the
governor general on the advice of the prime minister from among the
members of Parliament

Legislative branch: unicameral National Parliament (47 seats; members
elected from single member constituencies by popular vote to serve
four-year terms)
elections: last held 26 May 1993 (next to be held 6 August 1997)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - GNUR
21, PAP 7, NAPSI 5, SILP 4, UP 4, independents 6

Judicial branch: High Court

Political parties and leaders: National Unity and Reconciliation Group
(GNUR), Solomon MAMALONI; People's Alliance Party (PAP); National
Action Party (NAPSI), leader NA; Solomon Islands Labor Party (SILP),
leader NA; United Party (UP), leader NA; Nationalist Front for
Progress (NFP), Andrew NORI; Labor Party (LP), Joses TUHANUKU;
Christian Fellowship, leader NA

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat
(nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Stephen Rex HOROI (represents the country
as both the Permanent Representative to the UN and the ambassador to
the US)
chancery: Permanent Mission of the Solomon Islands to the UN, 820
Second Avenue, Suite 800, New York, NY 10017
telephone : [1] (212) 599-6193
FAX: [1] (212) 661-8925

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Solomon Islands (embassy closed July 1993); the ambassador to Papua
New Guinea is accredited to the Solomon Islands

Flag description: divided diagonally by a thin yellow stripe from the
lower hoist-side corner; the upper triangle (hoist side) is blue with
five white five-pointed stars arranged in an X pattern; the lower
triangle is green

Economy

Economy - overview: The bulk of the population depend on subsistence
agriculture, fishing, and forestry for at least part of their
livelihood. Most manufactured goods and petroleum products must be
imported. The islands are rich in undeveloped mineral resources such
as lead, zinc, nickel, and gold. The Government of the Solomon Islands
is nearing financial insolvency. In mid-1995 the central bank
suspended interest and principal payments on government bonds and
treasury bills held by financial institutions and the general public.
The government so far has taken no steps to restrain expenditure or
address the deficit, which is expected to be considerably higher than
the $20 million forecasted in the 1996 budget.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.2 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 10.4% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 26,842
by occupation: services 41.5%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing
23.7%, commerce, transport, and finance 21.7%, construction,
manufacturing, and mining 13.1% (1992 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $147 million
expenditures: $168 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: copra, fish (tuna)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 20,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 55 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: cocoa, beans, coconuts, palm kernels, rice,
potatoes, vegetables, fruit; cattle, pigs; timber; fish

Exports:
total value: $170 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: timber, fish, palm oil, cocoa, copra
partners : Japan 39%, UK 23%, Thailand 9%, Australia 5%, US 2% (1991)

Imports:
total value: $152 million (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: plant and machinery, manufactured goods, food and live
animals, fuel
partners: Australia 34%, Japan 16%, Singapore 14%, NZ 9%

Debt - external: $100 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $8.625 million from Australia (FY96/97 est.); $3.3
million from NZ (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 Solomon Islands dollar (SI$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Solomon Islands dollars (SI$) per US$1 - 3.7900
(November 1996), 3.4059 (1995), 3.2914 (1994), 3.1877 (1993), 2.9281
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Solomon Islands:Communications

Telephones: 5,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 38,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: 2,000 (1992 est.)

@Solomon Islands:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 2,100 km
paved: 32 km
unpaved: 2,068 km (includes about 800 km of private plantation roads)
(1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Aola Bay, Honiara, Lofung, Noro, Viru Harbor,
Yandina

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 29 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 19
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m : 17 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 10
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 9 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: no regular military forces; Solomon Islands
National Reconnaissance and Surveillance Force; Royal Solomon Islands
Police (RSIP)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

SOMALIA

@Somalia:Geography

Location: Eastern Africa, bordering the Gulf of Aden and the Indian
Ocean, east of Ethiopia

Geographic coordinates: 10 00 N, 49 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 637,660 sq km
land: 627,340 sq km
water: 10,320 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 2,366 km
border countries: Djibouti 58 km, Ethiopia 1,626 km, Kenya 682 km

Coastline: 3,025 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: principally desert; December to February - northeast monsoon,
moderate temperatures in north and very hot in south; May to October -
southwest monsoon, torrid in the north and hot in the south, irregular
rainfall, hot and humid periods (tangambili) between monsoons

Terrain: mostly flat to undulating plateau rising to hills in north

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Shimbiris 2,450 m

Natural resources: uranium and largely unexploited reserves of iron
ore, tin, gypsum, bauxite, copper, salt

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 69%
forests and woodland: 26%
other: 3% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring droughts; frequent dust storms over eastern
plains in summer

Environment - current issues: famine; use of contaminated water
contributes to human health problems; deforestation; overgrazing; soil
erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Endangered Species, Law of the Sea
signed, but not ratified: Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography - note: strategic location on Horn of Africa along southern
approaches to Bab el Mandeb and route through Red Sea and Suez Canal

@Somalia:People

Population: 6,590,325 (July 1997 est.)
note: this estimate was derived from an official census taken in 1987
by the Somali Government with the cooperation of the UN and the US
Bureau of the Census; population estimates are updated year by year
between census years by factoring growth rates into them and by taking
account of refugee movements and of losses due to famine; lower
estimates of Somalia's population in mid-1996 (on the order of 6.0
million to 6.5 million) have been made by aid and relief agencies,
based on the number of persons being fed; population counting in
Somalia is complicated by the large numbers of nomads and by refugee
movements in response to famine and clan warfare

Age structure:
0-14 years: 44% (male 1,449,037; female 1,452,171)
15-64 years: 53% (male 1,777,131; female 1,718,389)
65 years and over: 3% (male 89,346; female 104,251) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.03% (1997 est.) (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 45.49 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 18.34 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.) (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.12 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female (1997 est.)
under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.86 male(s)/female
total population : 1.01 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 125.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 46.23 years
male: 44.66 years
female: 47.85 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.76 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Somali(s)
adjective : Somali

Ethnic groups: Somali 85%, Bantu, Arabs 30,000

Religions: Sunni Muslim

Languages: Somali (official), Arabic, Italian, English

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 24%
male: 36%
female: 14% (1990 est.)

@Somalia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Somalia
former: Somali Republic

Data code: SO

Government type: none

National capital: Mogadishu

Administrative divisions: 18 regions (plural - NA, singular -
gobolka); Awdal, Bakool, Banaadir, Bari, Bay, Galguduud, Gedo,
Hiiraan, Jubbada Dhexe, Jubbada Hoose, Mudug, Nugaal, Sanaag,
Shabeellaha Dhexe, Shabeellaha Hoose, Sool, Togdheer, Woqooyi Galbeed

Independence: 1 July 1960 (from a merger of British Somaliland, which
became independent from the UK on 26 June 1960, and Italian
Somaliland, which became independent from the Italian-administered UN
trusteeship on 1 July 1960, to form the Somali Republic)

National holiday: NA

Constitution: 25 August 1979, presidential approval 23 September 1979

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: Somalia has no functioning government; the United
Somali Congress (USC) ousted the regime of Major General Mohamed SIAD
Barre on 27 January 1991; the present political situation is one of
anarchy, marked by interclan fighting and random banditry

Legislative branch: unicameral People's Assembly or Golaha Shacbiga
note: the Golaha Shacbiga is not functioning

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (not functioning)

Political parties and leaders: the United Somali Congress or USC
ousted the former regime on 27 January 1991; formerly the only party
was the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party or SRSP, headed by former
President and Commander in Chief of the Army Major General Mohamed
SIAD Barre

Political pressure groups and leaders: numerous clan and subclan
factions are currently vying for power

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF,
CAEU, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
IGADD, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU,
NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
WMO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Somalia does not have an embassy
in the US (ceased operations on 8 May 1991)

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Somalia; US interests are represented by the US Embassy in Nairobi
at Moi Avenue and Haile Selassie Avenue; mail address: P. O. Box
30137, Unit 64100, Nairobi; APO AE 09831; telephone: [254] (2) 334141;
FAX [254] (2) 340838

Flag description: light blue with a large white five-pointed star in
the center; design based on the flag of the UN (Italian Somaliland was
a UN trust territory)

Economy

Economy - overview: One of the world's poorest and least developed
countries, Somalia has few resources. Moreover, much of the economy
has been devastated by the civil war. Agriculture is the most
important sector, with livestock accounting for about 40% of GDP and
about 65% of export earnings. Nomads and seminomads, who are dependent
upon livestock for their livelihood, make up a large portion of the
population. Crop production generates only 10% of GDP and employs
about 20% of the work force. The main export crop is bananas; sugar,
sorghum, and corn are grown for the domestic market. The small
industrial sector is based on the processing of agricultural products
and accounts for less than 10% of GDP; most facilities have been shut
down because of the civil strife. The greatly increased political
turmoil of 1991-93 resulted in a substantial drop in agricultural
output, with widespread famine. In 1994 economic conditions stabilized
in the countryside, followed in 1995 by slight improvements. However,
ongoing civil strife in Mogadishu and outlying areas is interfering
with any substantial recovery.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $3.6 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $500 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 65.5%
industry: 8.7%
services: 25.8% (1990 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA

Labor force:
total: 3.7 million (very few are skilled laborers)(1993 est.)
by occupation: agriculture (mostly pastoral nomadism) 71%, industry
and services 29%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: a few small industries, including sugar refining,
textiles, petroleum refining (mostly shut down)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 144,000 kW prior to the civil war, but now
largely shut down due to war damage; some localities operate their own
generating plants, providing limited municipal power; note - UN and
relief organizations use their own portable power systems

Electricity - production: 60 million kWh (1991)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: bananas, sorghum, corn, mangoes, sugarcane;
cattle, sheep, goats; fishing potential largely unexploited

Exports:
total value: $130 million (1994 est.)
commodities: bananas, live animals, fish, hides (1995)
partners: Saudi Arabia 57%, Yemen 14%, Italy 13%, US (bananas) (1995
est.)

Imports:
total value: $269 million (1994 est.)
commodities : manufactures, petroleum products, foodstuffs,
construction materials (1995)
partners: Kenya 24%, Djibouti 18%, Pakistan 6% (1995 est.)

Debt - external: $2.6 billion (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Somali shilling (So. Sh.) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Somali shillings (So. Sh.) per US$1 - 4,100 (November
1996 est.), 7,000 (January 1996 est.), 5,000 (1 January 1995), 2,616
(1 July 1993), 4,200 (December 1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Somalia:Communications

Telephones: 9,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: the public telecommunications system was completely
destroyed or dismantled by the civil war factions; all relief
organizations depend on their own private systems
domestic: recently, local cellular telephone systems have been
established in Mogadishu and in several other population centers
international : international connections are available from Mogadishu
by satellite

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA (there are at
least five radio broadcast stations of NA type)

Radios: 350,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (Somalia's only TV station was
demolished during the civil strife, sometime in 1991)

Televisions: 113,000 (1992 est.)

@Somalia:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 18,000 km
paved: 2,700 km
unpaved: 15,300 km (1993 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 15 km

Ports and harbors: Bender Cassim (Boosaaso), Berbera, Chisimayu
(Kismaayo), Merca, Mogadishu

Merchant marine:
total: 2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,529 GRT/6,892 DWT
ships by type: cargo 1, refrigerated cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 47 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 11
over 3,047 m : 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 36
2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m: 13
914 to 1,523 m: 19 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: NA; note - no functioning central government
military forces; clan militias continue to battle for control of key
economic or political prizes

Military manpower - military age:
males: 1,615,598 years of age (1997 est.)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,408,639 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 901,827 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: most of the southern half of the boundary
with Ethiopia is a Provisional Administrative Line; territorial
dispute with Ethiopia over the Ogaden
______________________________________________________________________

SOUTH AFRICA

@South Africa:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, at the southern tip of the continent of
Africa

Geographic coordinates: 29 00 S, 24 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 1,219,912 sq km
land: 1,219,912 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Prince Edward Islands (Marion Island and Prince Edward
Island)

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
total : 4,750 km
border countries: Botswana 1,840 km, Lesotho 909 km, Mozambique 491
km, Namibia 855 km, Swaziland 430 km, Zimbabwe 225 km

Coastline: 2,798 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly semiarid; subtropical along east coast; sunny days,
cool nights

Terrain: vast interior plateau rimmed by rugged hills and narrow
coastal plain

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point : Njesuthi 3,408 m

Natural resources: gold, chromium, antimony, coal, iron ore,
manganese, nickel, phosphates, tin, uranium, gem diamonds, platinum,
copper, vanadium, salt, natural gas

Land use:
arable land: 10%
permanent crops : 1%
permanent pastures: 67%
forests and woodland: 7%
other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 12,700 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: prolonged droughts

Environment - current issues: lack of important arterial rivers or
lakes requires extensive water conservation and control measures;
growth in water usage threatens to outpace supply; pollution of rivers
from agricultural runoff and urban discharge; air pollution resulting
in acid rain; soil erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping,
Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the
Sea

Geography - note: South Africa completely surrounds Lesotho and almost
completely surrounds Swaziland

@South Africa:People

Population: 42,327,458 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 35% (male 7,470,444; female 7,340,734)
15-64 years: 61% (male 12,729,753; female 12,891,969)
65 years and over : 4% (male 762,041; female 1,132,517) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.51% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 26.89 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 11.89 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.09 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.67 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 53.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 56.29 years
male: 54.4 years
female: 58.23 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.22 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: South African(s)
adjective: South African

Ethnic groups: black 75.2%, white 13.6%, Colored 8.6%, Indian 2.6%

Religions: Christian 68% (includes most whites and Coloreds, about 60%
of blacks and about 40% of Indians), Muslim 2%, Hindu 1.5% (60% of
Indians), traditional and animistic 28.5%

Languages: 11 official languages, including Afrikaans, English,
Ndebele, Pedi, Sotho, Swazi, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 81.8%
male : 81.9%
female: 81.7% (1995 est.)

@South Africa:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of South Africa
conventional short form: South Africa
abbreviation : RSA

Data code: SF

Government type: republic

National capital: Pretoria (administrative); Cape Town (legislative);
Bloemfontein (judicial)

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces; Eastern Cape, Free State,
Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, North-West, Northern Cape,
Northern Province, Western Cape

Independence: 31 May 1910 (from UK)

National holiday: Freedom Day, 27 April (1994)

Constitution: 10 December 1996; this new constitution was certified by
the Constitutional Court on 4 December 1996, was signed by President
MANDELA on 10 December 1996, and entered into effect on 3 February
1997; it is being implemented in phases

Legal system: based on Roman-Dutch law and English common law; accepts
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Nelson MANDELA (since 10 May 1994); Deputy
Executive President Thabo MBEKI (since 10 May 1994); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Nelson MANDELA (since 10 May 1994);
Deputy Executive President Thabo MBEKI (since 10 May 1994); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the president
elections: president and deputy executive presidents elected by the
National Assembly; election last held 9 May 1994 (next to be held in
April 1999)
election results: Nelson MANDELA elected president; percent of
National Assembly vote - 100% (by acclamation); Thabo MBEKI and
Frederik W. DE KLERK elected deputy executive presidents; percent of
National Assembly vote - 100% (by acclamation)
note: the initial governing coalition, made up of the ANC, the IFP,
and the NP, which constituted a Government of National Unity or GNU,
no longer includes the NP which was withdrawn by DE KLERK on 30 June
1996 when he voluntarily gave up his position as deputy executive
president and distanced himself from the programs of the ANC

Legislative branch: bicameral parliament consisting of the National
Assembly (400 seats; members are elected by popular vote under a
system of proportional representation to serve five-year terms) and
the National Council of Provinces (90 seats, ten members elected by
each of the nine provincial legislatures for five-year terms; has
special powers to protect regional interests, including the
safeguarding of cultural and linguistic traditions among ethnic
minorities); note - following the implementation of the new
constitution on 3 February 1997 the former Senate was disbanded and
replaced by the National Council of Provinces with essentially no
change in membership and party affiliations, although the new
institution's responsibilities have been changed somewhat by the new
constitution
elections: National Assembly and Senate - last held 26-29 April 1994
(next to be held NA April 1999); note - the Senate was disbanded and
replaced by the National Council of Provinces on 6 February 1997
election results: National Assembly - percent of vote by party - ANC
62.6%, NP 20.4%, IFP 10.5%, FF 2.2%, DP 1.7%, PAC 1.2%, ACDP 0.5%,
other 0.9%; seats by party - ANC 252, NP 82, IFP 43, FF 9, DP 7, PAC
5, ACDP 2; Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
ANC 61, NP 17, FF 4, IFP 5, DP 3

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court; Supreme Court of Appeals; High
Courts; Magistrate Courts

Political parties and leaders: African National Congress or ANC
[Nelson MANDELA, president]; National Party or NP [Frederik W. DE
KLERK, president]; Inkatha Freedom Party or IFP [Mangosuthu BUTHELEZI,
president]; African Christian Democratic Party or ACDP [Kenneth
MESHOE, president]; Democratic Party or DP [Tony LEON, president];
Freedom Front or FF [Constand VILJOEN, president]; Pan-Africanist
Congress or PAC [Stanley MOGOBA, president]
note: in addition to these seven parties which received seats in the
National Assembly, 11 other parties won votes in the national
elections in April 1994

Political pressure groups and leaders: South African National Civics
Organization or SANCO [Mlungisi HLONGWANE, national president];
Congress of South African Trade Unions or COSATU [John GOMONO,
president]; note - both SANCO and COSATU, as well as the South African
Communist Party, are in a formal alliance with the ANC

International organization participation: AfDB, BIS, C, CCC, ECA, FAO,
G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO,
ITU, MTCR, NAM, OAU, SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Franklin SONN
chancery: 3051 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 232-4400
FAX: [1] (202) 265-1607
consulate(s) general: Beverly Hills (California), Chicago, and New
York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador James A. JOSEPH
embassy: 877 Pretorius St., Arcadia 0083
mailing address: P.O. Box 9536, Pretoria 0001
telephone: [27] (12) 342-1048
FAX : [27] (12) 342-2244
consulate(s) general: Cape Town, Durban, Johannesburg

Flag description: two equal width horizontal bands of red (top) and
blue separated by a central green band which splits into a horizontal
Y, the arms of which end at the corners of the hoist side, embracing a
black isosceles triangle from which the arms are separated by narrow
yellow bands; the red and blue bands are separated from the green band
and its arms by narrow white stripes
note: prior to 26 April 1994, the flag was actually four flags in one
- three miniature flags reproduced in the center of the white band of
the former flag of the Netherlands, which has three equal horizontal
bands of orange (top), white, and blue; the miniature flags are a
vertically hanging flag of the old Orange Free State with a horizontal
flag of the UK adjoining on the hoist side and a horizontal flag of
the old Transvaal Republic adjoining on the other side

Economy

Economy - overview: Despite the efforts of South Africa's first
majority-run government, income inequality remains among the world's
most extreme. Many of the white one-seventh of the South African
population enjoy incomes, material comforts, and health and
educational standards equal to those of Western Europe. In contrast,
most of the remaining population suffers from the poverty patterns of
the Third World, including unemployment, lack of job skills, and bleak
living conditions. The main strength of the economy lies in its rich
mineral resources, which provide two-thirds of exports. Economic
developments for the remainder of the 1990s will be driven largely by
the new government's attempts to improve black living standards, to
set the country on a steady export-led growth path, and to cut back
the enormous numbers of unemployed. The economy in recent years has
absorbed less than 5% of the more than 300,000 workers entering the
labor force annually. Local economists estimate that the economy must
grow at least 5% in real terms annually to absorb all of the new
entrants, much less reduce the accumulated total.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $227 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $5,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 5%
industry: 37%
services : 58% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 9% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 14.2 million economically active (1996)
by occupation: services 35%, agriculture 30%, industry 20%, mining 9%,
other 6%

Unemployment rate: 34% (1996 est.); note - an additional 11% of the
workforce is underemployed

Budget:
revenues : $30.5 billion
expenditures: $38 billion, including capital expenditures of $2.6
billion (FY94/95 est.)

Industries: mining (world's largest producer of platinum, gold,
chromium), automobile assembly, metalworking, machinery, textile, iron
and steel, chemical, fertilizer, foodstuffs

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 34.57 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 158.78 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,305 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: corn, wheat, sugarcane, fruits, vegetables;
beef, poultry, mutton, wool, dairy products

Exports:
total value: $29.2 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: gold 27%, other minerals and metals 20%-25%, food 5%,
chemicals 3% (1994)
partners: Italy, Japan, US, Germany, UK, other EU countries, Hong Kong

Imports:
total value : $26.9 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: machinery 32%, transport equipment 15%, chemicals 11%,
petroleum products, textiles, scientific instruments (1994)
partners: Germany, US, Japan, UK, Italy

Debt - external: $30 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note: current aid pledges include US $600 million over three years,
1994-96; UK $150 million over three years; Australia $21 million over
three years; Japan $1.3 billion over two years ending in 1996; EU $833
million over five years

Currency: 1 rand (R) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: rand (R) per US$1 - 4.6410 (January 1997), 4.2706
(1996), 3.6266 (1995), 3.5490 (1994), 3.2636 (1993), 2.8497 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@South Africa:Communications

Telephones: 5,206,235 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: the system is the best developed, most modern, and
has the highest capacity in Africa
domestic: consists of carrier-equipped open-wire lines, coaxial
cables, microwave radio relay links, fiber-optic cable, and
radiotelephone communication stations; key centers are Bloemfontein,
Cape Town, Durban, Johannesburg, Port Elizabeth, and Pretoria
international : 1 submarine cable; satellite earth stations - 3
Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 2 Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 14, FM 286, shortwave 0

Radios: 12.1 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 67 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 3.45 million (1990 est.)

@South Africa:Transportation

Railways:
total: 21,431 km
narrow gauge: 20,995 km 1.067-m gauge (9,087 km electrified); 436 km
0.610-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 182,329 km
paved : 55,428 km (including 2,040 km of expressways)
unpaved: 126,901 km (1991 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 931 km; petroleum products 1,748 km; natural gas
322 km

Ports and harbors: Cape Town, Durban, East London, Mosselbaai, Port
Elizabeth, Richards Bay, Saldanha

Merchant marine:
total: 7 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 270,848 GRT/266,029 DWT
ships by type: container 6, oil tanker 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 662 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 351
over 3,047 m: 10
2,438 to 3,047 m : 4
1,524 to 2,437 m: 43
914 to 1,523 m: 74
under 914 m: 220 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 311
1,524 to 2,437 m : 33
914 to 1,523 m: 278 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: South African National Defense Force or SANDF
(includes Army, Navy, Air Force, and Medical Services), South African
Police Service or SAPS

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 10,972,813 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 6,672,760 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 435,972 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $2.9 billion (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.2% (FY95/96)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Swaziland has asked South Africa to open
negotiations on reincorporating some nearby South African territories
that are populated by ethnic Swazis or that were long ago part of the
Swazi Kingdom

Illicit drugs: transshipment center for heroin and cocaine; cocaine
consumption on the rise; world's largest market for illicit
methaqualone, usually imported illegally from India through various
east African countries; illicit cultivation of marijuana
______________________________________________________________________

SOUTH GEORGIA AND THE
Sandwich Islands]

(dependent territory of the UK)

@South Georgia and the:Geography

Location: Southern South America, islands in the South Atlantic Ocean,
east of the tip of South America

Geographic coordinates: 54 30 S, 37 00 W

Map references: Antarctic Region

Area:
total : 4,066 sq km
land: 4,066 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Shag Rocks, Clerke Rocks, Bird Island

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Rhode Island

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: NA km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: variable, with mostly westerly winds throughout the year,
interspersed with periods of calm; nearly all precipitation falls as
snow

Terrain: most of the islands, rising steeply from the sea, are rugged
and mountainous; South Georgia is largely barren and has steep,
glacier-covered mountains; the South Sandwich Islands are of volcanic
origin with some active volcanoes

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Paget 2,915 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland : 0%
other: 100% (largely covered by permanent ice and snow with some
sparse vegetation consisting of grass, moss, and lichen)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: the South Sandwich Islands have prevailing weather
conditions that generally make them difficult to approach by ship;
they are also subject to active volcanism

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: the north coast of South Georgia has several large
bays, which provide good anchorage; reindeer, introduced early in this
century, live on South Georgia

@South Georgia and the:People

Population: no indigenous population
note: there is a small military garrison on South Georgia, and the
British Antarctic Survey has a biological station on Bird Island; the
South Sandwich Islands are uninhabited

@South Georgia and the:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
conventional short form: none

Data code: SX

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK; administered by a
civil commissioner based in the Falkland Islands

National capital: none; Grytviken on South Georgia is the garrison
town

Flag description: the flag of the UK is used

Economy

Economy - overview: Some fishing takes place in adjacent waters. There
is a potential source of income from harvesting fin fish and krill.
The islands receive income from postage stamps produced in the UK.

Budget:
revenues: $291,777
expenditures: $451,000, including capital expenditures of $NA (1988
est.)

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

@South Georgia and the:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: coastal radiotelephone station at Grytviken

Radio broadcast stations: AM 0, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: NA

@South Georgia and the:Transportation

Highways:
total: NA km
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Grytviken

Airports: none

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: administered by the UK, claimed by Argentina
______________________________________________________________________

SPAIN

@Spain:Geography

Location: Southwestern Europe, bordering the Bay of Biscay,
Mediterranean Sea, and North Atlantic Ocean, southwest of France

Geographic coordinates: 40 00 N, 4 00 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 504,750 sq km
land: 499,400 sq km
water: 5,350 sq km
note: includes Balearic Islands, Canary Islands, and five places of
sovereignty (plazas de soberania) on and off the coast of Morocco -
Ceuta, Mellila, Islas Chafarinas, Penon de Alhucemas, and Penon de
Velez de la Gomera

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Oregon

Land boundaries:
total: 1,919.1 km
border countries: Andorra 65 km, France 623 km, Gibraltar 1.2 km,
Portugal 1,214 km, Morocco (Ceuta) 6.3 km, Morocco (Melilla) 9.6 km

Coastline: 4,964 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm (applies only to the Atlantic Ocean)
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; clear, hot summers in interior, more moderate and
cloudy along coast; cloudy, cold winters in interior, partly cloudy
and cool along coast

Terrain: large, flat to dissected plateau surrounded by rugged hills;
Pyrenees in north

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point : Pico de Teide on Canary Islands 3,718 m

Natural resources: coal, lignite, iron ore, uranium, mercury, pyrites,
fluorspar, gypsum, zinc, lead, tungsten, copper, kaolin, potash,
hydropower

Land use:
arable land: 30%
permanent crops : 9%
permanent pastures: 21%
forests and woodland: 32%
other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 34,530 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: pollution of the Mediterranean Sea from
raw sewage and effluents from the offshore production of oil and gas;
water quality and quantity nationwide; air pollution; deforestation;
desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping,
Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands,
Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Desertification,
Law of the Sea

Geography - note: strategic location along approaches to Strait of
Gibraltar

@Spain:People

Population: 39,107,912 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 15% (male 3,121,625; female 2,942,492)
15-64 years: 69% (male 13,396,398; female 13,400,728)
65 years and over: 16% (male 2,592,692; female 3,653,977) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.06% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 9.94 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.54 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.66 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.71 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 77.39 years
male: 73.59 years
female: 81.46 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.18 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Spaniard(s)
adjective: Spanish

Ethnic groups: composite of Mediterranean and Nordic types

Religions: Roman Catholic 99%, other 1%

Languages: Castilian Spanish 74%, Catalan 17%, Galician 7%, Basque 2%

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 96%
male: 98%
female: 94% (1986 est.)

@Spain:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Kingdom of Spain
conventional short form: Spain
local short form: Espana

Data code: SP

Government type: parliamentary monarchy

National capital: Madrid

Administrative divisions: 17 autonomous communities (comunidades
autonomas, singular - comunidad autonoma); Andalucia, Aragon,
Asturias, Canarias, Cantabria, Castilla-La Mancha, Castilla y Leon,
Cataluna, Communidad Valencian, Extremadura, Galicia, Islas Baleares,
La Rioja, Madrid, Murcia, Navarra, Pais Vasco
note: there are five places of sovereignty on and off the coast of
Morocco (Ceuta, Mellila, Islas Chafarinas, Penon de Alhucemas, and
Penon de Velez de la Gomera) with administrative status unknown

Independence: 1492 (expulsion of the Moors and unification)

National holiday: National Day, 12 October

Constitution: 6 December 1978, effective 29 December 1978

Legal system: civil law system, with regional applications; does not
accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: King JUAN CARLOS I (since 22 November 1975)
head of government : President of the Government Jose Maria AZNAR
(since 5 May 1996); First Vice President Francisco ALVAREZ-CASCOS
FERNANDEZ (since 5 May 1996) and Second Vice President (and Minister
of Economy and Finance) Rodrigo RATO FIGAREDO (since 5 May 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers designated by the president
note : there is also a Council of State that is the supreme
consultative organ of the government
elections: the king is a hereditary monarch; president proposed by the
king and elected by the National Assembly following legislative
elections; election last held 3 March 1996 (next to be held by NA
2000)
election results: Jose Maria AZNAR elected president; percent of
National Assembly vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral The General Courts or National Assembly
or Las Cortes Generales consists of the Senate or Senado (256 seats;
208 members are directly elected by popular vote and the other 48 were
appointed by the regional legislatures to serve four-year terms) and
the Congress of Deputies or Congreso de los Diputados (350 seats;
members are elected by popular vote on block lists by proportional
representation to serve four-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 3 March 1996 (next to be held by March
2000); Congress of Deputies - last held 3 March 1996 (next to be held
by March 2000)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - PP 132, PSOE 96, CiU 11, PNV 6, IU 2, others 9; Congress of
Deputies - percent of vote by party - PP 38.9%, PSOE 37.5%, IU 10.7%,
CiU 4.6%; seats by party - PP 156, PSOE 141, IU 21, CiU 16, other 16

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Tribunal Supremo

Political parties and leaders:
principal national parties, from right to left: Popular Party or PP
[Jose Maria AZNAR Lopez]; Spanish Socialist Workers Party or PSOE
[Felipe GONZALEZ Marquez, secretary general]; Spanish Communist Party
or PCE [Julio ANGUITA Gonzalez]; United Left or IU (a coalition of
parties including the PCE and other small parties) [Julio ANGUITA
Gonzalez]
chief regional parties: Convergence and Union or CiU [Jordi PUJOL,
secretary general] (a coalition of the Democratic Convergence of
Catalonia or CDC [Pere ESTEVE] and the Democratic Union of Catalonia
or UDC [Josep Antoni DURAN LLEIDA]); Basque Nationalist Party or PNV
[Xabier ARZALLUS Antia and Jose Antonio ARDANZA]; Canarian Coalition
or CC (a coalition of five parties)

Political pressure groups and leaders: on the extreme left, the Basque
Fatherland and Liberty or ETA and the First of October Antifascist
Resistance Group or GRAPO use terrorism to oppose the government; free
labor unions (authorized in April 1977); Workers Confederation or
CC.OO; the Socialist General Union of Workers or UGT and the smaller
independent Workers Syndical Union or USO; business and landowning
interests; the Catholic Church; Opus Dei; university students

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB,
Australia Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, EIB, ESA, EU,
FAO, G- 8, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM
(observer), ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer), MTCR, NACC, NAM (guest), NATO,
NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNU, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Antonio de OYARZABAL MARCHESI
chancery : 2375 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037
telephone: [1] (202) 452-0100, 728-2340
FAX: [1] (202) 833-5670
consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
New Orleans, New York, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Richard N. GARDNER
embassy: Serrano 75, 28006 Madrid
mailing address : APO AE 09642
telephone: [34] (1) 587-2200
FAX: [34] (1) 587-2303
consulate(s) general: Barcelona

Flag description: three horizontal bands of red (top), yellow (double
width), and red with the national coat of arms on the hoist side of
the yellow band; the coat of arms includes the royal seal framed by
the Pillars of Hercules, which are the two promontories (Gibraltar and
Ceuta) on either side of the eastern end of the Strait of Gibraltar

Economy

Economy - overview: Spain's mixed capitalist economy supports a GDP
three-fourths that of the four leading West European economies. Its
center-right government has staked much on gaining admission to the
first group of countries to implement the European single currency by
developing an austere 1997 budget - including a wage freeze for
public-sector employees - in hopes of meeting the Maastricht monetary
convergence criteria. The government slashed spending by $1.6 billion
in mid-1996 to ensure that Spain's deficit did not exceed its target
of 4.4% of GDP for the year; the government forecasts a deficit of 3%
for 1997. The AZNAR administration advocates liberalization,
privatization, and deregulation of the economy, and has introduced
some tax reforms to that end. Unemployment, nevertheless, remains the
highest in the EU at about 22%, but the government, for political
reasons, has made only limited progress in changing labor laws or
reforming pension schemes, which are key to the sustainability of
Spain's economic advances.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $593 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $15,300 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 3.6%
industry: 33.6%
services: 62.8% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3.7% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 12.475 million
by occupation: services 62%, manufacturing, mining, and construction
29%, agriculture 9% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 22% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $113 billion
expenditures : $139 billion, including capital expenditures of $15
billion (1995)

Industries: textiles and apparel (including footwear), food and
beverages, metals and metal manufactures, chemicals, shipbuilding,
automobiles, machine tools, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 39.58 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 163.7 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,752 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grain, vegetables, olives, wine grapes, sugar
beets, citrus; beef, pork, poultry, dairy products; fish catch of
866,831 metric tons in 1993

Exports:
total value: $94.5 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: cars and trucks, semifinished manufactured goods,
foodstuffs, machinery (1994)
partners : EU 72.1%, US 4.2%, other developed countries 7.9% (1996)

Imports:
total value : $118.3 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: machinery, transport equipment, fuels, semifinished
goods, foodstuffs, consumer goods, chemicals (1994)
partners: EU 65.6%, US 6.6%, other developed countries 11.5%, Middle
East 6.2% (1996)

Debt - external: $90 billion (1993 est.)

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $1.213 billion (1993)

Currency: 1 peseta (Pta) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates: pesetas (Ptas) per US$1 - 134.77 (January 1997),
126.66 (1996), 124.69 (1995), 133.96 (1994), 127.26 (1993), 102.38
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Spain:Communications

Telephones: 12.6 million (1990 est.)

Telephone system: generally adequate, modern facilities
domestic: NA
international: 22 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth stations -
2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), NA Eutelsat, NA
Inmarsat, and NA Marecs; tropospheric scatter to adjacent countries

Radio broadcast stations: AM 190, FM 406 (repeaters 134), shortwave 0

Radios: 12 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 100 (repeaters 1,297)

Televisions: 15.7 million (1992 est.)

@Spain:Transportation

Railways:
total: 14,343 km
broad gauge: 12,139 km 1.668-m gauge (6,510 km electrified; 2,295 km
double track)
standard gauge: 488 km 1.435-m gauge (488 km electrified)
narrow gauge: 1,716 km (privately owned: 1,669 km 1.000-m gauge, 489
km electrified; 28 km 0.914-m gauge, 28 km electrified; government
owned: 19 km 1.000-m gauge, all electrified)

Highways:
total: 343,197 km
paved: 339,765 km (including 7,747 km of expressways)
unpaved : 3,432 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,045 km, but of minor economic importance

Pipelines: crude oil 265 km; petroleum products 1,794 km; natural gas
1,666 km

Ports and harbors: Aviles, Barcelona, Bilbao, Cadiz, Cartagena,
Castellon de la Plana, Ceuta, Huelva, La Coruna, Las Palmas (Canary
Islands), Malaga, Melilla, Pasajes, Gijon, Santa Cruz de Tenerife
(Canary Islands), Santander, Tarragona, Valencia, Vigo

Merchant marine:
total: 141 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 888,815 GRT/1,396,541
DWT
ships by type : bulk 9, cargo 33, chemical tanker 10, combination
ore/oil 1, container 9, liquefied gas tanker 4, oil tanker 26,
passenger 2, refrigerated cargo 9, roll-on/roll-off cargo 31,
short-sea passenger 6, specialized tanker 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 96 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 82
over 3,047 m: 15
2,438 to 3,047 m: 11
1,524 to 2,437 m : 15
914 to 1,523 m: 13
under 914 m: 28 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 14
1,524 to 2,437 m : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 12 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, Civil Guard,
National Police, Coastal Civil Guard

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 10,387,353 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 8,381,141 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 333,758 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $6.3 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.4% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Gibraltar question with UK; Spain controls
five places of sovereignty (plazas de soberania) on and off the coast
of Morocco - the coastal enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla, which Morocco
contests, as well as the islands of Penon de Alhucemas, Penon de Velez
de la Gomera, and Islas Chafarinas

Illicit drugs: key European gateway country for Latin American cocaine
and North African hashish entering the European market; transshipment
point for and consumer of Southwest Asian heroin
______________________________________________________________________

SPRATLY ISLANDS

@Spratly Islands:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, group of reefs in the South China Sea,
about two-thirds of the way from southern Vietnam to the southern
Philippines

Geographic coordinates: 8 38 N, 111 55 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total : less than 5 sq km
land: less than 5 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes 100 or so islets, coral reefs, and sea mounts scattered
over the South China Sea

Area - comparative: NA

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 926 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: tropical

Terrain: flat

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: South China Sea 0 m
highest point : unnamed location on Southwest Cay 4 m

Natural resources: fish, guano, undetermined oil and natural gas
potential

Land use:
arable land : 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: typhoons; serious maritime hazard because of numerous
reefs and shoals

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: strategically located near several primary shipping
lanes in the central South China Sea; includes numerous small islands,
atolls, shoals, and coral reefs

@Spratly Islands:People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants
note: there are scattered garrisons

@Spratly Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Spratly Islands

Data code: PG

Economy

Economy - overview: Economic activity is limited to commercial
fishing. The proximity to nearby oil- and gas-producing sedimentary
basins suggests the potential for oil and gas deposits, but the region
is largely unexplored, and there are no reliable estimates of
potential reserves; commercial exploitation has yet to be developed.

Industries: none

@Spratly Islands:Communications

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

@Spratly Islands:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 4 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 3
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: about 50 small islands or reefs are occupied by
China, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Vietnam

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: all of the Spratly Islands are claimed by
China, Taiwan, and Vietnam; parts of them are claimed by Malaysia and
the Philippines; in 1984, Brunei established an exclusive economic
zone, which encompasses Louisa Reef, but has not publicly claimed the
island
______________________________________________________________________

SRI LANKA

@Sri Lanka:Geography

Location: Southern Asia, island in the Indian Ocean, south of India

Geographic coordinates: 7 00 N, 81 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
total : 65,610 sq km
land: 64,740 sq km
water: 870 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than West Virginia

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,340 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical monsoon; northeast monsoon (December to March);
southwest monsoon (June to October)

Terrain: mostly low, flat to rolling plain; mountains in south-central
interior

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Pidurutalagala 2,524 m

Natural resources: limestone, graphite, mineral sands, gems,
phosphates, clay

Land use:
arable land: 14%
permanent crops: 15%
permanent pastures : 7%
forests and woodland: 32%
other: 32% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 5,500 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional cyclones and tornadoes

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; wildlife
populations threatened by poaching; coastal degradation from mining
activities and increased pollution; freshwater resources being
polluted by industrial wastes and sewage runoff

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: strategic location near major Indian Ocean sea lanes

@Sri Lanka:People

Population: 18,721,178 (July 1997 est.)
note: since the outbreak of hostilities between the government and
armed Tamil separatists in the mid-1980s, several hundred thousand
Tamil civilians have fled the island; as of late 1996, 63,068 were
housed in refugee camps in south India, another 30,000-40,000 lived
outside the Indian camps, and more than 200,000 Tamils have sought
political asylum in the West

Age structure:
0-14 years: 28% (male 2,698,852; female 2,581,476)
15-64 years : 66% (male 6,019,140; female 6,266,311)
65 years and over: 6% (male 565,671; female 589,728) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.14% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 18.64 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.9 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.37 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.96 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 16.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 72.42 years
male: 69.75 years
female: 75.23 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.15 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Sri Lankan(s)
adjective: Sri Lankan

Ethnic groups: Sinhalese 74%, Tamil 18%, Moor 7%, Burgher, Malay, and
Vedda 1%

Religions: Buddhist 69%, Hindu 15%, Christian 8%, Muslim 8%

Languages: Sinhala (official and national language) 74%, Tamil
(national language) 18%
note: English is commonly used in government and is spoken by about
10% of the population

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 90.2%
male: 93.4%
female: 87.2% (1995 est.)

@Sri Lanka:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
conventional short form: Sri Lanka
former: Ceylon

Data code: CE

Government type: republic

National capital: Colombo

Administrative divisions: 8 provinces; Central, North Central, North
Eastern, North Western, Sabaragamuwa, Southern, Uva, Western

Independence: 4 February 1948 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence and National Day, 4 February (1948)

Constitution: adopted 16 August 1978

Legal system: a highly complex mixture of English common law,
Roman-Dutch, Muslim, Sinhalese, and customary law; has not accepted
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA (since 12
November 1994); note - Sirimavo BANDARANAIKE is the prime minister; in
Sri Lanka the president is considered to be both the chief of state
and the head of the government, this is in contrast to the more common
practice of dividing the roles between the president and the prime
minister when both offices exist
head of government: President Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA
(since 12 November 1994); note - Sirimavo BANDARANAIKE is the prime
minister; in Sri Lanka the president is considered to be both the
chief of state and the head of the government, this is in contrast to
the more common practice of dividing the roles between the president
and the prime minister when both offices exist
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president in consultation with the
prime minister
elections : president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
election last held 9 November 1994 (next to be held NA November 2000)
election results : Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA elected
president; percent of vote - Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA
(People's Alliance) 62%, Srima DISSANAYAKE (United National Party)
37%, other 1%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (225 seats; members elected
by popular vote on the basis of a modified proportional representation
system to serve six-year terms)
elections: last held 16 August 1994 (next to be held by August 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - PA 49.0%, UNP 44.0%, SLMC
1.8%, TULF 1.7%, SLPF 1.1%, EPDP 0.3%, UPF 0.3%, PLOTE 0.1%, other
1.7%; seats by party - PA 105, UNP 94, EPDP 9, SLMC 7, TULF 5, PLOTE
3, SLPF 1, UPF 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the Judicial
Service Commission; Court of Appeals

Political parties and leaders: All Ceylon Tamil Congress (ACTC), C. G.
Kumar PONNAMBALAM; Ceylon Workers Congress (CLDC), S. THONDAMAN;
Communist Party, K. P. SILVA; Communist Party/Beijing (CP/B), N.
SHANMUGATHASAN; Democratic People's Liberation Front (DPLF), leader
NA; Democratic United National Front (DUNF), G. M. PREMACHANDRA; Eelam
People's Democratic Party (EPDP), Douglas DEVANANDA; Eelam People's
Revolutionary Liberation Front (EPRL), Suresh PREMACHANDRAN; Eelam
Revolutionary Organization of Students (EROS), Shankar RAJI; Lanka
Socialist Party/Trotskyite (LSSP, or Lanka Sama Samaja Party), Colin
R. DE SILVA; Liberal Party (LP), Chanaka AMARATUNGA; New Socialist
Party (NSSP, or Nava Sama Samaja Party), Vasudeva NANAYAKKARA;
People's Alliance (PA), Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA; People's
Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam (PLOTE), Dharmalingam
SIDARTHAN; People's United Front (MEP, or Mahajana Eksath Peramuna),
Dinesh GUNAWARDENE; Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP), Sirimavo
BANDARANAIKE; Sri Lanka Muslim Congress (SLMC), M. H. M. ASHRAFF; Sri
Lanka People's Party (SLMP, or Sri Lanka Mahajana Party), Ossie
ABEYGUNASEKERA; Sri Lanka Progressive Front (SLPF), leader NA; Tamil
Eelam Liberation Organization (TELO), leader NA; Tamil United
Liberation Front (TULF), M. SIVASITHAMBARAM; United National Party
(UNP), Dingiri Banda WIJETUNGA; Upcountry People's Front (UPF), leader
NA; several ethnic Tamil and Muslim parties, represented in either
parliament or provincial councils
note: the United Socialist Alliance (USA), which was formed in 1987
and included the NSSP, LSSP, SLMP, CP/M, and CP/B, was defunct as of
1993, following the formation of the People's Alliance Party (PA)

Political pressure groups and leaders: Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam (LTTE) and other smaller Tamil separatist groups; other radical
chauvinist Sinhalese groups; Buddhist clergy; Sinhalese Buddhist lay
groups; labor unions

International organization participation: AsDB, C, CCC, CP, ESCAP,
FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
ISO, ITU, NAM, PCA, SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WCL,
WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Geetha DE
SILVA
chancery : 2148 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 483-4025 through 4028
FAX : [1] (202) 232-7181
consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador A. Peter BURLEIGH
embassy: 210 Galle Road, Colombo 3
mailing address : P. O. Box 106, Colombo
telephone: [94] (1) 448007
FAX: [94] (1) 437345, 446013

Flag description: yellow with two panels; the smaller hoist-side panel
has two equal vertical bands of green (hoist side) and orange; the
other panel is a large dark red rectangle with a yellow lion holding a
sword, and there is a yellow bo leaf in each corner; the yellow field
appears as a border that goes around the entire flag and extends
between the two panels

Economy

Economy - overview: Industry - dominated by the fast-growing apparel
industry - has surpassed agriculture as the main source of export
earnings. The economy has been plagued by high rates of unemployment
since the late 1970s. Economic growth accelerated in 1991-95 as
domestic conditions began to improve and conditions for foreign
investment brightened. In 1996, however, a drought, slow economic
reform, and civil war exacted a heavy economic toll. Insufficient
monsoon rains caused power cuts that hurt industrial and agricultural
production, and the stepped-up Tamil insurgency reduced foreign
investment and tourism - two key sources of foreign exchange.
Meanwhile, Colombo's counterinsurgency efforts caused defense
expenditures to overshoot budget targets by 42%. In 1997, agricultural
production should recover from the effects of last year's drought, but
industry will still be hampered by high real interest rates, slow
improvement in foreign investment inflows, and stalled progress on
privatization. The government's main challenge this year will be to
curb defense and social welfare spending to cut the budget deficit as
a percentage of GDP in half by 1998, as stipulated in its deficit
reduction program.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $69.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.7% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,760 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 23.8%
industry: 24.7%
services : 51.5% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 15.9% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 6.2 million (1994)
by occupation: agriculture 42%, services 40%, industry 18% (1994)

Unemployment rate: 13.1% (1994)

Budget:
revenues : $3 billion
expenditures: $4.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $1
billion (1997)

Industries: processing of rubber, tea, coconuts, and other
agricultural commodities; clothing, cement, petroleum refining,
textiles, tobacco

Industrial production growth rate: 6.2% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 1.56 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 4.33 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 236 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, sugarcane, grains, pulses, oilseed,
roots, spices, tea, rubber, coconuts; milk, eggs, hides, meat

Exports:
total value: $4 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: textiles and apparel, tea, petroleum products, diamonds,
other gems, rubber products (1994)
partners : US 34.8%, UK 8.9%, Germany 6.9%, Belgium-Luxembourg 5.9%
(1994)

Imports:
total value: $5 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: textiles, machinery and equipment, transport equipment,
petroleum, building materials, sugar (1994)
partners: Japan 11.0%, India 8.5%, South Korea 6.8%, Hong Kong 6.6%,
Taiwan 5.2%, Singapore 4.9% (1994)

Debt - external: $9.6 billion (1995)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $602 million (1995 est.)

Currency: 1 Sri Lankan rupee (SLRe) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Sri Lankan rupees (SLRes) per US$1 - 56.921 (January
1997), 55.271 (1996), 51.252 (1995), 49.415 (1994), 48.322 (1993),
43.830 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Sri Lanka:Communications

Telephones: 175,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: very inadequate domestic service, good international
service
domestic: NA
international: submarine cables to Indonesia and Djibouti; satellite
earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 12, FM 5, shortwave 0

Radios: 3.525 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 5

Televisions: 865,000 (1992 est.)

@Sri Lanka:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,484 km
broad gauge: 1,459 km 1.676-m gauge
narrow gauge: 25 km 0.762-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 98,642 km
paved: 37,484 km
unpaved: 61,158 km (1993 est.)

Waterways: 430 km; navigable by shallow-draft craft

Pipelines: crude oil and petroleum products 62 km (1987)

Ports and harbors: Colombo, Galle, Jaffna, Trincomalee

Merchant marine:
total: 26 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 220,660 GRT/329,365 DWT
ships by type: bulk 2, cargo 13, container 1, oil tanker 2,
refrigerated cargo 8 (1996 est.)

Airports: 13 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 12
over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
914 to 1,523 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Police Force

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 5,066,744 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 3,946,315 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 184,619 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $736 million (1997)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 5.7% (1997)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

SUDAN

@Sudan:Geography

Location: Northern Africa, bordering the Red Sea, between Egypt and
Eritrea

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 2,505,810 sq km
land: 2.376 million sq km
water : 129,810 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than one-quarter the size of the US

Land boundaries:
total : 7,687 km
border countries: Central African Republic 1,165 km, Chad 1,360 km,
Democratic Republic of the Congo 628 km, Egypt 1,273 km, Eritrea 605
km, Ethiopia 1,606 km, Kenya 232 km, Libya 383 km, Uganda 435 km

Coastline: 853 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 18 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical in south; arid desert in north; rainy season (April
to October)

Terrain: generally flat, featureless plain; mountains in east and west

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Red Sea 0 m
highest point: Kinyeti 3,187 m

Natural resources: petroleum; small reserves of iron ore, copper,
chromium ore, zinc, tungsten, mica, silver, gold

Land use:
arable land : 5%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 46%
forests and woodland: 19%
other: 30% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 19,460 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust storms

Environment - current issues: inadequate supplies of potable water;
wildlife populations threatened by excessive hunting; soil erosion;
desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: largest country in Africa; dominated by the Nile and
its tributaries

@Sudan:People

Population: 32,594,128 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 46% (male 7,584,401; female 7,271,175)
15-64 years: 52% (male 8,536,476; female 8,492,043)
65 years and over : 2% (male 398,591; female 311,442) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.06% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 40.54 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 11.16 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.17 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.28 male(s)/female
total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 74.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 55.54 years
male: 54.6 years
female: 56.53 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.79 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Sudanese (singular and plural)
adjective: Sudanese

Ethnic groups: black 52%, Arab 39%, Beja 6%, foreigners 2%, other 1%

Religions: Sunni Muslim 70% (in north), indigenous beliefs 25%,
Christian 5% (mostly in south and Khartoum)

Languages: Arabic (official), Nubian, Ta Bedawie, diverse dialects of
Nilotic, Nilo-Hamitic, Sudanic languages, English
note: program of Arabization in process

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 46.1%
male: 57.7%
female: 34.6% (1995 est.)

@Sudan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of the Sudan
conventional short form: Sudan
local long form: Jumhuriyat as-Sudan
local short form: As-Sudan
former : Anglo-Egyptian Sudan

Data code: SU

Government type: transitional - previously ruling military junta;
presidential and National Assembly elections held in March 1996; new
constitution to be drafted by the National Assembly

National capital: Khartoum

Administrative divisions: 26 states (wilayat, singular - wilayat or
wilayah*); A'ali an Nil, Al Bahr al Ahmar, Al Buhayrat, Al Jazirah, Al
Khartum, Al Qadarif, Al Wahdah, An Nil al Abyad, An Nil al Azraq, Ash
Shamaliyah*, Bahr al Jabal, Gharb al Istiwa'iyah, Gharb Bahr al
Ghazal, Gharb Darfur, Gharb Kurdufan, Janub Darfur, Janub Kurdufan,
Junqali, Kassala, Nahr an Nil, Shamal Bahr al Ghazal, Shamal Darfur,
Shamal Kurdufan, Sharq al Istiwa'iyah, Sinnar, Warab

Independence: 1 January 1956 (from Egypt and UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 January (1956)

Constitution: 12 April 1973, suspended following coup of 6 April 1985;
interim constitution of 10 October 1985 suspended following coup of 30
June 1989; new constitution to be drafted following national elections
held in March 1996

Legal system: based on English common law and Islamic law; as of 20
January 1991, the now defunct Revolutionary Command Council imposed
Islamic law in the northern states; Islamic law applies to all
residents of the northern states regardless of their religion; some
separate religious courts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
reservations

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal, but noncompulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Lt. General Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR
(since 16 October 1993); First Vice President Major General al-Zubayr
Muhammad SALIH (since 19 October 1993), Second Vice President (Police)
Maj. General George KONGOR AROP (since NA February 1994); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government : President Lt. General Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR
(since 16 October 1993); First Vice President Major General al-Zubayr
Muhammad SALIH (since 19 October 1993), Second Vice President (Police)
Maj. General George KONGOR AROP (since NA February 1994); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the president; note - President
al-BASHIR's government is dominated by members of Sudan's National
Islamic Front, a fundamentalist political organization formed from the
Muslim Brotherhood in 1986; front leader Hasan al-TURABI dominates
much of Khartoum's overall domestic and foreign policies; President
al-BASHIR named a new cabinet on 20 April 1996 which includes members
of the National Islamic Front, serving and retired military offficers,
and civilian technocrats
elections : president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 6-17 March 1996 (next to be held NA 2001)
election results: Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR elected president;
percent of vote - Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR 75.7%; note - about forty
other candidates ran for president
note : al-BASHIR, as chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council for
National Salvation (RCC), assumed power on 30 June 1989 and served
concurrently as chief of state, chairman of the RCC, prime minister,
and minister of defense until 16 October 1993 when he was appointed
president by the RCC; upon its dissolution on 16 October 1993, the
RCC's executive and legislative powers were devolved to the president
and the Transitional National Assembly (TNA), Sudan's appointed
legislative body, which has since been replaced by the National
Assembly which was elected in March 1996

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (400 seats; 275
elected by popular vote, 125 elected by a supraassembly of interest
groups known as the National Congress; members serve four-year terms)
elections : last held 6-17 March 1996 (next to be held NA 2000)
election results: NA; the March 1996 elections were held on a nonparty
basis; parties are banned in the new National Assembly

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Special Revolutionary Courts

Political parties and leaders: none; banned following 30 June 1989
coup

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Islamic Front, Hasan
al-TURABI

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL,
AMF, CAEU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IGADD, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM
(observer), ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
UNU, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Mahdi Ibrahim MOHAMED
chancery: 2210 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 338-8565 through 8570
FAX : [1] (202) 667-2406
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: operations in Khartoum were
suspended in February 1996; Ambassador to Sudan Timothy M. CARNEY and
several members of the mission have relocated to Nairobi, Kenya and
operate out of the US Embassy there; the embassy is located at the
corner of Moi Avenue and Haile Selassie Avenue; mailing address: P. O.
Box 30137, Unit 64100, APO AE 09831; telephone: [254] (2) 334141; FAX:
[254] (2) 340838

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and black with a green isosceles triangle based on the hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: Sudan is buffeted by civil war, chronic political
instability, adverse weather, high inflation, a drop in remittances
from abroad, and counterproductive economic policies. The private
sector's main areas of activity are agriculture and trading, with most
private industrial investment predating 1980. Agriculture employs 80%
of the work force. Industry mainly processes agricultural items.
Sluggish economic performance over the past decade, attributable
largely to declining annual rainfall, has kept per capita income at
low levels. A large foreign debt and huge arrearages continue to cause
difficulties. In 1990 the International Monetary Fund took the unusual
step of declaring Sudan noncooperative because of its nonpayment of
arrearages to the Fund. After Sudan backtracked on promised reforms in
1992-93, the IMF threatened to expel Sudan from the Fund. To avoid
expulsion, Khartoum agreed to make payments on its arrears to the
Fund, liberalize exchange rates, and reduce subsidies, measures it has
partially implemented. The government's continued prosecution of the
civil war and its growing international isolation continued to inhibit
growth in the nonagricultural sectors of the economy during 1996.
Hyperinflation has raised consumer prices above the reach of most.
Popular unrest erupted several times in 1996 in reaction to unpopular
government economic decisions.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $26.6 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $860 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 33%
industry : 17%
services: 50% (1992 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 133% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 11 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 80%, industry and commerce 10%, government
6%
note: labor shortages for almost all categories of skilled employment
(1983 est.)

Unemployment rate: 30% (FY92/93 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $382 million
expenditures: $1.06 billion, including capital expenditures of $91
million (1995 est.)

Industries: cotton ginning, textiles, cement, edible oils, sugar, soap
distilling, shoes, petroleum refining

Industrial production growth rate: 6.8% (FY92/93 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 500,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 1.3 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 37 kWh (1994 est.)

Agriculture - products: cotton, groundnuts, sorghum, millet, wheat,
gum arabic, sesame; sheep

Exports:
total value: $500 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: cotton 44%, livestock/meat 13%, gum arabic 11%, sesame
10%
partners : Egypt 33.3%, Saudi Arabia 16.6%, Japan 13.4%, Italy 12%
(1995)

Imports:
total value: $1 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, petroleum products, manufactured goods,
machinery and equipment, medicines and chemicals, textiles
partners : EU 29.4%, US 17.6%, Saudi Arabia 8.7%, Egypt 6.3% (1995)

Debt - external: $18.5 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $387 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Sudanese pound (£Sd) = 100 piastres

Exchange rates: Sudanese pounds (£Sd) per US$1 - official rate:
1,454.0 (December 1996), 750.0 (November 1995), 277.8 (1994), 153.8
(1993), 69.4 (1992); market rate: 1,4600.00 (January 1997), 1,250.79
(1996), 571.02 (August 1995), 289.61 (1994), 159.31 (1993), 97.43
(1992)
note : the market rate is a unified exchange rate determined by a
committee of local bankers, without official intervention, and is
quoted uniformly by all commercial banks

Fiscal year: calendar year
note: prior to July 1995, Sudan had a fiscal year that began on 1 July
and ended on 30 June; as a transition to their new fiscal year, a
six-month budget was implemented for 1 July - 31 December 1995; the
new calendar year (1 January - 31 December) fiscal year became
effective 1 January 1996

@Sudan:Communications

Telephones: 77,215 (1983 est.)

Telephone system: large, well-equipped system by African standards,
but barely adequate and poorly maintained by modern standards
domestic: consists of microwave radio relay, cable, radiotelephone
communications, tropospheric scatter, and a domestic satellite system
with 14 earth stations
international: satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)
and 1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 11, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 6.67 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3

Televisions: 2.06 million (1992 est.)

@Sudan:Transportation

Railways:
total: 5,516 km
narrow gauge: 4,800 km 1.067-m gauge; 716 km 1.6096-m gauge plantation
line

Highways:
total : 11,610 km
paved: 4,203 km
unpaved: 7,407 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 5,310 km navigable

Pipelines: refined products 815 km

Ports and harbors: Juba, Khartoum, Kusti, Malakal, Nimule, Port Sudan,
Sawakin

Merchant marine:
total: 4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 37,359 GRT/49,422 DWT
ships by type: cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 (1996 est.)

Airports: 56 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 20
2,438 to 3,047 m: 9
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
under 914 m: 8 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 36
1,524 to 2,437 m: 12
914 to 1,523 m : 24 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Popular Defense Force
Militia

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 7,437,363 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 4,576,117 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 341,516 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: administrative boundary with Kenya does not
coincide with international boundary; administrative boundary with
Egypt does not coincide with international boundary creating the
"Hala'ib Triangle," a barren area of 20,580 sq km
______________________________________________________________________

SURINAME

@Suriname:Geography

Location: Northern South America, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
between French Guiana and Guyana

Geographic coordinates: 4 00 N, 56 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total: 163,270 sq km
land: 161,470 sq km
water: 1,800 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Georgia

Land boundaries:
total: 1,707 km
border countries: Brazil 597 km, French Guiana 510 km, Guyana 600 km

Coastline: 386 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by trade winds

Terrain: mostly rolling hills; narrow coastal plain with swamps

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : unnamed location in the coastal plain -2 m
highest point: Wilhelmina Gebergte 1,286 m

Natural resources: timber, hydropower potential, fish, shrimp,
bauxite, iron ore, and small amounts of nickel, copper, platinum, gold

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 96%
other : 4% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 600 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: deforestation as timber is cut for
export

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Climate Change, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: mostly tropical rain forest; great diversity of
flora and fauna which for the most part is not threatened because of
the lack of development; relatively small population most of which
lives along the coast

@Suriname:People

Population: 424,569 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 34% (male 73,017; female 69,538)
15-64 years: 61% (male 132,188; female 128,260)
65 years and over: 5% (male 10,033; female 11,533) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.83% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.2 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.83 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -9.06 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.87 male(s)/female
total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 28.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 70.32 years
male: 67.78 years
female: 72.99 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.64 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Surinamer(s)
adjective: Surinamese

Ethnic groups: Hindustani (also known locally as "East Indians"; their
ancestors emigrated from northern India in the latter part of the 19th
century) 37%, Creole (mixed white and black) 31%, Javanese 15.3%,
"Maroons" (their African ancestors were brought to the country in the
17th and 18th centuries as slaves) 10.3%, Amerindian 2.6%, Chinese
1.7%, white 1%, other 1.1%

Religions: Hindu 27.4%, Muslim 19.6%, Roman Catholic 22.8%, Protestant
25.2% (predominantly Moravian), indigenous beliefs 5%

Languages: Dutch (official), English (widely spoken), Sranang Tongo
(Surinamese, sometimes called Taki-Taki, is native language of Creoles
and much of the younger population and is lingua franca among others),
Hindustani (a dialect of Hindi), Javanese

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 93%
male: 95%
female: 91% (1995 est.)

@Suriname:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Suriname
conventional short form: Suriname
local long form : Republiek Suriname
local short form: Suriname
former: Netherlands Guiana, Dutch Guiana

Data code: NS

Government type: republic

National capital: Paramaribo

Administrative divisions: 10 districts (distrikten, singular -
distrikt); Brokopondo, Commewijne, Coronie, Marowijne, Nickerie, Para,
Paramaribo, Saramacca, Sipaliwini, Wanica

Independence: 25 November 1975 (from Netherlands)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 November (1975)

Constitution: ratified 30 September 1987

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Jules WIJDENBOSCH (since 14 September 1996);
Vice President Pretaapnarian RADHAKISHUN (since 14 September 1996);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Jules WIJDENBOSCH (since 14 September
1996); Vice President Pretaapnarian RADHAKISHUN (since 14 September
1996); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
cabinet : Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president from among
the members of the National Assembly
note: Commander in Chief of the National Army maintains significant
power
elections: president and vice president elected by the National
Assembly for five-year terms; election last held 23 May 1996; runoff
election held 5 September 1996 (next to be held NA May 2001)
election results: Jules WIJDENBOSCH elected president; percent of
legislative vote NA; National Assembly failed to elect president;
results reflect the People's Assembly votes - Jules WIJDENBOSCH (NDP)
438, Ronald VENETIAAN (NF) 407

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
Nationale (51 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms)
elections : last held 23 May 1996 (next to be held NA May 2001)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - NDP
16, NF 14, BVD 5, KTPI 5, DA'91 4, Pendawa Lima 4, Alliance 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, justices nominated for life

Political parties and leaders: The New Front (NF), a coalition of
three parties (NPS, VHP, SPA), leader Ronald R. VENETIAAN; Progressive
Reform Party (VHP), Jaggernath LACHMON; National Party of Suriname
(NPS), Ronald VENETIAAN; Party of National Unity and Solidarity
(KTPI), Willy SOEMITA; Suriname Labor Party (SPA), Fred DERBY;
Democratic Alternative '91 (DA '91), a coalition of two parties (AF,
and BEP) formed in January 1991, Winston JESSURUN; Alternative Forum
(AF), Rick VAN RAVENSWAY; Party for Brotherhood and Unity in Politics
(BEP), Caprino ALLENDY; Pendawa Lima, Paul SOMOHARDJO; National
Democratic Party (NDP), Desire BOUTERSE; Progressive Workers' and Farm
Laborers' Union (PALU), Ir Iwan KROLIS; The Progressive Development
Alliance, a combination of three parties (DP, HPP, PVF), Frank
PLAYFAIR; Democratic Party (DP), Frank PLAYFAIR; Reformed Progressive
Party (HPP), Harry KISOENSINGH; Party of the Federation of Land
Workers PVF), Jwan SITAL; Party for Renewal and Democracy (BVD), Atta
MUNGRA; Independent Progressive Democratic Alternative (OPDA),
Joginder RAMKHILAWAN

Political pressure groups and leaders: Union for Liberation and
Democracy, Kofi AFONGPONG; Mandela Bushnegro Liberation Movement,
Leendert ADAMS; Tucayana Amazonica, Alex JUBITANA, Thomas SABAJO;
General Liberation and Development Party (ABOP), George TIRINI

International organization participation: ACP, Caricom, ECLAC, FAO,
G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, LAES, NAM, OAS, OIC,
OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Cicyl G.
ALWART
chancery: Suite 108, 4301 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 244-7488, 7490 through 7492
FAX : [1] (202) 244-5878
consulate(s) general: Miami

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Dennis K. HAYS
embassy: Dr. Sophie Redmondstraat 129, Paramaribo
mailing address : P. O. Box 1821, American Embassy Paramaribo,
Department of State, Washington, DC, 20521-3390
telephone: [597] 472900, 477881, 476459
FAX: [597] 420800

Flag description: five horizontal bands of green (top, double width),
white, red (quadruple width), white, and green (double width); there
is a large yellow five-pointed star centered in the red band

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is dominated by the bauxite industry,
which accounts for upwards of 15% of GDP and more than 65% of export
earnings. Following a dismal year in 1994 which saw the value of the
Surinamese currency plummet by about 80%, inflation rise to more than
600%, and national output fall for the fifth consecutive year, nearly
all economic indicators improved in 1995-96. The government unified
the exchange rate and maintained a fairly tight monetary policy.
Inflation apparently has been eliminated, and tax revenues have
increased sufficiently to erase the budget deficit. The release of
substantial development aid from the Netherlands - which had been held
up due to the government's failure to initiate economic reforms - also
has helped buoy the economy. Suriname's economic prospects for the
medium term will depend on continued implementation of economic
restructuring. The new government elected in the fall of 1996 has sent
mixed signals about commitment to these reforms.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.4 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,150 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 14%
industry : 33%
services: 53% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 0% (1996 est.)

Labor force: NA
by occupation: agriculture, industry, services

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $205 million
expenditures: $174 million, including capital expenditures of $12
million (1995 est.)

Industries: bauxite and gold mining, alumina and aluminum production,
lumbering, food processing, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: 6.5% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 389,000 kW 000 kW

Electricity - production: 1.402 billion kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,929 kWh (1995)

Agriculture - products: paddy rice, bananas, palm kernels, coconuts,
plantains, peanuts; beef, chicken; forest products and shrimp of
increasing importance

Exports:
total value: $432 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: alumina, aluminum, shrimp and fish, rice, bananas
partners: Norway 33%, Netherlands 26%, US 13%, Japan 6%, Brazil 6%, UK
3% (1994)

Imports:
total value: $418 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities : capital equipment, petroleum, foodstuffs, cotton,
consumer goods
partners: US 40%, Netherlands 24%, Trinidad and Tobago 11%, Japan 3%
(1994)

Debt - external: $198 million (1994)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, the Netherlands provided a 1996 aid package of $224
million to Suriname, Aruba, and the Netherlands Antilles

Currency: 1 Surinamese guilder, gulden, or florin (Sf.) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Surinamese guilders, gulden, or florins (Sf.) per US$1
- central bank midpoint rate: 401.00 (January 1997), 401.26 (1996),
442.23 (1995), 134.12 (1994); parallel rate: 412 (December 1995), 510
(December 1994), 109 (January 1994)
note : beginning July 1994, the central bank midpoint exchange rate
was unified and became market determined

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Suriname:Communications

Telephones: 43,522 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: international facilities good
domestic: microwave radio relay network
international : satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 14, shortwave 1

Radios: 290,256 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 6 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 59,598 (1993 est.)

@Suriname:Transportation

Railways:
total: 166 km (single track)
standard gauge: 80 km 1.435-m gauge
narrow gauge: 86 km 1.000-m gauge

Highways:
total: 4,470 km
paved : 1,162 km
unpaved: 3,308 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,200 km; most important means of transport; oceangoing
vessels with drafts ranging up to 7 m can navigate many of the
principal waterways

Ports and harbors: Albina, Moengo, New Nickerie, Paramaribo, Paranam,
Wageningen

Merchant marine:
total: 2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,421 GRT/2,990 DWT
ships by type: cargo 1, container 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 38 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 32
over 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m: 31 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 6
914 to 1,523 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: National Army (includes small Navy and Air Force
elements), Civil Police

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 121,618 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 71,811 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims area in French Guiana between Litani
Rivier and Riviere Marouini (both headwaters of the Lawa Rivier);
claims area in Guyana between New (Upper Courantyne) and
Courantyne/Koetari Rivers (all headwaters of the Courantyne)

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for South American drugs destined
mostly for Europe
______________________________________________________________________

SVALBARD

(territory of Norway)

@Svalbard:Geography

Location: Northern Europe, islands between the Arctic Ocean, Barents
Sea, Greenland Sea, and Norwegian Sea, north of Norway

Geographic coordinates: 78 00 N, 20 00 E

Map references: Arctic Region

Area:
total: 62,049 sq km
land: 62,049 sq km
water : 0 sq km
note: includes Spitsbergen and Bjornoya (Bear Island)

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than West Virginia

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 3,587 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm unilaterally claimed by Norway but not
recognized by Russia
territorial sea: 4 nm

Climate: arctic, tempered by warm North Atlantic Current; cool
summers, cold winters; North Atlantic Current flows along west and
north coasts of Spitsbergen, keeping water open and navigable most of
the year

Terrain: wild, rugged mountains; much of high land ice covered; west
coast clear of ice about one-half of the year; fjords along west and
north coasts

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Arctic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Newtontoppen 1,717 m

Natural resources: coal, copper, iron ore, phosphate, zinc, wildlife,
fish

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures : 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100% (no trees and the only bushes are crowberry and
cloudberry)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: ice floes often block up the entrance to Bellsund (a
transit point for coal export) on the west coast and occasionally make
parts of the northeastern coast inaccessible to maritime traffic

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: northernmost part of the Kingdom of Norway; consists
of nine main islands; glaciers and snowfields cover 60% of the total
area

@Svalbard:People

Population: 2,624 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: -3.81% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over : NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : NA years
male: NA years
female : NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Ethnic groups: Russian and Ukrainian 62%, Norwegian 38%, other NEGL%
(1994)

Languages: Russian, Norwegian

@Svalbard:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Svalbard (sometimes referred to as
Spitzbergen)

Data code: SV

Dependency status: territory of Norway; administered by the Ministry
of Industry, Oslo, through a governor (sysselmann) residing in
Longyearbyen, Spitsbergen; by treaty (9 February 1920) sovereignty was
given to Norway

Government type: NA

National capital: Longyearbyen

Independence: none (territory of Norway)

National holiday: NA

Legal system: NA

Executive branch:
chief of state: King HARALD V of Norway (since 17 January 1991)
head of government: Governor Ann-Krisitin OLSEN (since NA) and
Assistant Governor Jan-Atle HANSEN (since NA September 1993)
elections : none; the king is a hereditary monarch; governor and
assistant governor responsible to the Polar Department of the Ministry
of Justice

International organization participation: none

Flag description: the flag of Norway is used

Economy

Economy - overview: Coal mining is the major economic activity on
Svalbard. By treaty (9 February 1920), the nationals of the treaty
powers have equal rights to exploit mineral deposits, subject to
Norwegian regulation. Although US, UK, Dutch, and Swedish coal
companies have mined in the past, the only companies still mining are
Norwegian and Russian. The settlements on Svalbard are essentially
company towns. The Norwegian state-owned coal company employs nearly
60% of the Norwegian population on the island, runs many of the local
services, and provides most of the local infrastructure. There is also
some trapping of seal, polar bear, fox, and walrus.

Labor force: NA

Budget:
revenues : $11.6 million
expenditures: $11.6 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Currency: 1 Norwegian krone (NKr) = 100 oere

Exchange rates: Norwegian kroner (NKr) per US$1 - 6.4475 (January
1997), 6.4498 (1996), 6.3352 (1995), 7.0576 (1994), 7.0941 (1993),
6.2145 (1992)

@Svalbard:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
domestic: local telephone service
international: satellite earth station - 1 of NA type (for
communication with Norwegian mainland only)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1 (repeaters 2), shortwave 0
note: there are five meteorological/radio stations

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1

Televisions: NA

@Svalbard:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : NA km
paved: NA km
unpaved : NA km

Ports and harbors: Barentsburg, Longyearbyen, Ny-Alesund, Pyramiden

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 4 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 4
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
under 914 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: demilitarized by treaty (9 February 1920)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Svalbard is the focus of a maritime boundary
dispute in the Barents Sea between Norway and Russia
______________________________________________________________________

SWAZILAND

@Swaziland:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, between Mozambique and South Africa

Geographic coordinates: 26 30 S, 31 30 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 17,360 sq km
land: 17,200 sq km
water: 160 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries:
total : 535 km
border countries: Mozambique 105 km, South Africa 430 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: varies from tropical to near temperate

Terrain: mostly mountains and hills; some moderately sloping plains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Great Usutu River 21 m
highest point: Emlembe 1,862 m

Natural resources: asbestos, coal, clay, cassiterite, hydropower,
forests, small gold and diamond deposits, quarry stone, and talc

Land use:
arable land: 11%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 62%
forests and woodland : 7%
other: 20% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 670 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: limited supplies of potable water;
wildlife populations being depleted because of excessive hunting;
overgrazing; soil degradation; soil erosion

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: landlocked; almost completely surrounded by South
Africa

@Swaziland:People

Population: 1,031,600 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 46% (male 234,628; female 236,056)
15-64 years: 52% (male 255,775; female 280,416)
65 years and over: 2% (male 10,291; female 14,434) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.24% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 42.71 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.31 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.91 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
total population : 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 86.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 57.7 years
male: 53.67 years
female: 61.84 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.01 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Swazi(s)
adjective: Swazi

Ethnic groups: African 97%, European 3%

Religions: Christian 60%, indigenous beliefs 40%

Languages: English (official, government business conducted in
English), siSwati (official)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 76.7%
male : 78%
female: 75.6% (1995 est.)

@Swaziland:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Kingdom of Swaziland
conventional short form: Swaziland

Data code: WZ

Government type: monarchy; independent member of Commonwealth

National capital: Mbabane (administrative); Lobamba (legislative)

Administrative divisions: 4 districts; Hhohho, Lubombo, Manzini,
Shiselweni

Independence: 6 September 1968 (from UK)

National holiday: Somhlolo (Independence) Day, 6 September (1968)

Constitution: none; constitution of 6 September 1968 was suspended 12
April 1973; a new constitution was promulgated 13 October 1978, but
has not been formally presented to the people

Legal system: based on South African Roman-Dutch law in statutory
courts and Swazi traditional law and custom in traditional courts; has
not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: NA; note - no suffrage before September 1993; 55 of the 65
seats in the House of Assembly were filled by popular vote in the
elections of September and October 1993; of a population of less than
1 million, the electorate numbered 283,693

Executive branch:
chief of state: King MSWATI III (since 25 April 1986)
head of government: Prime Minister Sibusiso Barnabas DLAMINI (since 9
August 1996)
cabinet: Cabinet recommended by the prime minister and confirmed by
the king
elections : none; the king is a hereditary monarch; prime minister
appointed by the king

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Libandla, an advisory
body, consists of the Senate (20 seats, 10 appointed by the House of
Assembly and 10 appointed by the king; members serve five-year terms)
and the House of Assembly (65 seats, 10 appointed by the king and 55
elected by secret, popular vote; members serve five-year terms)
elections: House of Assembly - last held 26 September and 11 October
1993 (next to be held NA 1998)
election results : House of Assembly - balloting is done on a nonparty
basis; candidates for election are nominated by the local council of
each constituency and for each constituency the three candidates with
the most votes in the first round of voting are narrowed to a single
winner by a second round

Judicial branch: High Court, judges are appointed by the king; Court
of Appeal, judges are appointed by the king

Political parties and leaders:
note: political parties are banned by the constitution promulgated on
13 October 1978; illegal parties are prohibited from holding large
public gatherings
illegal parties: Peoples' United Democratic Movement or PUDEMO [Mario
MASUKU]; Swaziland Youth Congress or SWAYOCO (included in PUDEMO);
Swaziland Communist Party or SWACOPA [Mphandlana SHONGWE]; Swaziland
Liberation Front or FROLISA; Convention for Full Democracy in
Swaziland or COFUDESWA [Sabelo DLAMINI]; Swaziland National Front or
SWANAFRO; Ngwane Socialist Revolutionary Party or NGWASOREP; Swaziland
Democratic Alliance (represents key opposition parties) [Jerry
NXUMALO]; Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions or SFTU [Jan SITHOLE]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, PCA, SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Mary Madzandza KANYA
chancery: Suite 3M, 3400 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 362-6683, 6685
FAX: [1] (202) 244-8059

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Allen McKEE
embassy: Central Bank Building, Warner Street, Mbabane
mailing address: P. O. Box 199, Mbabane
telephone: [268] 46441 through 46445
FAX : [268] 45959

Flag description: three horizontal bands of blue (top), red (triple
width), and blue; the red band is edged in yellow; centered in the red
band is a large black and white shield covering two spears and a staff
decorated with feather tassels, all placed horizontally

Economy

Economy - overview: This small landlocked economy is based largely on
subsistence agriculture, which occupies more than 60% of the
population. Manufacturing features a number of agroprocessing
factories. Mining has declined in importance in recent years;
high-grade iron ore deposits were depleted by 1978, and health
concerns have cut world demand for asbestos. Exports of soft drink
concentrate, sugar and wood pulp are the main earners of hard
currency. Surrounded by South Africa, except for a short border with
Mozambique, Swaziland is heavily dependent on South Africa from which
it receives nearly 90% of its imports and to which it sends more than
half of its exports. Remittances from Swazi workers in South African
mines supplement domestically earned income by as much as 20%. The
government is trying to improve the atmosphere for foreign investment.
Overgrazing, soil depletion, and drought persist as problems for the
future.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $3.8 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.9% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 12%
industry: 43%
services: 45% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 14.7% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 160,355 (1986 est.)
by occupation: private sector about 65%, public sector 35%

Unemployment rate: 15% (1992 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $397 million
expenditures: $413 million, including capital expenditures of $78
million (1995/96)

Industries: mining (coal and asbestos), wood pulp, sugar, soft drink
concentrates

Industrial production growth rate: 4.2% (1993 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 50,000 kW (1993)

Electricity - production: 84 million kWh (1993)
note: imports 90% of its electricity from South Africa

Electricity - consumption per capita: 612 kWh (1993)

Agriculture - products: sugarcane, cotton, maize, tobacco, rice,
citrus, pineapples, corn, sorghum, peanuts; cattle, goats, sheep

Exports:
total value : $700 million (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: soft drink concentrates, sugar, wood pulp, cotton yarn
partners : South Africa 58%, EU 20%, Mozambique 6% (1994)

Imports:
total value: $831 million (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: motor vehicles, machinery, transport equipment, petroleum
products, foodstuffs, chemicals
partners : South Africa 88%, Japan, UK, US (FY94/95)

Debt - external: $175 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 lilangeni (E) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: emalangeni (E) per US$1 - 4.6410 (January 1997),
4.2706 (1996), 3.6266 (1995), 3.5490 (1994), 3.2636 (1993), 2.8497
(1992); note - the Swazi emalangeni are at par with the South African
rand

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Swaziland:Communications

Telephones: 30,364 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : system consists of carrier-equipped, open-wire lines and
low-capacity, microwave radio relay
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: 129,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 10

Televisions: 12,500 (1992 est.)

@Swaziland:Transportation

Railways:
total: 297 km; note - includes 71 km which are not in use
narrow gauge: 297 km 1.067-m gauge

Highways:
total: 2,885 km
paved: 814 km
unpaved: 2,071 km (1994 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 17 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 11
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m : 10 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 6
914 to 1,523 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Umbutfo Swaziland Defense Force (Army), Royal
Swaziland Police Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 228,109 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 131,872 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $22 million (FY93/94)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Swaziland has asked South Africa to open
negotiations on reincorporating some nearby South African territories
that are populated by ethnic Swazis or that were long ago part of the
Swazi Kingdom
______________________________________________________________________

SWEDEN

@Sweden:Geography

Location: Northern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea, Gulf of Bothnia,
Kattegat, and Skagerrak, between Finland and Norway

Geographic coordinates: 62 00 N, 15 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 449,964 sq km
land : 410,928 sq km
water: 39,036 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries:
total: 2,205 km
border countries: Finland 586 km, Norway 1,619 km

Coastline: 3,218 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf : 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: agreed boundaries or midlines
territorial sea: 12 nm (adjustments made to return a portion of
straits to high seas)

Climate: temperate in south with cold, cloudy winters and cool, partly
cloudy summers; subarctic in north

Terrain: mostly flat or gently rolling lowlands; mountains in west

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Baltic Sea 0 m
highest point: Kebnekaise 2,111 m

Natural resources: zinc, iron ore, lead, copper, silver, timber,
uranium, hydropower potential

Land use:
arable land : 7%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 1%
forests and woodland: 68%
other: 24% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,150 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: ice floes in the surrounding waters, especially in
the Gulf of Bothnia, can interfere with maritime traffic

Environment - current issues: acid rain damaging soils and lakes;
pollution of the North Sea and the Baltic Sea

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile
Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: strategic location along Danish Straits linking
Baltic and North Seas

@Sweden:People

Population: 8,865,051 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 19% (male 849,093; female 805,087)
15-64 years: 64% (male 2,876,064; female 2,784,346)
65 years and over : 17% (male 655,490; female 894,971) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.23% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 11.37 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.78 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.69 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.73 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 3.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 79.08 years
male: 76.42 years
female : 81.89 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.7 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Swede(s)
adjective: Swedish

Ethnic groups: white, Lapp (Sami), foreign-born or first-generation
immigrants 12% (Finns, Yugoslavs, Danes, Norwegians, Greeks, Turks)

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran 94%, Roman Catholic 1.5%, Pentecostal
1%, other 3.5% (1987)

Languages: Swedish
note: small Lapp- and Finnish-speaking minorities

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 99% (1979 est.)
male: NA%
female: NA%

@Sweden:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Kingdom of Sweden
conventional short form: Sweden
local long form: Konungariket Sverige
local short form: Sverige

Data code: SW

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: Stockholm

Administrative divisions: 24 provinces (lan, singular and plural);
Alvsborgs Lan, Blekinge Lan, Gavleborgs Lan, Goteborgs och Bohus Lan,
Gotlands Lan, Hallands Lan, Jamtlands Lan, Jonkopings Lan, Kalmar Lan,
Kopparbergs Lan, Kristianstads Lan, Kronobergs Lan, Malmohus Lan,
Norrbottens Lan, Orebro Lan, Ostergotlands Lan, Skaraborgs Lan,
Sodermanlands Lan, Stockholms Lan, Uppsala Lan, Varmlands Lan,
Vasterbottens Lan, Vasternorrlands Lan, Vastmanlands Lan

Independence: 6 June 1523, Gustav VASA was elected king; 6 June 1809,
a constitutional monarchy was established

National holiday: Day of the Swedish Flag, 6 June

Constitution: 1 January 1975

Legal system: civil law system influenced by customary law; accepts
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: King CARL XVI GUSTAF (since 19 September 1973); Heir
Apparent Princess VICTORIA Ingrid Alice Desiree, daughter of the king
(born 14 July 1977)
head of government: Prime Minister Goran PERSSON (since 21 March 1996)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the prime minister
elections: the king is a constitutional monarch; prime minister
elected by the Parliament; election last held NA March 1996 (next to
be held NA 1998)
election results : Goran PERSSON elected prime minister; percent of
parliamentary vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Riksdag (349 seats;
members are elected by popular vote on a proportional representation
basis to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 18 September 1994 (next to be held NA September
1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - Social Democrats 45.4%,
Moderate Party (Conservatives) 22.3%, Center Party 7.7%, Liberals
7.2%, Left Party 6.2%, Greens 5.8%, Christian Democrats 4.1%, New
Democracy Party 1.2%; seats by party - Social Democrats 162, Moderate
Party (Conservatives) 80, Center Party 27, Liberals 26, Left Party 22,
Greens 18, Christian Democrats 14; note - the New Democracy Party did
not receive a seat because parties require a minimum of 4.0% of votes
for a seat in parliament

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Hogsta Domstolen, judges are
appointed by the government (prime minister and cabinet)

Political parties and leaders: Social Democratic Party [Goran
PERSSON]; Moderate Party (conservative) [Carl BILDT]; Liberal People's
Party [Maria LEISSNER]; Center Party [Olof JOHANSSON]; Christian
Democratic Party [Alf SVENSSON]; New Democracy Party [Vivianne
FRANZEN]; Left Party or VP (Communist) [Gudrun SCHYMAN]; Communist
Workers' Party [Rolf HAGEL]; Green Party [no formal leader but party
spokesperson is Briger SCHLAUG]

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB,
Australia Group, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN, EBRD, ECE, EIB, ESA, EU,
FAO, G- 6, G- 8, G- 9, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM,
IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NACC (observer), NAM (guest), NC,
NEA, NIB, NSG, OECD, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UN Security Council
(temporary), UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH,
UNMOGIP, UNMOP, UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UNTSO, UPU, WEU (observer),
WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Carl Henrik Sihver LILJEGREN
chancery: 1501 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20005
telephone: [1] (202) 467-2600
FAX : [1] (202) 467-2699
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Thomas L. SIEBERT
embassy: Strandvagen 101, S-115 89 Stockholm
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone: [46] (8) 783 53 00
FAX : [46] (8) 661 19 64

Flag description: blue with a yellow cross that extends to the edges
of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist
side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

Economy

Economy - overview: Aided by peace and neutrality for the whole
twentieth century, Sweden has achieved an enviable standard of living
under a mixed system of high-tech capitalism and extensive welfare
benefits. It has a modern distribution system, excellent internal and
external communications, and a skilled labor force. Timber,
hydropower, and iron ore constitute the resource base of an economy
heavily oriented toward foreign trade. Privately owned firms account
for about 90% of industrial output, of which the engineering sector
accounts for 50% of output and exports. Agriculture accounts for only
2% of GDP and 2% of the jobs. In recent years, however, this
extraordinarily favorable picture has been clouded by budgetary
difficulties, inflation, growing unemployment, and a gradual loss of
competitiveness in international markets. To curb the budget deficit
and bolster confidence in the economy, the government adopted an
adjustment program in November 1994 that aims to eliminate the
government budget deficit and to stabilize the debt to GDP ratio.
Sweden has harmonized its economic policies with those of the EU,
which it joined at the start of 1995.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $184.3 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $20,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 2%
industry : 27%
services: 71% (1993)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 0.2% (September 1996)

Labor force:
total: 4.552 million (84% unionized, 1992)
by occupation: community, social and personal services 38.3%, mining
and manufacturing 21.2%, commerce, hotels, and restaurants 14.1%,
banking, insurance 9.0%, communications 7.2%, construction 7.0%,
agriculture, fishing, and forestry 3.2% (1991)

Unemployment rate: 8% (September 1996) plus about 6% in training
programs

Budget:
revenues: $109.4 billion
expenditures : $146.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY95/96)

Industries: iron and steel, precision equipment (bearings, radio and
telephone parts, armaments), wood pulp and paper products, processed
foods, motor vehicles

Industrial production growth rate: 2% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 35.46 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 147.7 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 14,862 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grains, sugar beets, potatoes; meat, milk

Exports:
total value: $79.9 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities : machinery, motor vehicles, paper products, pulp and
wood, iron and steel products, chemicals, petroleum and petroleum
products
partners: EU 59.1% (Germany 13.2%, UK 10.2%, Denmark 6.9%, France
5.1%), Norway 8.1%, Finland 4.8%, US 8.0% (1994)

Imports:
total value : $64.4 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: machinery, petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals,
motor vehicles, foodstuffs, iron and steel, clothing
partners: EU 62.6% (Germany 18.4%, UK 9.5%, Denmark 6.6%, France
5.5%), Finland 6.3%, Norway 6.1%, US 8.5% (1994)

Debt - external: $66.5 billion (1994)

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $1.769 billion (1993)

Currency: 1 Swedish krona (SKr) = 100 oere

Exchange rates: Swedish kronor (SKr) per US$1 - 7.0671 (January 1997),
6.7060 (1996), 7.1333 (1995), 7.7160 (1994), 7.7834 (1993), 5.8238
(1992)

Fiscal year: 1 January - 31 December (Sweden changed its fiscal year
from 1 July - 30 June in 1995)

@Sweden:Communications

Telephones: 13 million (1996 est.)

Telephone system: excellent domestic and international facilities;
automatic system
domestic: coaxial and multiconductor cable carry most voice traffic;
parallel microwave radio relay network carries some additional
telephone channels
international: 5 submarine coaxial cables; satellite earth stations -
1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean), 1 Eutelsat, and 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic and
Indian Ocean regions); note - Sweden shares the Inmarsat earth station
with the other Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland, and
Norway)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 360 (mostly repeaters), shortwave 0

Radios: 7.272 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 880 (mostly repeaters)

Televisions: 3.5 million

@Sweden:Transportation

Railways:
total: 12,624 km (includes 953 km of privately-owned railways)
standard gauge: 11,767 km 1.435-m gauge (7,320 km electrified and
1,152 km double track)
other gauge: 857 km NA-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 136,233 km
paved: 103,537 km (including 1,231 km of expressways)
unpaved : 32,696 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 2,052 km navigable for small steamers and barges

Pipelines: natural gas 84 km

Ports and harbors: Gavle, Goteborg, Halmstad, Helsingborg, Hudiksvall,
Kalmar, Karlshamn, Malmo, Solvesborg, Stockholm, Sundsvall

Merchant marine:
total: 179 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,131,361 GRT/2,244,410
DWT
ships by type: bulk 11, cargo 39, chemical tanker 27, combination
ore/oil 1, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker 31, railcar carrier 1,
refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 43, short-sea passenger
7, specialized tanker 4, vehicle carrier 13 (1996 est.)

Airports: 251 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 247
over 3,047 m : 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 8
1,524 to 2,437 m: 84
914 to 1,523 m: 26
under 914 m : 127 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 4 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Swedish Army, Royal Swedish Navy, Swedish Air Force

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,101,889 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,839,158 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 51,314 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $5.8 billion (FY94/95)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.5% (FY94/95)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: minor transshipment point for and consumer of narcotics
shipped via the CIS and Baltic states; increasing consumer of European
amphetamines
______________________________________________________________________

SWITZERLAND

@Switzerland:Geography

Location: Central Europe, east of France

Geographic coordinates: 47 00 N, 8 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 41,290 sq km
land: 39,770 sq km
water : 1,520 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of New Jersey

Land boundaries:
total: 1,852 km
border countries: Austria 164 km, France 573 km, Italy 740 km,
Liechtenstein 41 km, Germany 334 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate, but varies with altitude; cold, cloudy,
rainy/snowy winters; cool to warm, cloudy, humid summers with
occasional showers

Terrain: mostly mountains (Alps in south, Jura in northwest) with a
central plateau of rolling hills, plains, and large lakes

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Lake Maggiore 195 m
highest point: Dufourspitze 4,634 m

Natural resources: hydropower potential, timber, salt

Land use:
arable land: 10%
permanent crops: 2%
permanent pastures: 28%
forests and woodland: 32%
other : 28% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 250 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: avalanches, landslides, flash floods

Environment - current issues: air pollution from vehicle emissions and
open-air burning; acid rain; water pollution from increased use of
agricultural fertilizers; loss of biodiversity

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber
94, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: landlocked; crossroads of northern and southern
Europe; along with southeastern France and northern Italy, contains
the highest elevations in Europe

@Switzerland:People

Population: 7,240,463 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 17% (male 643,301; female 614,913)
15-64 years: 68% (male 2,501,705; female 2,412,165)
65 years and over : 15% (male 429,754; female 638,625) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.33% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 11.05 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.23 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.67 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 78.77 years
male : 75.59 years
female: 82.11 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.45 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Swiss (singular and plural)
adjective: Swiss

Ethnic groups: total population - German 65%, French 18%, Italian 10%,
Romansch 1%, other 6%
note : Swiss nationals - German 74%, French 20%, Italian 4%, Romansch
1%, other 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 46.7%, Protestant 40%, other 5%, no religion
8.3% (1990)

Languages: German 63.7%, French 19.2%, Italian 7.6%, Romansch 0.6%,
other 8.9%
note: figures for Swiss nationals only: German 74%, French 20%,
Italian 4%, Romansch 1%, other 1%

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99% (1980 est.)
male: NA%
female: NA%

@Switzerland:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Swiss Confederation
conventional short form: Switzerland
local long form: Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft (German),
Confederation Suisse (French), Confederazione Svizzera (Italian)
local short form: Schweiz (German), Suisse (French), Svizzera
(Italian)

Data code: SZ

Government type: federal republic

National capital: Bern

Administrative divisions: 26 cantons (cantons, singular - canton in
French; cantoni, singular - cantone in Italian; kantone, singular -
kanton in German); Aargau, Ausser-Rhoden, Basel-Landschaft,
Basel-Stadt, Bern, Fribourg, Geneve, Glarus, Graubunden, Inner-Rhoden,
Jura, Luzern, Neuchatel, Nidwalden, Obwalden, Sankt Gallen,
Schaffhausen, Schwyz, Solothurn, Thurgau, Ticino, Uri, Valais, Vaud,
Zug, Zurich

Independence: 1 August 1291

National holiday: Anniversary of the Founding of the Swiss
Confederation, 1 August (1291)

Constitution: 29 May 1874

Legal system: civil law system influenced by customary law; judicial
review of legislative acts, except with respect to federal decrees of
general obligatory character; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction,
with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Arnold KOLLER (since 1 January 1997); Vice
President Flavio COTTI (since 1 January 1997); note - the president is
both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Arnold KOLLER (since 1 January 1997);
Vice President Flavio COTTI (since 1 January 1997); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Federal Council or German - Bundesrat, French - Conseil
Federal, Italian - Consiglio Federale elected by the Federal Assembly
from among its own members for a four-year term
elections : president and vice president elected by the Federal
Assembly from among the members of the Federal Council for one-year
terms that run concurrently; election last held 4 December 1996 (next
to be held NA December 1997)
election results: Arnold KOLLER elected president; percent of Federal
Assembly vote - NA; Flavio COTTI elected vice president; percent of
legislative vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Federal Assembly or German -
Bundesversammlung, French - Assemblee Federale, Italian - Assemblea
Federale consists of the Council of States or German - Standerat,
French - Conseil des Etats, Italian - Consiglio degli Stati (46 seats;
members are elected two from each canton and one from each half canton
to serve four-year terms) and the National Council or German -
Nationalrat, French - Conseil National, Italian - Consiglio Nazionale
(200 seats; members are elected by popular vote on a basis of
proportional representation to serve four-year terms)
elections: Council of States - last held throughout 1995 (each canton
determines when the next election will be held); National Council -
last held 20 October 1995 (next to be held NA October 1999)
election results: Council of States - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - PRD 17, PDC 16, UDC 5, PSS 5, LPS 2, LdU 1; National
Council - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PRD 45, PSS
55, PDC 34, UDC 29, Greens 10, LPS 7, FPS 6, LdU/EVP 5, SD 3, PdAdS 3,
Ticino League 2, EDU 1

Judicial branch: Federal Supreme Court, judges elected for six-year
terms by the Federal Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Radical Free Democratic Party
(Freisinnig-Demokratische Partei der Schweiz or FDP, Parti
Radical-Democratique Suisse or PRD, Partitio Liberal-Radicale Svizzero
or PLR) [Franz STEINEGGER, president]; Social Democratic Party
(Sozialdemokratische Partei der Schweiz or SPS, Parti Socialist Suisse
or PSS, Partito Socialista Svizzero or PSS, Partida Socialdemocratica
de la Svizra or PSS) [Peter BODENMANN, president]; Christian
Democratic People's Party (Christichdemokratische Volkspartei der
Schweiz or CVP, Parti Democrate-Chretien Suisse or PDC, Partito
Democratico-Cristiano Popolare Svizzero or PDC, Partida
Cristiandemocratica dalla Svizra or PCD) [Anton COTTIER, president];
Swiss People's Party (Schweizerische Volkspartei or SVP, Union
Democratique du Centre or UDC, Unione Democratica de Centro or UDC,
Uniun Democratica da Center or UDC) [Ueli MAURER, president]; Green
Party (Grune Partei der Schweiz or Grune, Parti Ecologiste Suisse or
Les Verts, Partito Ecologista Svizzero or I Verdi, Partida Ecologica
Svizra or La Verda) [Verena DIENER, president]; Freedom Party or FPS
[Roland BORER]; Liberal Party (Liberale Partei der Schweiz or LPS,
Parti Liberal Suisse or PLS, Partito Liberale Svizzero or PLS)
[Francois Jeanneset, president]; Alliance of Independents' Party
(Landesring der Unabhaengigen or LdU, Alliance des Independants or
AdI) [Daniel ANDRES, president]; Ticino League (Lega dei Ticinesi)
[Giuliano BIGNASCA, president]; and other minor parties including
Swiss Democratic Party (Schweizer Demokraten or SD, Democrates Suisses
or DS, Democratici Svizzeri or DS), Workers' Party (Parti Suisse du
Travail or PST, Partei der Arbeit der Schweiz or PdAdS, Partito
Svizzero del Lavoro or PSdL), Evangelical People's Party (Evangelische
Volkspartei der Schweiz or EVP, Parti Evangelique Suisse or PEV,
Partito Evangelico Svizzero or PEV), and the Union of Federal
Democrats (Eidgenossisch-Demokratische Union or EDU, Union
Democratique Federale or UDF, Unione Democratica Federale or UDF);
note - see elections

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB,
Australia Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, ESA, FAO, G- 8,
G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO,
ITU, MTCR, NAM (guest), NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OSCE, PCA, UN
(observer), UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOP,
UNMOT, UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Alfred DEFAGO (since April 1997)
chancery: 2900 Cathedral Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 745-7900
FAX: [1] (202) 387-2564
consulate(s) general : Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New
York, Pago Pago (American Samoa), and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Madeleine May KUNIN (since 8 August 1996)
embassy: Jubilaeumstrasse 93, 3005 Bern
mailing address : use embassy street address
telephone: [41] (31) 357 70 11
FAX: [41] (31) 357 73 44

Flag description: red square with a bold, equilateral white cross in
the center that does not extend to the edges of the flag

Economy

Economy - overview: Switzerland, a fundamentally prosperous and stable
modern economy with a per capita GDP roughly 10% above that of the big
West European economies, is experiencing continued economic
difficulties. GDP has dropped for five consecutive quarters,
unemployment is reaching record levels, and the fiscal deficit is
again above 3% of GDP. In 1997, growth may reach barely 0.6%; a
recovery is not likely before mid to late 1997. Weak domestic consumer
demand is partly at fault; declining real disposable income is
combining with a reluctance to reduce saving rates in the face of an
uncertain employment outlook. Switzerland's leading sectors, including
financial services, biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, and
special-purpose machines, will therefore be more reliant on export
markets at the same time they are being squeezed by the strong franc.
Consequently, growth in machinery and equipment investment, for
example, is expected to taper off. On the other side, import growth in
1997 also is likely to be lower than the 1995 rate of 6.6%, but higher
than 1996's expected 1.9%.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $161.3 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -0.75% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $22,600 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 2.8%
industry: 31.1%
services: 66.1% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 0.8% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 3.776 million (939,000 foreign workers, mostly Italian)
by occupation: services 67%, manufacturing and construction 29%,
agriculture and forestry 4% (1994)

Unemployment rate: 5.3% (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $31 billion
expenditures : $36.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995)

Industries: machinery, chemicals, watches, textiles, precision
instruments

Industrial production growth rate: -2% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 14.27 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 62.2 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 6,810 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grains, fruits, vegetables; meat, eggs

Exports:
total value: $81.35 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: manufactures 94.74%, agricultural products 2.99%, raw
materials 2.05%, fuels 0.15% (1995)
partners: EU countries 62.1%, US 8.7%, Japan 4.0% (1996 est.)

Imports:
total value : $80.05 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: manufactures 86.81%, agricultural products 6.44%, raw
materials 3.65%, fuels 2.93% (1995)
partners: EU 80.2%, US 6.6% (1996 est.)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $1.034 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 Swiss franc, franken, or franco (SFR) = 100 centimes,
rappen, or centesimi

Exchange rates: Swiss francs, franken, or franchi (SFR) per US$1 -
1.3936 (January 1997), 1.2360 (1996), 1.1825 (1995), 1.3677 (1994),
1.4776 (1993), 1.4062 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Switzerland:Communications

Telephones: 4.573 million (1993 est.)

Telephone system: excellent domestic and international services
domestic: extensive cable and microwave radio relay networks
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean
and Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 265, shortwave 0

Radios: 2.727 million (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 18 (repeaters 1,322)

Televisions: 2.513 million (1994 est.)

@Switzerland:Transportation

Railways:
total: 5,719 km (1,432 km double track)
standard gauge: 3,283 km 1.435-m gauge (99% electrified; 310 km
nongovernment owned)
narrow gauge: 1,255 km 1.000-m gauge (99% electrified; 1,181 km
nongovernment owned)
other gauge : 1,181 km NA-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
total: 71,055 km (including 1,540 km of expressways)
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 65 km; Rhine (Basel to Rheinfelden, Schaffhausen to
Bodensee); 12 navigable lakes

Pipelines: crude oil 314 km; natural gas 1,506 km

Ports and harbors: Basel

Merchant marine:
total: 23 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 378,871 GRT/665,519 DWT
ships by type: bulk 13, cargo 1, chemical tanker 6, oil tanker 1,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 1, specialized tanker 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 67 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 66
over 3,047 m: 4
2,438 to 3,047 m : 4
1,524 to 2,437 m: 13
914 to 1,523 m: 5
under 914 m: 40 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Air Force and Antiaircraft Command, Frontier
Guards, Fortification Guards

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,889,213 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 1,617,691 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 41,038 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $3.74 billion (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.4% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: money-laundering center; transit country for and
consumer of South American cocaine and Southwest Asian heroin
______________________________________________________________________

SYRIA

@Syria:Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between
Lebanon and Turkey

Geographic coordinates: 35 00 N, 38 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 185,180 sq km
land: 184,050 sq km
water: 1,130 sq km
note: includes 1,295 sq km of Israeli-occupied territory

Area - comparative: slightly larger than North Dakota

Land boundaries:
total: 2,253 km
border countries: Iraq 605 km, Israel 76 km, Jordan 375 km, Lebanon
375 km, Turkey 822 km

Coastline: 193 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 41 nm
territorial sea: 35 nm

Climate: mostly desert; hot, dry, sunny summers (June to August) and
mild, rainy winters (December to February) along coast; cold weather
with snow or sleet periodically hitting Damascus

Terrain: primarily semiarid and desert plateau; narrow coastal plain;
mountains in west

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: unnamed location near Lake Tiberias -200 m
highest point: Mount Hermon 2,814 m

Natural resources: petroleum, phosphates, chrome and manganese ores,
asphalt, iron ore, rock salt, marble, gypsum

Land use:
arable land: 28%
permanent crops : 4%
permanent pastures: 43%
forests and woodland: 3%
other: 22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 9,060 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust storms, sandstorms

Environment - current issues: deforestation; overgrazing; soil
erosion; desertification; water pollution from dumping of raw sewage
and wastes from petroleum refining; inadequate supplies of potable
water

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test
Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Environmental Modification

Geography - note: there are 42 Israeli settlements and civilian land
use sites in the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights (August 1996 est.)

@Syria:People

Population: 16,137,899 (July 1997 est.)
note: in addition, there are 32,600 people living in the
Israeli-occupied Golan Heights - 17,600 Arabs (16,000 Druze and 1,600
Alawites) and 15,000 Israeli settlers (August 1996 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 46% (male 3,839,369; female 3,654,350)
15-64 years: 51% (male 4,174,734; female 3,997,666)
65 years and over : 3% (male 234,127; female 237,653) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.3% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 38.7 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.7 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.98 male(s)/female
total population: 1.04 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 38.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 67.44 years
male: 66.21 years
female : 68.74 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.73 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Syrian(s)
adjective: Syrian

Ethnic groups: Arab 90.3%, Kurds, Armenians, and other 9.7%

Religions: Sunni Muslim 74%, Alawite, Druze, and other Muslim sects
16%, Christian (various sects) 10%, Jewish (tiny communities in
Damascus, Al Qamishli, and Aleppo)

Languages: Arabic (official), Kurdish, Armenian, Aramaic, Circassian,
French widely understood

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 70.8%
male : 85.7%
female: 55.8% (1995 est.)

@Syria:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Syrian Arab Republic
conventional short form: Syria
local long form: Al Jumhuriyah al Arabiyah as Suriyah
local short form : Suriyah
former: United Arab Republic (with Egypt)

Data code: SY

Government type: republic under military regime since March 1963

National capital: Damascus

Administrative divisions: 14 provinces (muhafazat, singular -
muhafazah); Al Hasakah, Al Ladhiqiyah, Al Qunaytirah, Ar Raqqah, As
Suwayda', Dar'a, Dayr az Zawr, Dimashq, Halab, Hamah, Hims, Idlib, Rif
Dimashq, Tartus

Independence: 17 April 1946 (from League of Nations mandate under
French administration)

National holiday: National Day, 17 April (1946)

Constitution: 13 March 1973

Legal system: based on Islamic law and civil law system; special
religious courts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Hafiz al-ASAD (since 22 February 1971); note
- President ASAD seized power in the November 1970 coup, assumed
presidential powers 22 February 1971, and was confirmed as president
in the 12 March 1971 national elections; Vice Presidents 'Abd al-Halim
ibn Said KHADDAM (since 11 March 1984), Rifaat al-ASAD (since 11 March
1984), and Muhammad Zuhayr MASHARIQA (since 11 March 1984)
head of government: Prime Minister Mahmud ZUBI (since 1 November
1987), Deputy Prime Ministers Lt. Gen. Mustafa TALAS (since 11 March
1984), Salim YASIN (since NA December 1981), and Rashid AKHTARINI
(since 4 July 1992)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
election last held 2 December 1991 (next to be held NA December 1998);
vice presidents appointed by the president; prime minister and deputy
prime ministers appointed by the president
election results: Hafiz al-ASAD reelected president; percent of vote -
Hafiz al-ASAD 99.98%

Legislative branch: unicameral People's Council or Majlis al-shaab
(250 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 24-25 August 1994 (next to be held NA 1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
National Progressive Front 167, independents 83

Judicial branch: Supreme Constitutional Court, justices are appointed
for four-year terms by the president; High Judicial Council; Court of
Cassation; State Security Courts

Political parties and leaders:
National Progressive Front includes : the ruling Arab Socialist
Renaissance (Ba'th) Party, Hafiz al-ASAD, president of the republic,
secretary general of the party, and chairman of the National
Progressive Front; Syrian Arab Socialist Party (ASP), 'Abd al-Ghani
KANNUT; Arab Socialist Union (ASU), Jamal ATASSI; Syrian Communist
Party (SCP), Yusuf FAYSAL; Arab Socialist Unionist Party, Safwan
QUDSI; Democratic Socialist Union Party, Ahmad al-ASAD

Political pressure groups and leaders: non-Ba'th parties have little
effective political influence; Communist party ineffective;
conservative religious leaders; Muslim Brotherhood

International organization participation: ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU,
CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO,
ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNRWA, UPU, WFTU,
WHO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Walid MUALEM
chancery: 2215 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 232-6313
FAX: [1] (202) 234-9548

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Christopher W. S. ROSS
embassy: Abou Roumaneh, Al-Mansur Street No. 2, Damascus
mailing address : P. O. Box 29, Damascus
telephone: [963] (11) 333-2814, 333-0788, 332-0783
FAX: [963] (11) 224-7938

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and black with two small green five-pointed stars in a horizontal line
centered in the white band; similar to the flag of Yemen, which has a
plain white band and of Iraq, which has three green stars (plus an
Arabic inscription) in a horizontal line centered in the white band;
also similar to the flag of Egypt, which has a symbolic eagle centered
in the white band

Economy

Economy - overview: Sheltered from the pressures of the international
marketplace for almost three decades, Syria's predominantly statist
economy is on a weak footing because of Damascus's failure to
implement extensive economic reform. After an economic rebound in the
early 1990s in the wake of the Persian Gulf war, economic growth has
slowed as the traditionally volatile economy has once again slumped.
Current account and budget deficits and inflation are increasing. The
dominant agricultural sector remains underdeveloped, with roughly 80%
of agricultural land still dependent on rain-fed sources. Although
Syria has sufficient water supplies in the aggregate at normal levels
of precipitation, the great distance between major water supplies and
population centers poses serious distribution problems, and the water
problem is exacerbated by rapid population growth, industrial
expansion, and increased water pollution. Unemployment remains a
nagging problem because about 60% of the population is under the age
of 20, ensuring a steady flow of job seekers into the already tight
labor market. Private investment is critical to the modernization of
the agricultural, energy, and export sectors, particularly because
Damascus is saddled with a heavy foreign debt. Oil production is
leveling off, and the efforts of the nonoil sector to penetrate
international markets have fallen short. Syria's inadequate
infrastructure, outmoded technological base, and weak educational
system hamper competition with neighbors such as Jordan and Israel.
The dominant public sector continues to be plagued by labor,
financial, and management problems, and much of the private sector is
hobbled by a shortage of capital. The economic benefits of any peace
treaty with Israel will depend in large part on the pace of economic
reform.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $98.3 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.2% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,300 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 28%
industry: 18%
services: 54% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 20% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 4.7 million (1995 est.)
by occupation: services 40%, agriculture 40%, industry 20% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 9% (1994 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $3 billion
expenditures : $3.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: petroleum, textiles, food processing, beverages, tobacco,
phosphate rock mining

Industrial production growth rate: 4.3% (1994)

Electricity - capacity: 4.16 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 14.25 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 902 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, barley, cotton, lentils, chickpeas;
beef, lamb, eggs, poultry, milk

Exports:
total value: $4.4 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: petroleum 56%, food and live animals 16%, textiles 16%
(1994 est.)
partners: EU 57% (Germany 17%, Italy 16%, France 11%), Lebanon 14%,
Saudi Arabia 7% (1995 est.)

Imports:
total value : $5.2 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: machinery 25%, food and live animals 15%, transport
equipment 12%, chemicals 8% (1994 est.)
partners: EU 33% (Italy 9%, Germany 8%, France 4%), South Korea 4.5%,
US 4%, Japan 3% (1995 est.)

Debt - external: $22 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: $4.2 billion (1990-92)

Currency: 1 Syrian pound (£S) = 100 piastres

Exchange rates: Syrian pounds (£S) per US$1 - 41.9 (January 1997);
official fixed rate 11.225

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Syria:Communications

Telephones: 541,465 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: fair system currently undergoing significant
improvement and digital upgrades, including fiber-optic technology
domestic: coaxial cable and microwave radio relay network
international: satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)
and 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region); 1 submarine cable; coaxial
cable and microwave radio relay to Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey;
participant in Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 3.392 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 17

Televisions: 700,000 (1993 est.)

@Syria:Transportation

Railways:
total : 1,998 km
broad gauge: 1,766 km 1.435-m gauge
narrow gauge: 232 km 1.050-m gauge

Highways:
total: 39,243 km
paved : 27,862 km (including 850 km of expressways)
unpaved: 11,381 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 870 km; minimal economic importance

Pipelines: crude oil 1,304 km; petroleum products 515 km

Ports and harbors: Baniyas, Jablah, Latakia, Tartus

Merchant marine:
total: 125 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 381,408 GRT/565,225 DWT
ships by type: bulk 12, cargo 109, livestock carrier 3,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 99 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 84
over 3,047 m: 5
2,438 to 3,047 m : 15
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 62 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 15
1,524 to 2,437 m : 2
914 to 1,523 m: 13 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Syrian Arab Army, Syrian Arab Navy, Syrian Arab Air
Force, Syrian Arab Air Defense Forces, Police and Security Force

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 3,742,851 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 2,095,933 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 170,328 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $875 million (1994 est.); note
- based on official budget data that understate actual spending

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 8% (1994 est.)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Golan Heights is Israeli occupied; Hatay
question with Turkey; dispute with upstream riparian Turkey over
Turkish water development plans for the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers;
Syrian troops in northern, central, and eastern Lebanon since October
1976

Illicit drugs: a transit point for Lebanese and Turkish refined
cocaine going to Europe and heroin and hashish bound for regional and
Western markets
______________________________________________________________________

TAJIKISTAN

Introduction

Current issues: Tajikistan has experienced three changes of government
since it gained independence in September 1991. The current president,
Emomali RAHMONOV, was elected in November 1994, yet has been in power
since 1992. The country is suffering through its fourth year of a
civil conflict, with no clear end in sight. Underlying the conflict
are deeply rooted regional and clan-based animosities that pit a
government consisting of people primarily from the Kulob (Kulyab),
Khujand (Leninabad), and Hisor (Hissar) regions against a secular and
Islamic-led opposition from the Gharm, Gorno-Badakhshan, and
Qurghonteppa (Kurgan-Tyube) regions. Government and opposition
representatives have held periodic rounds of UN-mediated peace talks
and agreed in September 1994 to a cease-fire which has been
periodically extended. Russian-led peacekeeping troops are deployed
throughout the country, and Russian-commanded border guards are
stationed along the Tajikistani-Afghan border.

@Tajikistan:Geography

Location: Central Asia, west of China

Geographic coordinates: 39 00 N, 71 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
total : 143,100 sq km
land: 142,700 sq km
water: 400 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Wisconsin

Land boundaries:
total: 3,651 km
border countries: Afghanistan 1,206 km, China 414 km, Kyrgyzstan 870
km, Uzbekistan 1,161 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: midlatitude continental, hot summers, mild winters; semiarid
to polar in Pamir Mountains

Terrain: Pamirs and Alay Mountains dominate landscape; western Fergana
Valley in north, Kofarnihon and Vakhsh Valleys in southwest

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Syrdariya 300 m
highest point: Qullai Kommunizm 7,495 m

Natural resources: significant hydropower potential, some petroleum,
uranium, mercury, brown coal, lead, zinc, antimony, tungsten

Land use:
arable land : 6%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 25%
forests and woodland: 4%
other: 65% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 6,390 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: inadequate sanitation facilities;
increasing levels of soil salinity; industrial pollution; excessive
pesticides; part of the basin of the shrinking Aral Sea suffers from
severe overutilization of available water for irrigation and
associated pollution

Environment - international agreements:
party to: none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked

@Tajikistan:People

Population: 5,945,903 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 42% (male 1,263,725; female 1,234,730)
15-64 years : 53% (male 1,578,940; female 1,599,458)
65 years and over: 5% (male 114,118; female 154,932) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.18% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 27.93 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.74 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -8.42 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.74 male(s)/female
total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 109.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 64.68 years
male : 61.55 years
female: 67.97 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.58 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Tajikistani(s)
adjective: Tajikistani

Ethnic groups: Tajik 64.9%, Uzbek 25%, Russian 3.5% (declining because
of emigration), other 6.6%

Religions: Sunni Muslim 80%, Shi'a Muslim 5%

Languages: Tajik (official), Russian widely used in government and
business

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98%
male: 99%
female: 97% (1989 est.)

@Tajikistan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Tajikistan
conventional short form: Tajikistan
local long form: Jumhurii Tojikistan
local short form: none
former : Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: TI

Government type: republic

National capital: Dushanbe

Administrative divisions: 2 oblasts (viloyatho, singular - viloyat)
and one autonomous oblast* (viloyati avtonomii); Viloyati Avtonomii
Badakhshoni Kuni* (Khorugh - formerly Khorog), Viloyati Khatlon
(Qurghonteppa - formerly Kurgan-Tyube), Viloyati Leninobod (Khujand -
formerly Leninabad)
note: the administrative center name follows in parentheses

Independence: 9 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: National Day, 9 September (1991)

Constitution: new constitution adopted 6 November 1994

Legal system: based on civil law system; no judicial review of
legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Emomali RAHMONOV (since 6 November 1994;
head of state and Assembly chairman since NA November 1992)
head of government: Prime Minister Yahyo AZIMOV (since 8 February
1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president who proposes
them to the Supreme Assembly for approval
elections : president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 6 November 1994 (next to be held NA 1999); prime
minister appointed by the president
election results: Emomali RAHMONOV elected president; percent of vote
- Emomali RAHMONOV 58%, Abdumalik ABDULLAJANOV 40%

Legislative branch: unicameral Supreme Assembly or Majlisi Oli (181
seats; members are popularly elected to serve five-year terms)
elections : last held 26 February and 12 March 1995 (next to be held
NA 2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; estimated seats by
party - Communist Party and affiliates 100, People's Party 10, Party
of People's Unity 6, Party of Economic and Political Renewal 1, other
64

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: People's Party of Tajikistan [Abdumajid
DOSTIYEV]; National Revival Bloc [Abdumalik ABDULLOJONOV]; Tajik
Communist Party [Shodi SHABDOLOV]; Democratic Party [Jumaboy NIYAZOV,
chairman]; Islamic Renaissance Party or IRP [Mohammed Sharif
HIMMATZODA, chairman]; Rebirth (Rastokhez) [Takhir ABDUZHABOROV]; Lali
Badakhshan Society [Atobek AMIRBEK]; Tajikistan Party of Economic and
Political Renewal or TPEPR; Citizenship, Patriotism, Unity Party
[Bobokhon MAHMADOV]; Adolatho "Justice" Party [Abdurahmon KARIMOV,
chairman]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Tajikistan Opposition Movement
based in northern Afghanistan [Seyed Abdullah NURI, chairman]

International organization participation: CIS, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP,
FAO, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, IOC, IOM,
ITU, NACC, OIC, OSCE, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
WMO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Tajikistan does not have an
embassy in the US, but has a mission at the UN: address - 136 East
67th Street, New York, NY 10021, telephone - [1] (212) 472-7645, FAX -
[1] (212) 628-0252; permanent representative to the UN is Rashid
ALIMOV

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador R. Grant SMITH
embassy : interim chancery, Oktyabrskaya Hotel, 105A Prospect Rudaki,
Dushanbe 734001
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone : [7] (3772) 21-03-56
FAX: Telex (787) 20116

Flag description: three horizontal stripes of red (top), a wider
stripe of white, and green; a gold crown surmounted by seven
five-pointed gold stars is located in the center of the white stripe

Economy

Economy - overview: Tajikistan had the next-to-lowest per capita GDP
in the former USSR, the highest rate of population growth, an
extremely low standard of living, and rampant inflation. Agriculture
dominates the economy, with cotton being the most important crop.
Mineral resources, varied but limited in amount, include silver, gold,
uranium, and tungsten. Industry is limited to a large aluminum plant,
hydropower facilities, and small obsolete factories mostly in light
industry and food processing. The Tajik economy has been gravely
weakened by four years of civil conflict and by the loss of subsidies
from Moscow and of markets for its products, which has left Tajikistan
dependent on Russia and Uzbekistan and on international humanitarian
assistance for much of its basic subsistence needs. Moreover, constant
political turmoil and the continued dominance by former communist
officials have impeded the introduction of meaningful economic
reforms. The regime made initial efforts to stabilize the economy and
promote reform in 1996.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $5.4 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: -17% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $920 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 65% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1.9 million (1996)
by occupation: agriculture and forestry 52%, manufacturing, mining,
and construction 17%, services 31% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 2.4% includes only officially registered
unemployed; also large numbers of underemployed workers and
unregistered unemployed people (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures : $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: aluminum, zinc, lead, chemicals and fertilizers, cement,
vegetable oil, metal-cutting machine tools, refrigerators and freezers

Industrial production growth rate: -20% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 4.44 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 16.8 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,135 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: cotton, grain, fruits, grapes, vegetables;
cattle, sheep, goats

Exports:
total value: $768 million (1996 est.)
commodities : cotton, aluminum, fruits, vegetable oil, textiles
partners: FSU 78%, Netherlands (1994)

Imports:
total value: $657 million (1996 est.)
commodities: fuel, chemicals, machinery and transport equipment,
textiles, foodstuffs
partners : FSU 55%, Switzerland, UK (1994)

Debt - external: $635 million (of which $250 million to Russia) (1995
est.)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $22 million (1993)
note: commitments, $885 million (disbursements $115 million) (1992-95)

Currency: the Tajikistani ruble (TSR) = 100 tanga; Tajikistan
introduced its own currency in May 1995

Exchange rates: Tajikistani rubles (TJR) per US$1 - 350 (January
1997), 284 (January 1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Tajikistan:Communications

Telephones: 303,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: poorly developed and not well maintained; many towns
are not reached by the national network
domestic: cable and microwave radio relay
international: linked by cable and microwave radio relay to other CIS
republics, and by leased connections to the Moscow international
gateway switch; Dushanbe linked by Intelsat to international gateway
switch in Ankara (Turkey); satellite earth stations - 1 Orbita and 2
Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: 1 state-owned radio broadcast station

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1
note : 1 Intelsat earth station provides TV receive-only service from
Turkey

Televisions: NA

@Tajikistan:Transportation

Railways:
total: 480 km in common carrier service; does not include industrial
lines (1990)

Highways:
total: 32,752 km
paved: 21,119 km (note - these roads are said to be hard-surfaced,
meaning that some are paved and some are all-weather gravel surfaced)
unpaved: 11,633 km (1992 est.)

Pipelines: natural gas 400 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 59 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 14
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 45
914 to 1,523 m: 9
under 914 m : 36 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Air Force, Presidential National Guard,
Security Forces (internal and border troops)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,393,416 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 1,143,159 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 60,832 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 180 billion rubles (1995); note
- conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the current
exchange rate could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.4% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: boundary with China in dispute; territorial
dispute with Kyrgyzstan on northern boundary in Isfara Valley area;
foreign support to Islamic fighters based in northern Afghanistan in
Tajikistan's civil war

Illicit drugs: limited illicit cultivation of cannabis and opium
poppy, mostly for domestic consumption; increasingly used as
transshipment point for illicit drugs from Southwest Asia to Russia
and Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

TANZANIA

@Tanzania:Geography

Location: Eastern Africa, bordering the Indian Ocean, between Kenya
and Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 6 00 S, 35 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total : 945,090 sq km
land: 886,040 sq km
water: 59,050 sq km
note: includes the islands of Mafia, Pemba, and Zanzibar

Area - comparative: slightly larger than twice the size of California

Land boundaries:
total : 3,402 km
border countries: Burundi 451 km, Kenya 769 km, Malawi 475 km,
Mozambique 756 km, Rwanda 217 km, Uganda 396 km, Zambia 338 km

Coastline: 1,424 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: varies from tropical along coast to temperate in highlands

Terrain: plains along coast; central plateau; highlands in north,
south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: Kilimanjaro 5,895 m

Natural resources: hydropower potential, tin, phosphates, iron ore,
coal, diamonds, gemstones, gold, natural gas, nickel

Land use:
arable land: 3%
permanent crops : 1%
permanent pastures: 40%
forests and woodland: 38%
other: 18% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,500 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: the tsetse fly; flooding on the central plateau
during the rainy season

Environment - current issues: soil degradation; deforestation;
desertification; destruction of coral reefs threatens marine habitats;
recent droughts affected marginal agriculture

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

Geography - note: Kilimanjaro is highest point in Africa

@Tanzania:People

Population: 29,460,753 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 45% (male 6,597,703; female 6,638,333)
15-64 years: 52% (male 7,496,133; female 7,868,581)
65 years and over: 3% (male 399,747; female 460,256) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.6% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 40.92 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 19.84 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -5.09 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.87 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 104.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 41.71 years
male: 40.34 years
female: 43.13 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.58 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Tanzanian(s)
adjective: Tanzanian

Ethnic groups: mainland - native African 99% (of which 95% are Bantu
consisting of more than 130 tribes), other 1% (consisting of Asian,
European, and Arab)
note: Zanzibar - Arab, native African, mixed Arab and native African

Religions: mainland - Christian 45%, Muslim 35%, indigenous beliefs
20%
note: Zanzibar - more than 99% Muslim

Languages: Kiswahili or Swahili (official), Kiunguju (name for Swahili
in Zanzibar), English (official, primary language of commerce,
administration, and higher education), Arabic (widely spoken in
Zanzibar), many local languages
note : Kiswahili (Swahili) is the mother tongue of Bantu people living
in Zanzibar and nearby coastal Tanzania; although Kiswahili is Bantu
in structure and origin, its vocabulary draws on a variety of sources,
including Arabic and English, and it has become the lingua franca of
central and eastern Africa; the first language of most people is one
of the local languages

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write Kiswahili (Swahili),
English, or Arabic
total population: 67.8%
male: 79.4%
female: 56.8% (1995 est.)

@Tanzania:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : United Republic of Tanzania
conventional short form: Tanzania
former: United Republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar

Data code: TZ

Government type: republic

National capital: Dar es Salaam
note: some government offices have been transferred to Dodoma, which
is planned as the new national capital by the end of the 1990s

Administrative divisions: 25 regions; Arusha, Dar es Salaam, Dodoma,
Iringa, Kigoma, Kilimanjaro, Lindi, Mara, Mbeya, Morogoro, Mtwara,
Mwanza, Pemba North, Pemba South, Pwani, Rukwa, Ruvuma, Shinyanga,
Singida, Tabora, Tanga, Zanzibar Central/South, Zanzibar North,
Zanzibar Urban/West, Ziwa Magharibi

Independence: 26 April 1964; Tanganyika became independent 9 December
1961 (from UK-administered UN trusteeship); Zanzibar became
independent 19 December 1963 (from UK); Tanganyika united with
Zanzibar 26 April 1964 to form the United Republic of Tanganyika and
Zanzibar; renamed United Republic of Tanzania 29 October 1964

National holiday: Union Day, 26 April (1964)

Constitution: 25 April 1977; major revisions October 1984

Legal system: based on English common law; judicial review of
legislative acts limited to matters of interpretation; has not
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Benjamin William MKAPA (since 22 November
1995); Vice President Omar Ali JUMA (since 22 November 1995); note the
president is both chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Benjamin William MKAPA (since 22
November 1995); Vice President Omar Ali JUMA (since 22 November 1995);
note the president is both chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet ministers, including the prime minister, are
appointed by the president from among the members of the National
Assembly
elections: president and vice president elected on the same ballot by
popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 29 October-19
November 1995 (next to be held NA October 2000); prime minister
appointed by the president
election results: percent of vote - Benjamin William MKAPA 62%, MREMA
28%, LIPUMBA 6%, CHEYO 4%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Bunge (274 seats,
232 directly elected; members serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 29 October-19 November 1995 (next to be held NA
October 2000)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - CCM
186, opposition parties 46; note - of the 42 seats which are not
elected, some are filled by presidential appointment and others are
designated by law for specific officials

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal; High Court

Political parties and leaders: Chama Cha Mapinduzi or CCM
(Revolutionary Party) [Benjamin William MKAPA]; Civic United Front or
CUF [Seif Sharif HAMAD]; National Convention for Construction and
Reform or NCCR [Lyatonga (Augustine) MREMA]; Union for Multiparty
Democracy or UMD [Abdullah FUNDIKIRA]; Chama Cha Demokrasia na
Maendeleo or CHADEMA [Edwin I. M. MTEI, chairman]; Democratic Party
(unregistered) [Reverend MTIKLA]; United Democratic Party or UDP [John
CHEYO]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, EADB,
ECA, FAO, G- 6, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAU,
SADC, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Mustafa Salim NYANG'ANYI
chancery : 2139 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 939-6125
FAX: [1] (202) 797-7408

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador J. Brady ANDERSON
embassy: 36 Laibon Road (off Bagamoyo Road), Dar es Salaam
mailing address: P. O. Box 9123, Dar es Salaam
telephone: [255] (51) 66010 through 66015
FAX : [255] (51) 66701

Flag description: divided diagonally by a yellow-edged black band from
the lower hoist-side corner; the upper triangle (hoist side) is green
and the lower triangle is blue

Economy

Economy - overview: Tanzania is one of the poorest countries in the
world. The economy is heavily dependent on agriculture, which accounts
for 57% of GDP, provides 85% of exports, and employs 90% of the work
force. Topography and climatic conditions, however, limit cultivated
crops to only 4% of the land area. Industry accounts for 17% of GDP
and is mainly limited to processing agricultural products and light
consumer goods. The economic recovery program announced in mid-1986
has generated notable increases in agricultural production and
financial support for the program by bilateral donors. The World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund, and bilateral donors have provided
funds to rehabilitate Tanzania's deteriorated economic infrastructure.
Growth in 1991-96 has featured a pickup in industrial production and a
substantial increase in output of minerals, led by gold. Recent
banking reforms have helped increase private sector growth and
investment.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $18.9 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.5% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $650 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 57%
industry: 17%
services: 26% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 30% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 13.495 million
by occupation: agriculture 90%, industry and commerce 10% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $495 million
expenditures: $631 million, including capital expenditures of $118
million (1990 est.)

Industries: primarily agricultural processing (sugar, beer,
cigarettes, sisal twine), diamond and gold mining, oil refining,
shoes, cement, textiles, wood products, fertilizer

Industrial production growth rate: 7.7% (1994)

Electricity - capacity: 440,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 1.91 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 60 kWh (1994 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, sisal, tea, cotton, pyrethrum
(insecticide made from chrysanthemums), cashews, tobacco, cloves
(Zanzibar), corn, wheat, cassava (tapioca), bananas, fruits,
vegetables; cattle, sheep, goats

Exports:
total value: $679 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: coffee, cotton, cashew nuts, cloves, tobacco, sisal
partners: India, Germany, Belgium, UK, Japan, Netherlands, Kenya, Hong
Kong, US

Imports:
total value: $1.69 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: manufactured goods, machinery and transportation
equipment, cotton piece goods, crude oil, foodstuffs
partners : UK, Germany, Italy, Japan, US, Kenya, China

Debt - external: $7.4 billion (1994 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Tanzanian shilling (TSh) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Tanzanian shillings (TSh) per US$1 - 597.27 (January
1997), 579.98 (1996), 574.76 (1995), 509.63 (1994), 405.27 (1993),
297.71 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Tanzania:Communications

Telephones: 137,000 (1989 est.)

Telephone system: fair system operating below capacity
domestic: open wire, microwave radio relay, tropospheric scatter
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
and 1 Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 12, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 640,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (1995 est.)

Televisions: 45,000 (1992 est.)

@Tanzania:Transportation

Railways:
total : 3,569 km (1995)
narrow gauge: 2,600 km 1.000-m gauge; 969 km 1.067-m gauge
note: the Tanzania-Zambia Railway Authority (TAZARA), which operates
1,860 km of 1.067-m narrow gauge track between Dar es Salaam and New
Kapiri Mposhi in Zambia (of which 969 km are in Tanzania and 891 km
are in Zambia) is not a part of Tanzania Railways Corporation; because
of the difference in gauge, this system does not connect to Tanzania
Railways

Highways:
total: 88,000 km
paved: 3,696 km
unpaved : 84,304 km (1994 est.)

Waterways: Lake Tanganyika, Lake Victoria, Lake Nyasa

Pipelines: crude oil 982 km

Ports and harbors: Bukoba, Dar es Salaam, Kigoma, Lindi, Mkoani,
Mtwara, Musoma, Mwanza, Tanga, Wete, Zanzibar

Merchant marine:
total: 8 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 30,371 GRT/41,269 DWT
ships by type: cargo 3, oil tanker 2, passenger-cargo 2,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 110 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 39
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m : 6
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 28 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 71
1,524 to 2,437 m: 15
914 to 1,523 m : 56 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Tanzanian People's Defense Force or TPDF (includes
Army, Navy, and Air Force), paramilitary Police Field Force Unit,
Militia

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 6,630,336 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 3,842,624 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $69 million (FY94/95)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: dispute with Malawi over the boundary in
Lake Nyasa (Lake Malawi); Democratic Republic of the
Congo-Tanzania-Zambia tripoint in Lake Tanganyika may no longer be
indefinite since it has been informally reported that the indefinite
section of the Democratic Republic of the Congo-Zambia boundary has
been settled

Illicit drugs: growing role in transshipment of Southwest and
Southeast Asian heroin and South American cocaine destined for
European and US markets and of South Asian methaqualone bound for
Southern Africa
______________________________________________________________________

THAILAND

@Thailand:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, bordering the Andaman Sea and the Gulf of
Thailand, southeast of Burma

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 100 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 514,000 sq km
land: 511,770 sq km
water: 2,230 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Wyoming

Land boundaries:
total: 4,863 km
border countries: Burma 1,800 km, Cambodia 803 km, Laos 1,754 km,
Malaysia 506 km

Coastline: 3,219 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy, warm, cloudy southwest monsoon (mid-May to
September); dry, cool northeast monsoon (November to mid-March);
southern isthmus always hot and humid

Terrain: central plain; Khorat Plateau in the east; mountains
elsewhere

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Gulf of Thailand 0 m
highest point: Doi Inthanon 2,576 m

Natural resources: tin, rubber, natural gas, tungsten, tantalum,
timber, lead, fish, gypsum, lignite, fluorite

Land use:
arable land: 34%
permanent crops : 6%
permanent pastures: 2%
forests and woodland: 26%
other: 32% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 44,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: land subsidence in Bangkok area resulting from the
depletion of the water table; droughts

Environment - current issues: air pollution from vehicle emissions;
water pollution from organic and factory wastes; deforestation; soil
erosion; wildlife populations threatened by illegal hunting

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Climate Change, Endangered Species, Marine Life
Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical
Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94
signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
Sea

Geography - note: controls only land route from Asia to Malaysia and
Singapore

@Thailand:People

Population: 59,450,818 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 25% (male 7,531,192; female 7,257,574)
15-64 years: 69% (male 20,308,061; female 20,902,406)
65 years and over: 6% (male 1,530,905; female 1,920,680) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 17.03 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.05 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.97 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.8 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 32.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 68.8 years
male: 65.12 years
female: 72.66 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.86 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Thai (singular and plural)
adjective: Thai

Ethnic groups: Thai 75%, Chinese 14%, other 11%

Religions: Buddhism 95%, Muslim 3.8%, Christianity 0.5%, Hinduism
0.1%, other 0.6% (1991)

Languages: Thai, English the secondary language of the elite, ethnic
and regional dialects

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 93.8%
male: 96%
female: 91.6% (1995 est.)

@Thailand:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Kingdom of Thailand
conventional short form: Thailand

Data code: TH

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: Bangkok

Administrative divisions: 76 provinces (changwat, singular and
plural); Amnat Charoen, Ang Thong, Buriram, Chachoengsao, Chai Nat,
Chaiyaphum, Chanthaburi, Chiang Mai, Chiang Rai, Chon Buri, Chumphon,
Kalasin, Kamphaeng Phet, Kanchanaburi, Khon Kaen, Krabi, Krung Thep
Mahanakhon (Bangkok), Lampang, Lamphun, Loei, Lop Buri, Mae Hong Son,
Maha Sarakham, Mukdahan, Nakhon Nayok, Nakhon Pathom, Nakhon Phanom,
Nakhon Ratchasima, Nakhon Sawan, Nakhon Si Thammarat, Nan, Narathiwat,
Nong Bua Lamphu, Nong Khai, Nonthaburi, Pathum Thani, Pattani,
Phangnga, Phatthalung, Phayao, Phetchabun, Phetchaburi, Phichit,
Phitsanulok, Phra Nakhon Si Ayutthaya, Phrae, Phuket, Prachin Buri,
Prachuap Khiri Khan, Ranong, Ratchaburi, Rayong, Roi Et, Sa Kaeo,
Sakon Nakhon, Samut Prakan, Samut Sakhon, Samut Songkhram, Sara Buri,
Satun, Sing Buri, Sisaket, Songkhla, Sukhothai, Suphan Buri, Surat
Thani, Surin, Tak, Trang, Trat, Ubon Ratchathani, Udon Thani, Uthai
Thani, Uttaradit, Yala, Yasothon

Independence: 1238 (traditional founding date; never colonized)

National holiday: Birthday of His Majesty the King, 5 December (1927)

Constitution: new constitution approved 7 December 1991; amended 10
June 1992; new constitution currently being drafted with completion
expected by the end of 1997

Legal system: based on civil law system, with influences of common
law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: King PHUMIPHON Adunyadet (since 9 June 1946); Heir
Apparent Crown Prince WACHIRALONGKON (born 28 July 1952)
head of government: Prime Minister CHAWALIT Yongchaiyut (since 25
November 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers
note: there is also a Privy Council
elections : none; the king is a constitutional monarch; prime minister
designated from among the members of the House of Representatives;
following elections in the House of Representatives, the leader of the
party that wins a plurality of seats usually becomes prime minister

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly or Rathasapha consists
of the Senate or Wuthisapha (a 270-member appointed body; members
serve six-year terms) and the House of Representatives or Sapha
Phuthaen Ratsadon (393 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve
four-year terms)
elections : House of Representatives - last held 17 November 1996
(next scheduled to be held by 17 November 2000, but may be held
earlier as Prime Minister CHAWALIT has promised to hold elections
after the draft of the new constitution is complete and that is
scheduled for the end of 1997)
election results: House of Representatives - percent of vote by party
- NA; seats by party - NAP 125, DP 123, NDP 52, TNP 39, SAP 20, TCP
18, SP 8, LDP 4, MP 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Sandika), judges appointed by the king

Political parties and leaders: Thai Nation Party (TNP or Chat Thai
Party), BANHAN Sinlapa-acha; Democratic Party (DP or Prachathipat
Party), CHUAN Likphai; New Aspiration Party (NAP or Khwamwang Mai),
Gen. CHAWALIT Yongchaiyut; National Development Party (NDP or Chat
Phattana), CHATCHAI Chunhawan; Phalang Dharma Party (PDP or Phalang
Tham), SUDARAT Keyuraphan; Social Action Party (SAP or Kitsangkhom
Party), MONTRI Phongphanit; Thai Citizen's Party (TCP or Prachakon
Thai), SAMAK Sunthonwet; Liberal Democratic Party (LDP or Seri Tham),
PHINIT Charusombat; Solidarity Party (SP or Ekkaphap Party), UTHAI
Phimchaichon; Mass Party (MP or Muanchon), Pol. Cpt. CHALOEM Yubamrung

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, CCC, CP,
ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
ISO, ITU, Mekong Group, NAM, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
UNIKOM, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador NIT Phibunsongkhram
chancery: 1024 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone: [1] (202) 944-3600
FAX: [1] (202) 944-3611
consulate(s) general: Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador William H. ITOH
embassy: 120/22 Wireless Road, Bangkok
mailing address: APO AP 96546
telephone: [66] (2) 205-4000
FAX : [66] (2) 254-2990
consulate(s) general: Chiang Mai

Flag description: five horizontal bands of red (top), white, blue
(double width), white, and red

Economy

Economy - overview: One of the more advanced developing countries in
Asia, Thailand depends on exports of manufactures - including
high-technology goods - and the development of the service sector to
fuel the country's rapid growth, averaging 9% since 1989. Most of
Thailand's recent imports have been for capital equipment and raw
materials, although imports of consumer goods are beginning to rise.
Thailand's 35% domestic savings rate is a key source of capital for
the economy, and the country is also benefiting from rising investment
from abroad. Prime Minister CHAWALIT's government - Thailand's seventh
government in six years - will continue Bangkok's probusiness policies
and reemphasize Bangkok's traditional fiscal austerity. CHAWALIT is
beginning to address Thailand's serious infrastructure bottlenecks,
especially in the transport and telecommunications sectors. Over the
longer term, Bangkok must produce more college graduates with
technical training and upgrade workers' skills to continue its rapid
economic development.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $455.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6.7% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $7,700 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 10.5%
industry: 30.5%
services: 59% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5.9% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 34.03 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 57%, industry 17%, commerce 11%, services
(including government) 15% (1993 est.)

Unemployment rate: 2.6% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $28.4 billion
expenditures: $28.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $6.1
billion (FY94/95)

Industries: tourism; textiles and garments, agricultural processing,
beverages, tobacco, cement, light manufacturing, such as jewelry;
electric appliances and components, integrated circuits, furniture,
plastics; world's second-largest tungsten producer and third-largest
tin producer

Industrial production growth rate: 13.3% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 15.84 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 70.21 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,205 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, cassava (tapioca), rubber, corn,
sugarcane, coconuts, soybeans

Exports:
total value: $57.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: manufactures 73%, agricultural products and fisheries
21%, raw materials 5%, fuels 1%
partners : US 21.0%, Japan 17.1%, Singapore 13.6%, Hong Kong 5.3%,
Germany 3.5%, UK 3.0%, Netherlands 2.8%, Malaysia 2.4%

Imports:
total value: $72.4 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: manufactures 80%, fuels 6.9%, raw materials 6.6%,
foodstuffs 4.3%
partners: Japan 30.4%, US 11.9%, Singapore 6.3%, Germany 5.8%, Taiwan
5.1%, Malaysia 4.9%, South Korea 3.7%, China 2.6%

Debt - external: $61.6 billion (1995)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $624 million (1993)

Currency: 1 baht (B) = 100 satang

Exchange rates: baht (B) per US$1 - 25.708 (January 1997), 15.343
(1996), 24.915 (1995), 25.150 (1994), 25.319 (1993), 25.400 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September

@Thailand:Communications

Telephones: 1,553,200 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: service to general public inadequate; bulk of
service to government activities provided by multichannel cable and
microwave radio relay network
domestic: microwave radio relay and multichannel cable; domestic
satellite system being developed
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
and 1 Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 200 (in government-controlled network),
FM 100 (in government-controlled network), shortwave 0

Radios: 10.75 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 11 (in government-controlled network)

Televisions: 3.3 million (1993 est.)

@Thailand:Transportation

Railways:
total : 4,623 km
narrow gauge: 4,623 km 1.000-m gauge (99 km double track)

Highways:
total: 56,903 km
paved: 52,806 km
unpaved : 4,097 km (1993 est.)

Waterways: 3,999 km principal waterways; 3,701 km with navigable
depths of 0.9 m or more throughout the year; numerous minor waterways
navigable by shallow-draft native craft

Pipelines: petroleum products 67 km; natural gas 350 km

Ports and harbors: Bangkok, Laem Chabang, Pattani, Phuket, Sattahip,
Si Racha, Songkhla

Merchant marine:
total : 283 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,859,021 GRT/3,060,277
DWT
ships by type: bulk 38, cargo 144, chemical tanker 5, combination bulk
1, container 12, liquefied gas tanker 15, multi-function large load
carrier 3, oil tanker 49, passenger 1, refrigerated cargo 10,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 2, short-sea passenger 1, specialized tanker 2
(1996 est.)

Airports: 100 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 86
over 3,047 m : 6
2,438 to 3,047 m: 9
1,524 to 2,437 m: 13
914 to 1,523 m: 22
under 914 m: 36 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 14
1,524 to 2,437 m : 1
914 to 1,523 m: 13 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Royal Thai Army, Royal Thai Navy (includes Royal
Thai Marine Corps), Royal Thai Air Force, Paramilitary Forces

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 17,076,040 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 10,315,765 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 591,094 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $4 billion (FY94/95)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.5% (FY94/95)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: boundary dispute with Laos; unresolved
maritime boundary with Vietnam; parts of border with Cambodia in
dispute; maritime boundary with Cambodia not clearly defined

Illicit drugs: a minor producer of opium, heroin, and marijuana; major
illicit transit point for heroin en route to the international drug
market from Burma and Laos; eradication efforts have reduced the area
of cannabis cultivation and shifted some production to neighboring
countries; opium poppy cultivation has been reduced by eradication
efforts; also a drug money-laundering center; rapidly growing role in
amphetamine production for regional consumption; increasing indigenous
abuse of methamphetamines and heroin
______________________________________________________________________

TOGO

@Togo:Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the Bight of Benin, between Benin
and Ghana

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 N, 1 10 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total : 56,790 sq km
land: 54,390 sq km
water: 2,400 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
total: 1,647 km
border countries: Benin 644 km, Burkina Faso 126 km, Ghana 877 km

Coastline: 56 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 30 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north

Terrain: gently rolling savanna in north; central hills; southern
plateau; low coastal plain with extensive lagoons and marshes

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Pic Baumann 986 m

Natural resources: phosphates, limestone, marble

Land use:
arable land : 38%
permanent crops: 7%
permanent pastures: 4%
forests and woodland: 17%
other : 34% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 70 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry harmattan wind can reduce visibility in
north during winter; periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: deforestation attributable to
slash-and-burn agriculture and the use of wood for fuel; recent
droughts affecting agriculture

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

@Togo:People

Population: 4,735,610 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 49% (male 1,153,174; female 1,143,085)
15-64 years: 49% (male 1,129,720; female 1,206,926)
65 years and over: 2% (male 47,211; female 55,494) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.54% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 45.71 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.32 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.85 male(s)/female
total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 82.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 58.32 years
male: 56.1 years
female : 60.61 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.68 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Togolese (singular and plural)
adjective: Togolese

Ethnic groups: native African (37 tribes; largest and most important
are Ewe, Mina, and Kabre) 99%, European and Syrian-Lebanese less than
1%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 70%, Christian 20%, Muslim 10%

Languages: French (official and the language of commerce), Ewe and
Mina (the two major African languages in the south), Kabye (sometimes
spelled Kabiye) and Dagomba (the two major African languages in the
north)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 51.7%
male: 67%
female: 37% (1995 est.)

@Togo:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Togolese Republic
conventional short form: Togo
local long form: Republique Togolaise
local short form: none
former: French Togo

Data code: TO

Government type: republic under transition to multiparty democratic
rule

National capital: Lome

Administrative divisions: 21 circumscriptions (circonscriptions,
singular - circonscription); Amlame, Aneho, Atakpame, Badou, Bafilo,
Bassar, Dapaong, Kande, Kara, Kpalime, Lome, Niamtougou, Notse,
Pagouda, Sansanne-Mango, Sokode, Sotouboua, Tabligbo, Tchamba, Tsevie,
Vogan
note : the 21 units may have become second-order administrative
divisions with the imposition of a new first-order level of five
prefectures (singular - prefecture) named De La Kara, Des Plateaux,
Des Savanes, Du Centre, and Maritime

Independence: 27 April 1960 (from French-administered UN trusteeship)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 April (1960)

Constitution: multiparty draft constitution approved by High Council
of the Republic 1 July 1992; adopted by public referendum 27 September
1992

Legal system: French-based court system

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Gen. Gnassingbe EYADEMA (since 14 April
1967)
head of government: Prime Minister Kwassi KLUTSE (since September
1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president and the prime
minister
elections : president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 25 August 1993 (next to be held NA 1998); prime
minister appointed by the president
election results: Gnassingbe EYADEMA elected president; percent of
vote - Gnassingbe EYADEMA 96.5%; note - all major opposition parties
boycotted the election

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (81 seats; members
are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 6 and 20 February 1994 (next to be held NA 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - CAR
36, RPT 35, UTD 7, UJD 2, CFN 1
note: as a result of a byelection in August 1996, ordered by the
Supreme Court for three seats of the Action Committee for Renewal and
the Togolese Union for Democracy, representation in the National
Assembly changed to RPT 38, CAR 34, UDT 6, UJD 2, and CFN 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel; Supreme Court or
Cour Supreme

Political parties and leaders: Rally of the Togolese People or RPT
[President Gen. Gnassingbe EYADEMA]; Coordination des Forces Nouvelles
or CFN [Joseph KOFFIGOH]; Togolese Union for Democracy or UTD [Edem
KODJO]; Action Committee for Renewal or CAR [Yao AGBOYIBOR]; Union for
Democracy and Solidarity or UDS [Antoine FOLLY]; Pan-African
Sociodemocrats Group or GSP, an alliance of three radical parties:
CDPA, PDR, and PSP; Democratic Convention of African Peoples or CDPA
[Leopold GNININVI]; Party for Democracy and Renewal or PDR [Zarifou
AYEVA]; Pan-African Social Party or PSP [Francis AGBAGLI]; Union of
Forces for Change or UFC [Gilchrist OLYMPIO (in exile)]; Union of
Justice and Democracy or UJD [Lal TAXPANDJAN]
note: Rally of the Togolese People or RPT, led by President EYADEMA,
was the only party until the formation of multiple parties was
legalized 12 April 1991

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA,
ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU,
MINURSO, NAM, OAU, OIC (observer), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIH,
UPU, WADB, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Kossivi OSSEYI
chancery: 2208 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 234-4212
FAX : [1] (202) 232-3190

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Johnny YOUNG
embassy: Rue Pelletier Caventou and Rue Vauban, Lome
mailing address: B. P. 852, Lome
telephone: [228] 21 77 17, 21 29 91 through 21 29 94
FAX : [228] 21 79 52

Flag description: five equal horizontal bands of green (top and
bottom) alternating with yellow; there is a white five-pointed star on
a red square in the upper hoist-side corner; uses the popular
pan-African colors of Ethiopia

Economy

Economy - overview: This small sub-Saharan economy is heavily
dependent on both commercial and subsistence agriculture, which
provides employment for more than 60% of the labor force. Cocoa,
coffee, and cotton together generate about 30% of export earnings.
Togo is self-sufficient in basic foodstuffs when harvests are normal.
In the industrial sector, phosphate mining is by far the most
important activity, although it has suffered from the collapse of
world phosphate prices and increased foreign competition. Togo serves
as a regional commercial and trade center. The government's
decade-long effort, supported by the World Bank and the IMF, to
implement economic reform measures, encourage foreign investment, and
bring revenues in line with expenditures has stalled. Political
unrest, including private and public sector strikes throughout 1992
and 1993, has jeopardized the reform program, shrunk the tax base, and
disrupted vital economic activity. Although strikes had ended in 1994,
political unrest and lack of funds prevented the government from
taking advantage of the 50% currency devaluation of 12 January 1994.
Resumption of World Bank and IMF flows will depend on implementation
of several controversial moves toward privatization and on downsizing
the military, on which the regime depends to stay in power.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $4.45 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $970 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 35%
industry: 23%
services: 42% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7.2% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 1.538 million (1993 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 64%, industry 9%, services 21%, unemployed
6% (1981 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $242 million
expenditures: $262 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: phosphate mining, agricultural processing, cement;
handicrafts, textiles, beverages

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh
note: imports electricity from Ghana

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: coffee, cocoa, cotton, yams, cassava
(tapioca), corn, beans, rice, millet, sorghum; meat; annual fish catch
of 10,000-14,000 tons

Exports:
total value: $265 (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: phosphates, cotton, coffee, cocoa
partners : Canada 9.2%, US 8.1%, Taiwan 7.5%, Nigeria 6.7% (1995 est.)

Imports:
total value: $350 million (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities : machinery and equipment, consumer goods, food, chemical
products
partners: Ghana 17.1%, China 13.3%, France 12.5%, Cameroon 6.0% (1995
est.)

Debt - external: $1.5 billion (1994)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 541.69 (January 1997),
511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69
(1992)
note: beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF
100 per French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since
1948

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Togo:Communications

Telephones: 12,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: fair system based on network of microwave radio
relay routes supplemented by open-wire lines
domestic: microwave radio relay and open-wire lines
international: satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)
and 1 Symphonie

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 795,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (relays 2)

Televisions: 24,000 (1992 est.)

@Togo:Transportation

Railways:
total: 525 km (1995)
narrow gauge : 525 km 1.000-m gauge

Highways:
total: 7,519 km
paved: 2,376 km
unpaved: 5,143 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 50 km Mono river

Ports and harbors: Kpeme, Lome

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 8 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 4
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
under 914 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 4
914 to 1,523 m : 4 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Gendarmerie

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,016,251 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 533,292 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $48 million (1993)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.9% (1993)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transit hub for Nigerian heroin and cocaine traffickers
______________________________________________________________________

TOKELAU

(territory of New Zealand)

@Tokelau:Geography

Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean, about
one-half of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 9 00 S, 172 00 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 10 sq km
land: 10 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 17 times the size of The Mall in Washington,
DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 101 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by trade winds (April to November)

Terrain: coral atolls enclosing large lagoons

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 5 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: lies in Pacific typhoon belt

Environment - current issues: very limited natural resources and
overcrowding are contributing to emigration to New Zealand

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

@Tokelau:People

Population: 1,463 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over : NA

Population growth rate: -1.35% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: NA years
male: NA years
female: NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
noun: Tokelauan(s)
adjective: Tokelauan

Ethnic groups: Polynesian

Religions: Congregational Christian Church 70%, Roman Catholic 28%,
other 2%
note: on Atafu, all Congregational Christian Church of Samoa; on
Nukunonu, all Roman Catholic; on Fakaofo, both denominations, with the
Congregational Christian Church predominant

Languages: Tokelauan (a Polynesian language), English

@Tokelau:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form : Tokelau

Data code: TL

Dependency status: territory of New Zealand

Government type: NA

National capital: none; each atoll has its own administrative center

Administrative divisions: none (territory of New Zealand)

Independence: none (territory of New Zealand)

National holiday: Waitangi Day, 6 February (1840) (Treaty of Waitangi
established British sovereignty over New Zealand)

Constitution: administered under the Tokelau Islands Act of 1948, as
amended in 1970

Legal system: British and local statutes

Suffrage: 21 years of age

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952);
the queen and New Zealand are represented by Administrator Lindsay
WATT (since NA March 1993)
head of government: Official Secretary Brian LAWRENCE (since NA)
cabinet: the Council of Faipule, consisting of the elected leaders
from each atoll, functions as a cabinet
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; administrator
appointed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade in New Zealand

Legislative branch: unicameral General Fono (45 seats - 15 from each
of the three atolls; members chosen by each atoll's Council of Elders
or Taupulega who meet together twice a year)

Judicial branch: High Court in Niue; Supreme Court in New Zealand

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: SPC, WHO (associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of New Zealand)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of New Zealand)

Flag description: the flag of New Zealand is used

Economy

Economy - overview: Tokelau's small size, isolation, and lack of
resources greatly restrain economic development and confine
agriculture to the subsistence level. The people must rely on aid from
New Zealand to maintain public services, annual aid being
substantially greater than GDP. The principal sources of revenue come
from sales of copra, postage stamps, souvenir coins, and handicrafts.
Money is also remitted to families from relatives in New Zealand.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.5 million (1993 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,000 (1993 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $430,830
expenditures: $2.8 million, including capital expenditures of $37,300
(1987 est.)

Industries: small-scale enterprises for copra production, wood work,
plaited craft goods; stamps, coins; fishing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: coconuts, copra, breadfruit, papaya, bananas;
pigs, poultry, goats

Exports:
total value: $98,000 (f.o.b., 1983)
commodities: stamps, copra, handicrafts
partners: NZ

Imports:
total value : $323,400 (c.i.f., 1983)
commodities: foodstuffs, building materials, fuel
partners: NZ

Debt - external: $0

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $3.7 million from NZ (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1 - 1.4247 (January
1997), 1.4543 (1996), 1.5235 (1995), 1.6844 (1994), 1.8495 (1993),
1.8584 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@Tokelau:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
domestic: radiotelephone service between islands
international: radiotelephone service to Western Samoa

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA
note: each atoll has a radio broadcast station of NA type that
broadcasts shipping and weather reports

Radios: 1,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

@Tokelau:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: NA km
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Merchant marine: none

Airports: none; lagoon landings by amphibious aircraft from Western
Samoa

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of New Zealand

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

TONGA

@Tonga:Geography

Location: Oceania, archipelago in the South Pacific Ocean, about
two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 20 00 S, 175 00 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 748 sq km
land: 718 sq km
water: 30 sq km

Area - comparative: four times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 419 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; modified by trade winds; warm season (December to
May), cool season (May to December)

Terrain: most islands have limestone base formed from uplifted coral
formation; others have limestone overlying volcanic base

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location on Kao Island 1,033 m

Natural resources: fish, fertile soil

Land use:
arable land: 24%
permanent crops: 43%
permanent pastures: 6%
forests and woodland: 11%
other : 16% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: cyclones (October to April); earthquakes and volcanic
activity on Fonuafo'ou

Environment - current issues: deforestation results as more and more
land is being cleared for agriculture and settlement; some damage to
coral reefs from starfish and indiscriminate coral and shell
collectors; overhunting threatens native sea turtle populations

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ship Pollution, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: archipelago of 170 islands (36 inhabited)

@Tonga:People

Population: 107,335 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 0.81% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 26.95 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.14 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.27 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 39.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 69.3 years
male : 67.29 years
female: 71.7 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.7 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Tongan(s)
adjective: Tongan

Ethnic groups: Polynesian, Europeans about 300

Religions: Christian (Free Wesleyan Church claims over 30,000
adherents)

Languages: Tongan, English

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write a simple message in
Tongan or English
total population: 100%
male: 100%
female : 100% (1976 est.)

@Tonga:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Kingdom of Tonga
conventional short form: Tonga
former: Friendly Islands

Data code: TN

Government type: hereditary constitutional monarchy

National capital: Nuku'alofa

Administrative divisions: three island groups; Ha'apai, Tongatapu,
Vava'u

Independence: 4 June 1970 (emancipation from UK protectorate)

National holiday: Emancipation Day, 4 June (1970)

Constitution: 4 November 1875, revised 1 January 1967

Legal system: based on English law

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: King Taufa'ahau TUPOU IV (since 16 December 1965)
head of government: Prime Minister Baron VAEA (since 22 August 1991)
and Deputy Prime Minister S. Langi KAVALIKU (since 22 August 1991)
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the king
note: there is also a Privy Council that consists of the king and the
Cabinet
elections: none; the king is a constitutional monarch; prime minister
and deputy prime minister appointed for life by the king

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly or Fale Alea (30
seats - 12 reserved for cabinet ministers sitting ex officio, nine for
nobles selected by the country's 33 nobles, and nine elected by
popular vote; members serve three-year terms)
elections: last held 24-25 January 1996 (next to be held NA January
1999)
election results : percent of vote - NA; seats - 7 proreform, 2
traditionalist

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the king;
Privy Council with the addition of the chief justice of the Supreme
Court sits as the Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: Tonga People's Party, Viliami FUKOFUKA

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, IMF,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, Sparteca, SPC, SPF,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Tonga does not have an embassy in
the US; Ambassador Sione KITE, resides in London
consulate(s) general : San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Tonga; the ambassador to Fiji is accredited to Tonga

Flag description: red with a bold red cross on a white rectangle in
the upper hoist-side corner

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy's base is agriculture, which
contributes 36% to GDP. Squash, coconuts, bananas, and vanilla beans
are the main crops, and agricultural exports make up two-thirds of
total exports. The country must import a high proportion of its food,
mainly from New Zealand. The industrial sector accounts for only 13%
of GDP. Tourism is the primary source of hard currency earnings, but
the country also remains dependent on sizable external aid and
remittances to offset its trade deficit. The economy continued to grow
in 1993-95 largely because of a rise in squash exports, increased aid
flows, and several large construction projects, but contracted in
1995-96. The government is now turning its attention to further
development of the private sector and the reduction of the budget
deficit. Current proposals include selling Tongan citizenship and
passports to foreigners, leasing its seven equatorial satellite spots,
and setting up a joint venture gas production facility with South
Korea.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $228 million (FY95/96 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -1.9% (FY95/96 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,140 (FY95/96 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 36%
industry: 13%
services: 51% (1994)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1.4% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 32,013 (1990 est.)
by occupation : agriculture 70% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $44 million
expenditures : $86 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: tourism, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 7,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 30 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: coconuts, copra, bananas, vanilla beans,
cocoa, coffee, ginger, black pepper

Exports:
total value : $15.25 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: squash, vanilla, fish, root crops, coconut oil
partners: Japan 59%, US 14%, Australia 6%, NZ 6% (FY93/94)

Imports:
total value: $80.3 million (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities : food products, live animals, machinery and transport
equipment, manufactures, fuels, chemicals
partners: NZ 38%, Australia 28%, US 10%, Fiji 7.5% (1995)

Debt - external: $48.4 million (FY93/94)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $7.8 million from Australia (FY96/97 est.); $3.9
million from NZ (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 pa'anga (T$) = 100 seniti

Exchange rates: pa'anga (T$) per US$1 - 1.2127 (December 1996), 1.2323
(1996), 1.2709 (1995), 1.3202 (1994), 1.3841 (1993), 1.3471 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Tonga:Communications

Telephones: 3,500 (1986 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international : satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 66,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1995)

Televisions: 1,000 (1992 est.)

@Tonga:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 674 km
paved : 182 km
unpaved: 492 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Neiafu, Nuku'alofa, Pangai

Merchant marine:
total: 4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 9,990 GRT/14,884 DWT
ships by type : cargo 1, liquefied gas tanker 2, roll-on/roll-off
cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 6 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Tonga Defense Services (includes, Royal Tongan
Marines, Tongan Royal Guards, Maritime Force, Police); note - a new
Air Wing which will be subordinate to the Defense Ministry is being
developed

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

@Trinidad and Tobago:Geography

Location: Caribbean, islands between the Caribbean Sea and the North
Atlantic Ocean, northeast of Venezuela

Geographic coordinates: 11 00 N, 61 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 5,130 sq km
land: 5,130 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Delaware

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 362 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the outer edge of the continental
margin
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy season (June to December)

Terrain: mostly plains with some hills and low mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: El Cerro del Aripo 940 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, asphalt

Land use:
arable land: 15%
permanent crops: 9%
permanent pastures: 2%
forests and woodland : 46%
other: 28% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 220 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: outside usual path of hurricanes and other tropical
storms

Environment - current issues: water pollution from agricultural
chemicals, industrial wastes, and raw sewage; oil pollution of
beaches; deforestation; soil erosion

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

@Trinidad and Tobago:People

Population: 1,130,337 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 29% (male 167,857; female 161,196)
15-64 years: 64% (male 373,434; female 347,489)
65 years and over: 7% (male 36,300; female 44,061) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: -1.18% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 15.37 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.87 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -19.31 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.82 male(s)/female
total population: 1.04 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 19.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 70.36 years
male: 67.92 years
female: 72.88 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.13 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Trinidadian(s), Tobagonian(s)
adjective: Trinidadian, Tobagonian

Ethnic groups: black 43%, East Indian (a local term - primarily
immigrants from northern India) 40%, mixed 14%, white 1%, Chinese 1%,
other 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 32.2%, Hindu 24.3%, Anglican 14.4%, other
Protestant 14%, Muslim 6%, none or unknown 9.1%

Languages: English (official), Hindi, French, Spanish

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 97.9%
male: 98.8%
female : 97% (1995 est.)

@Trinidad and Tobago:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
conventional short form: Trinidad and Tobago

Data code: TD

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Port-of-Spain

Administrative divisions: 8 counties, 3 municipalities*, and 1 ward**;
Arima*, Caroni, Mayaro, Nariva, Port-of-Spain*, Saint Andrew, Saint
David, Saint George, Saint Patrick, San Fernando*, Tobago**, Victoria

Independence: 31 August 1962 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 31 August (1962)

Constitution: 1 August 1976

Legal system: based on English common law; judicial review of
legislative acts in the Supreme Court; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Arthur Napoleon Raymond ROBINSON (since 19
March 1997)
head of government: Prime Minister Basdeo PANDAY (since 9 November
1995)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed from among the members of Parliament
elections : president elected by an electoral college that consists of
the members of the Senate and House of Representatives for a five-year
term; election last held NA February 1997 (next to be held NA 2002);
prime minister appointed from among the members of Parliament;
following legislative elections, the leader of the majority party in
the House of Representatives is usually appointed prime minister
election results: Arthur Napoleon Raymond ROBINSON elected president;
percent of electoral college vote - 69%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of a Senate (31
seats; members appointed by the president for a maximum term of five
years) and a House of Representatives (36 seats; members are elected
by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: House of Representatives - last held 6 November 1995 (next
to be held by December 2000)
election results: House of Representatives - percent of vote - PNM
52%, UNC 42.2%, NAR 5.2%; seats by party - PNM 17, UNC 17, NAR 2; the
UNC formed a coalition with the NAR
note: Tobago has a unicameral House of Assembly with 15 members
serving four-year terms

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal, judges are appointed by the
president on the advice of the prime minister; Supreme Court, judges
are appointed by the president on the advice of the prime minister

Political parties and leaders: People's National Movement (PNM),
Patrick MANNING; United National Congress (UNC), Basdeo PANDAY;
National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR), A. N. R. ROBINSON;
Movement for Social Transformation (MOTION), David ABDULLAH; National
Joint Action Committee (NJAC), Makandal DAAGA; National Development
Party (NDP), Carson CHARLES; Movement for Unity and Progress (MUP),
Hulsie BHAGGAN

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CCC, CDB,
ECLAC, FAO, G-24, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, LAES,
NAM, OAS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIH, UNU, UPU, WFTU,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Corinne Averille McKNIGHT
chancery: 1708 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 467-6490
FAX: [1] (202) 785-3130
consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Brian J. DONNELLY
embassy: 15 Queen's Park West, Port-of-Spain
mailing address: P. O. Box 752, Port-of-Spain
telephone: [1] (809) 622-6372 through 6376, 6176
FAX : [1] (809) 628-5462

Flag description: red with a white-edged black diagonal band from the
upper hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: Trinidad and Tobago has earned a reputation as an
excellent investment site for international businesses. Successful
economic reforms implemented in 1995 are expected to bring an average
growth rate of 2% over the next three years, and foreign investment
and trade are flourishing. Unemployment - a main cause of the
country's socio-economic problems - is high, but has decreased to its
lowest point in five years. The country enjoys a healthy trade surplus
of $500 million, yet its heavy dependence on oil and petrochemical
prices makes its trade balance vulnerable to sudden shifts.
Furthermore, Caricom, Trinidad and Tobago's main market, is saturated,
provoking some countries to establish non-tariff trade barriers.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $17.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.1% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $13,500 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 2%
industry: 45%
services: 53% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5.3% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 404,500
by occupation: construction and utilities 13%, manufacturing, mining,
and quarrying 14%, agriculture 11%, services 62% (1993 est.)

Unemployment rate: 16.1% (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $1.65 billion
expenditures: $1.61 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: petroleum, chemicals, tourism, food processing, cement,
beverage, cotton textiles

Industrial production growth rate: 1% (1994 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 1.253 million kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 4.229 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,885 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: cocoa, sugarcane, rice, citrus, coffee,
vegetables; poultry

Exports:
total value : $2.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals, steel
products, fertilizer, sugar, cocoa, coffee, citrus, flowers
partners: US 48%, Caricom countries 15%, Latin America 9%, EU 5%
(1994)

Imports:
total value: $1.8 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: machinery, transportation equipment, manufactured goods,
food, live animals
partners: US 47.7%, Venezuela 10%, UK 8.3%, other EU 8% (1994)

Debt - external: $1.67 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $10 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Trinidad and Tobago dollar (TT$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Trinidad and Tobago dollars (TT$) per US$1 - 6.1791
(January 1997), 6.0051 (1996), 5.9478 (1995), 5.9249 (1994), 5.3511
(1993), 4.2500 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Trinidad and Tobago:Communications

Telephones: 170,000 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: excellent international service; good local service
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
tropospheric scatter to Barbados and Guyana

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 4, shortwave 0
note: there were a total of 10 radio stations in 1995

Radios: 700,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (1995 est.)

Televisions: 400,000 (1992 est.)

@Trinidad and Tobago:Transportation

Railways:
note: minimal agricultural railroad system near San Fernando; railway
service was discontinued in 1968

Highways:
total: 8,160 km
paved: 4,162 km
unpaved: 3,998 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,032 km; petroleum products 19 km; natural gas
904 km

Ports and harbors: Pointe-a-Pierre, Point Fortin, Point Lisas,
Port-of-Spain, Scarborough, Tembladora

Merchant marine:
total : 2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,928 GRT/5,571 DWT
ships by type: cargo 1, oil tanker 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 6 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 5
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
under 914 m : 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Trinidad and Tobago Defense Force (includes Ground
Forces, Coast Guard, and Air Wing), Trinidad and Tobago Police Service

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 312,628 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 223,418 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $83 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for South American drugs destined
for the US and Europe and producer of cannabis
______________________________________________________________________

TROMELIN ISLAND

(possession of France)

@Tromelin Island:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, island in the Indian Ocean, east of
Madagascar

Geographic coordinates: 15 52 S, 54 25 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 1 sq km
land: 1 sq km
water : 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 1.7 times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 3.7 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 12 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: sandy

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Indian Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 7 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other : 100% (scattered bushes)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: climatologically important location for forecasting
cyclones; wildlife sanctuary

@Tromelin Island:People

Population: uninhabited

@Tromelin Island:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Tromelin Island
local long form: none
local short form: Ile Tromelin

Data code: TE

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by a high
commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Flag description: the flag of France is used

Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity

@Tromelin Island:Communications

Communications - note: important meteorological station

@Tromelin Island:Transportation

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: 1

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
under 914 m : 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claimed by Madagascar, Mauritius, and
Seychelles
______________________________________________________________________

TUNISIA

@Tunisia:Geography

Location: Northern Africa, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between
Algeria and Libya

Geographic coordinates: 34 00 N, 9 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 163,610 sq km
land: 155,360 sq km
water: 8,250 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Georgia

Land boundaries:
total: 1,424 km
border countries: Algeria 965 km, Libya 459 km

Coastline: 1,148 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: temperate in north with mild, rainy winters and hot, dry
summers; desert in south

Terrain: mountains in north; hot, dry central plain; semiarid south
merges into the Sahara

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Shatt al Gharsah -17 m
highest point: Jabal ash Shanabi 1,544 m

Natural resources: petroleum, phosphates, iron ore, lead, zinc, salt

Land use:
arable land: 19%
permanent crops: 13%
permanent pastures: 20%
forests and woodland: 4%
other : 44% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 3,850 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: toxic and hazardous waste disposal is
ineffective and presents human health risks; water pollution from raw
sewage; limited natural fresh water resources; deforestation;
overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: strategic location in central Mediterranean

@Tunisia:People

Population: 9,245,284 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 32% (male 1,541,853; female 1,451,035)
15-64 years: 62% (male 2,858,987; female 2,873,748)
65 years and over: 6% (male 267,261; female 252,400) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.48% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 20.56 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.08 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.73 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.08 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.06 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 33.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 72.85 years
male : 71.5 years
female: 74.3 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.52 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Tunisian(s)
adjective: Tunisian

Ethnic groups: Arab-Berber 98%, European 1%, Jewish less than 1%

Religions: Muslim 98%, Christian 1%, Jewish 1%

Languages: Arabic (official and one of the languages of commerce),
French (commerce)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 66.7%
male: 78.6%
female : 54.6% (1995 est.)

@Tunisia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Tunisia
conventional short form: Tunisia
local long form: Al Jumhuriyah at Tunisiyah
local short form: Tunis

Data code: TS

Government type: republic

National capital: Tunis

Administrative divisions: 23 governorates; Beja, Ben Arous, Bizerte,
Gabes, Gafsa, Jendouba, Kairouan, Kasserine, Kebili, L'Ariana, Le Kef,
Mahdia, Medenine, Monastir, Nabeul, Sfax, Sidi Bou Zid, Siliana,
Sousse, Tataouine, Tozeur, Tunis, Zaghouan

Independence: 20 March 1956 (from France)

National holiday: National Day, 20 March (1956)

Constitution: 1 June 1959; amended 12 July 1988

Legal system: based on French civil law system and Islamic law; some
judicial review of legislative acts in the Supreme Court in joint
session

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Zine El Abidine BEN ALI (since 7 November
1987)
head of government : Prime Minister Hamed KAROUI (since 26 September
1989)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 20 March 1994 (next to be held NA 1999); prime
minister appointed by the president
election results : President Zine El Abidine BEN ALI reelected without
opposition; percent of vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Chamber of Deputies or Majlis al-Nuwaab
(163 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 20 March 1994 (next to be held NA 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - RCD 97.7%, MDS 1.0%,
others 1.3%; seats by party - RCD 144, MDS 10, others 9; note - the
government changed the electoral code to guarantee that the opposition
won seats

Judicial branch: Court of Cassation (Cour de Cassation)

Political parties and leaders: Constitutional Democratic Rally Party
(RCD), President BEN ALI (official ruling party); Movement of
Democratic Socialists (MDS), Ismail BOULAHIA; five other political
parties are legal, including the Communist Party

Political pressure groups and leaders: the Islamic fundamentalist
party, Al Nahda (Renaissance), is outlawed

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACCT, AfDB, AFESD,
AL, AMF, AMU, BSEC (observer), CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member),
ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, MINURSO,
NAM, OAS (observer), OAU, OIC, OSCE (partner), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNHCR, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNTAES, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Mohamed Azouz ENNIFAR
chancery: 1515 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005
telephone: [1] (202) 862-1850

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Mary Ann CASEY
embassy: 144 Avenue de la Liberte, 1002 Tunis-Belvedere
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone: [216] (1) 782-566
FAX: [216] (1) 789-719

Flag description: red with a white disk in the center bearing a red
crescent nearly encircling a red five-pointed star; the crescent and
star are traditional symbols of Islam

Economy

Economy - overview: Tunisia has a diverse economy, with important
agricultural, mining, energy, tourism, and manufacturing sectors.
Detailed governmental control of economic affairs has gradually
lessened over the past decade with increasing privatization of trade
and commerce, simplification of the tax structure, and a cautious
approach to debt. Real growth has averaged 4.5% in 1991-96, and
inflation has been moderate. Growth in tourism and increased trade
have been key elements in this solid record. Agricultural production
accounted for a major portion of growth in GDP in 1996, growth having
been adversely affected by drought in 1995. Further privatization, the
attraction of increased foreign investment, and improvements in
government efficiency are among the challenges for the future.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $43.3 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7.1% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $4,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 13.5%
industry: 33.8%
services: 52.7% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 6% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 2.917 million (1993 est.)
by occupation: services 55%, industry 23%, agriculture 22% (1995 est.)
note : shortage of skilled labor

Unemployment rate: 16% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues : $5.2 billion
expenditures: $7.2 billion, including capital expenditures to $1.4
billion (1996 est.)

Industries: petroleum, mining (particularly phosphate and iron ore),
tourism, textiles, footwear, food, beverages

Industrial production growth rate: 3.5% (1995)

Electricity - capacity: 1.7 million kW (1995 est.)

Electricity - production: 6.5 billion kWh (1995 est.)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 678 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: olives, dates, oranges, almonds, grain, sugar
beets, grapes; poultry, beef, dairy products

Exports:
total value: $5.7 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: hydrocarbons, textiles, agricultural products, phosphates
and chemicals
partners: EU 75%, North African countries 7%, India 2%, US 1%

Imports:
total value: $7.7 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: industrial goods and equipment 57%, hydrocarbons 13%,
food 12%, consumer goods
partners: EU countries 70%, North African countries 6%, US 5%, Japan
2%, Switzerland 1%

Debt - external: $9.6 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $221 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Tunisian dinar (TD) = 1,000 millimes

Exchange rates: Tunisian dinars (TD) per US$1 - 1.0075 (January 1997),
0.9985 (December 1996), 0.9733 (1996), 0.9458 (1995), 1.0116 (1994),
1.0037 (1993), 0.8844 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Tunisia:Communications

Telephones: 560,000 (1996 est.)

Telephone system: the system is above the African average; key centers
are Sfax, Sousse, Bizerte, and Tunis
domestic : trunk facilities consist of open-wire lines, coaxial cable,
and microwave radio relay
international: 5 submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 1
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) and 1 Arabsat with back-up control station;
coaxial cable and microwave radio relay to Algeria and Libya;
participant in Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 8, shortwave 0

Radios: 1,693,527 (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 19

Televisions: 670,000 (1992 est.)

Communications - note: Internet access is permitted but is licensed
through a government agency

@Tunisia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,260 km
standard gauge: 492 km 1.435-m gauge
narrow gauge : 1,758 km 1.000-m gauge
dual gauge: 10 km 1.000-m and 1.435-m gauges (1993 est.)

Highways:
total: 20,830 km
paved: 15,831 km
unpaved: 4,999 km (1993 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 797 km; petroleum products 86 km; natural gas 742
km

Ports and harbors: Bizerte, Gabes, La Goulette, Sfax, Sousse, Tunis,
Zarzis

Merchant marine:
total: 21 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 138,113 GRT/179,906 DWT
ships by type: bulk 6, cargo 5, chemical tanker 3, oil tanker 2,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 3, short-sea passenger 1, specialized tanker 1
(1996 est.)

Airports: 29 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 21
over 3,047 m: 3
2,438 to 3,047 m : 6
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 8
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary forces

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 2,464,973 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,411,804 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 94,868 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $535 million (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.8% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: maritime boundary dispute with Libya; land
boundary dispute with Algeria settled in 1993; Malta and Tunisia are
discussing the commercial exploitation of the continental shelf
between their countries, particularly for oil exploration
______________________________________________________________________

TURKEY

@Turkey:Geography

Location: Southwestern Asia (that part west of the Bosporus is
sometimes included with Europe), bordering the Black Sea, between
Bulgaria and Georgia, and bordering the Aegean Sea and the
Mediterranean Sea, between Greece and Syria

Geographic coordinates: 39 00 N, 35 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 780,580 sq km
land: 770,760 sq km
water: 9,820 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 2,627 km
border countries: Armenia 268 km, Azerbaijan 9 km, Bulgaria 240 km,
Georgia 252 km, Greece 206 km, Iran 499 km, Iraq 331 km, Syria 822 km

Coastline: 7,200 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: in Black Sea only - to the maritime boundary
agreed upon with the former USSR
territorial sea : 6 nm in the Aegean Sea,; 12 nm in the Black Sea and
in the Mediterranean Sea

Climate: temperate; hot, dry summers with mild, wet winters; harsher
in interior

Terrain: mostly mountains; narrow coastal plain; high central plateau
(Anatolia)

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
highest point: Mount Ararat 5,166 m

Natural resources: antimony, coal, chromium, mercury, copper, borate,
sulfur, iron ore

Land use:
arable land: 32%
permanent crops: 4%
permanent pastures: 16%
forests and woodland : 26%
other: 22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 36,740 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: very severe earthquakes, especially in northern
Turkey, along an arc extending from the Sea of Marmara to Lake Van

Environment - current issues: water pollution from dumping of
chemicals and detergents; air pollution, particularly in urban areas;
deforestation

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Antarctic Treaty, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
Biodiversity, Desertification, Environmental Modification

Geography - note: strategic location controlling the Turkish Straits
(Bosporus, Sea of Marmara, Dardanelles) that link Black and Aegean
Seas

@Turkey:People

Population: 63,528,225 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 31% (male 10,180,631; female 9,820,505)
15-64 years: 63% (male 20,326,169; female 19,648,647)
65 years and over : 6% (male 1,638,048; female 1,914,225) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.64% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 21.83 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.43 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.86 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 40.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 72.37 years
male : 69.95 years
female: 74.91 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.52 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Turk(s)
adjective: Turkish

Ethnic groups: Turkish 80%, Kurdish 20%

Religions: Muslim 99.8% (mostly Sunni), other 0.2% (Christian and
Jews)

Languages: Turkish (official), Kurdish, Arabic

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 82.3%
male: 91.7%
female: 72.4% (1995 est.)

@Turkey:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Turkey
conventional short form: Turkey
local long form: Turkiye Cumhuriyeti
local short form: Turkiye

Data code: TU

Government type: republican parliamentary democracy

National capital: Ankara

Administrative divisions: 79 provinces (iller, singular - il); Adana,
Adiyaman, Afyon, Agri, Aksaray, Amasya, Ankara, Antalya, Ardahan,
Artvin, Aydin, Balikesir, Bartin, Batman, Bayburt, Bilecik, Bingol,
Bitlis, Bolu, Burdur, Bursa, Canakkale, Cankiri, Corum, Denizli,
Diyarbakir, Edirne, Elazig, Erzincan, Erzurum, Eskisehir, Gazi Antep,
Giresun, Gumushane, Hakkari, Hatay, Icel, Iggdir, Isparta, Istanbul,
Izmir, Kahraman Maras, Karabuk, Karaman, Kars, Kastamonu, Kayseri,
Kilis, Kirikkale, Kirklareli, Kirsehir, Kocaeli, Konya, Kutahya,
Malatya, Manisa, Mardin, Mugla, Mus, Nevsehir, Nigde, Ordu, Rize,
Sakarya, Samsun, Sanli Urfa, Siirt, Sinop, Sirnak, Sivas, Tekirdag,
Tokat, Trabzon, Tunceli, Usak, Van, Yalova, Yozgat, Zonguldak
note: Karabuk, Kilis, and Yalova are three new Turkish provinces
mentioned in the 24 December 1995 election results; the Turkish press
has mentioned another province called Osmaniye

Independence: 29 October 1923 (successor state to the Ottoman Empire)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Declaration of the Republic, 29
October (1923)

Constitution: 7 November 1982

Legal system: derived from various continental legal systems; accepts
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Suleyman DEMIREL (since 16 May 1993)
head of government : Prime Minister Necmettin ERBAKAN (since 8 July
1996) and Deputy Prime Minister Tansu CILLER (since 8 July 1996)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
nomination of the prime minister
note: there is also a National Security Council that serves as an
advisory body to the president and the cabinet
elections: president elected by the National Assembly for a seven-year
term; election last held 16 May 1993 (next to be held NA 2000); prime
minister and deputy prime minister appointed by the president
election results : Suleyman DEMIREL elected president; percent of
National Assembly vote - 54%

Legislative branch: unicameral Grand National Assembly of Turkey or
Turkiye Buyuk Millet Meclisi (550 seats; members are elected to serve
five-year terms)
elections : last held 24 December 1995 (next to be held by December
2000)
election results: percent of vote by party - RP 21.38%, DYP 19.18%,
ANAP 19.65%, DSP 14.64%, CHP 10.71%, independent 0.48%; seats by party
- RP 158, DYP 135, ANAP 133, DSP 75, CHP 49; note - seats held by
various parties are subject to change due to defections, creation of
new parties, and ouster or death of sitting deputies; current seats by
party are as follows: RP 160, DYP 120, ANAP 127, DSP 68, CHP 49, BBP
7, DTP 7, independents 10, vacant 2

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, judges appointed by the
president; Court of Appeals, judges are elected by the Supreme Council
of Judges and Prosecutors

Political parties and leaders: True Path Party or DYP [Tansu CILLER];
Motherland Party or ANAP [Mesut YILMAZ]; Welfare Party or RP
[Necmettin ERBAKAN]; Democratic Left Party or DSP [Bulent ECEVIT];
Nationalist Action Party or MHP [Tugrul TURKES]; New Party or YP
[Yusuf Bozkurt OZAL]; Republican People's Party or CHP [Deniz BAYKAL];
Workers' Party or IP [Dogu PERINCEK]; Nation Party or MP [Aykut
EDIBALI]; Democrat Party or DP [Murat UZMAN]; Grand Unity Party or BBP
[Muhsin YAZICIOGLU]; Rebirth Party or YDP [Hasan Celal GUZEL];
People's Democracy Party or HADEP [Murat BOZLAK]; Main Path Party or
ANAYOL [Gurcan BASER]; Democratic Target Party or DHP [Abdulkadir
Yasar TURK]; Liberal Democratic Party or LDP [Besim TIBUK]; New
Democracy Movement or YDH [Huseyin ERGUN]; Labor Party or EP [Abdullah
Levent TUZER]; Democracy and Peace Party or DBP [Refik KARAKOC];
Freedom and Solidarity Party or ODP [Ufuk URAS]; Peace Party or BP
[Mehmet ETI]; Democratic Mass Party or DKP [Serafettin ELCI]; Democrat
Turkey Party or DTP [Husamettin CINDORUK]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Turkish Confederation of Labor
or Turk-Is [Bayram MERAL]; Confederation of Revolutionary Workers
Unions or DISK [Ridvan BUDAK]; Moral Rights Workers Union or Hak-Is
[Salim USLU]; Turkish Industrialists' and Businessmen's Association or
TUSIAD [Muharrem KAYHAN]; Turkish Union of Chambers of Commerce and
Commodity Exchanges or TOBB [Fuat MIRAS]; Turkish Confederation of
Employers' Unions or TISK [Refik BAYDUR]; Independent Industrialists
and Businessmen's Association or MUSIAD [Erol YARAR]

International organization participation: AsDB, BIS, BSEC, CCC, CE,
CERN (observer), EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, NACC, NATO, NEA,
OECD, OIC, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM,
UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UNRWA, UPU, WEU (associate), WFTU,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Nuzhet KANDEMIR
chancery : 1714 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 659-8200
consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Marc GROSSMAN
embassy : 110 Ataturk Boulevard, Ankara
mailing address: PSC 93, Box 5000, APO AE 09823
telephone: [90] (312) 468-6110
FAX: [90] (312) 467-0019
consulate(s) general: Istanbul
consulate(s): Adana

Flag description: red with a vertical white crescent (the closed
portion is toward the hoist side) and white five-pointed star centered
just outside the crescent opening

Economy

Economy - overview: Turkey's dynamic economy is a complex mix of
modern industry and commerce along with traditional village
agriculture and crafts. The economy has a strong and rapidly growing
private sector, yet the state still plays a major role in basic
industry, banking, transport, and communication. The current economic
situation is marked by strong growth coupled with worsening
imbalances. Real GDP expanded by about 7% in 1996 but inflation rose
to 80%, the current account deficit reached about 3% of GDP, and the
public sector fiscal deficit probably topped 10% of GDP, leading to
speculation that the country could be headed toward a repeat of its
1994 financial crisis. To some extent, Ankara is caught in a vicious
circle because half of all central government revenue in 1996 went to
pay interest on the national debt. The government that took office in
July 1996 - an unusual coalition of Prime Minister ERBAKAN's Islamic
Welfare Party and Deputy Prime Minister CILLER's conservative True
Path Party - is trying to solve the fiscal problem by greatly
accelerating Turkey's privatization program. It has proposed a
balanced budget for 1997, although this is widely regarded as over
optimistic because it is based on earning more privatization revenue
in one year than Turkey has earned over the last decade. Ankara is
trying to increase trade with other countries in the region but most
of Turkey's trade is still with OECD countries. Despite the
implementation in January 1996 of a customs union with the EU, foreign
direct investment in the country totaled only about half a billion
dollars, perhaps because potential investors were concerned about the
prospects for economic stability.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $379.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,100 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 15%
industry: 33%
services: 52% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 80% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 21.3 million
by occupation: agriculture 47%, services 33%, industry 20% (1995)
note: about 1.5 million Turks work abroad (1994)

Unemployment rate: 6.3% (April 1996); another 6.3% officially
considered underemployed

Budget:
revenues: $32.9 billion
expenditures: $50.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $2.8
billion (1996)

Industries: textiles, food processing, mining (coal, chromite, copper,
boron), steel, petroleum, construction, lumber, paper

Industrial production growth rate: 6.5% (1996)

Electricity - capacity: 20.86 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 86.3 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,206 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: tobacco, cotton, grain, olives, sugar beets,
pulses, citrus; livestock

Exports:
total value : $22 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: textiles and apparel 40%, steel products 9%, foodstuffs
20% (1995)
partners: Germany 23%, Russia 6%, US 7%, Italy 7% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $42 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : machinery 23%, fuels 13%, raw materials 11%, foodstuffs
7% (1995)
partners: Germany 16%, US 10%, Italy 9%, France 6%, UK 5% (1995)

Debt - external: $75.8 billion (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $195 million (1993)
note: aid for Gulf war efforts from coalition allies (1991), $4.1
billion; aid pledged for Turkish Defense Fund, $2.5 billion

Currency: Turkish lira (TL)

Exchange rates: Turkish liras (TL) per US$1 - 110,119 (January 1997),
81,405 (1996), 45,845.1 (1995), 29,608.7 (1994), 10,984.6 (1993),
6,872.4 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Turkey:Communications

Telephones: 14.3 million (1995 est.)

Telephone system: fair domestic and international systems
domestic: trunk microwave radio relay network; limited open-wire
network
international : 12 satellite earth stations - Intelsat (Atlantic
Ocean), Eutelsat, and Inmarsat (Indian and Atlantic Ocean regions); 3
submarine fiberoptic cables (1996)

Radio broadcast stations: national broadcast stations 36, regional
broadcast stations 108, local broadcast stations 1,058 (1996)

Radios: 9.4 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 15 national, 15 regional, 229 local

Televisions: 10.53 million (1993 est.)

@Turkey:Transportation

Railways:
total: 10,386 km
standard gauge : 10,386 km 1.435-m gauge (1,093 km electrified)

Highways:
total: 381,300 km
paved : 87,699 km (including 1,246 km of expressways)
unpaved: 293,601 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: about 1,200 km

Pipelines: crude oil 1,738 km; petroleum products 2,321 km; natural
gas 708 km

Ports and harbors: Gemlik, Hopa, Iskenderun, Istanbul, Izmir, Izmit,
Mersin, Samsun, Trabzon

Merchant marine:
total: 515 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,986,328 GRT/10,157,071
DWT
ships by type: bulk 155, cargo 232, chemical tanker 24, combination
bulk 7, combination ore/oil 11, container 6, liquefied gas tanker 4,
livestock carrier 1, oil tanker 43, passenger-cargo 1, refrigerated
cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 20, short-sea passenger 7, specialized
tanker 2
note: Turkey owns an additional 34 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
163,512 DWT operating under the registries of The Bahamas, Malta, and
Panama (1996 est.)

Airports: 104 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 94
over 3,047 m : 16
2,438 to 3,047 m: 20
1,524 to 2,437 m: 13
914 to 1,523 m: 17
under 914 m: 28 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 10
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 8 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Land Forces, Navy (includes Naval Air and Naval
Infantry), Air Force, Coast Guard, Gendarmerie

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 17,352,876 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 10,553,157 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 649,336 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $4.3 billion (1996); note -
figures do not include about $7 billion for the government's
counterinsurgency effort

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.5% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: complex maritime, air and territorial
disputes with Greece in Aegean Sea; Cyprus question with Greece; Hatay
question with Syria; dispute with downstream riparians (Syria and
Iraq) over water development plans for the Tigris and Euphrates
Rivers; traditional demands on former Armenian lands in Turkey have
subsided

Illicit drugs: major transit route for Southwest Asian heroin and
hashish to Western Europe and the US via air, land, and sea routes;
major Turkish, Iranian, and other international trafficking
organizations operate out of Istanbul; laboratories to convert
imported morphine base into heroin are in remote regions of Turkey as
well as near Istanbul; government maintains strict controls over areas
of legal opium poppy cultivation and output of poppy straw concentrate
______________________________________________________________________

TURKMENISTAN

@Turkmenistan:Geography

Location: Central Asia, bordering the Caspian Sea, between Iran and
Kazakstan

Geographic coordinates: 40 00 N, 60 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
total : 488,100 sq km
land: 488,100 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries:
total: 3,736 km
border countries: Afghanistan 744 km, Iran 992 km, Kazakstan 379 km,
Uzbekistan 1,621 km

Coastline: 0 km
note: Turkmenistan borders the Caspian Sea (1,768 km)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: subtropical desert

Terrain: flat-to-rolling sandy desert with dunes rising to mountains
in the south; low mountains along border with Iran; borders Caspian
Sea in west

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Sarygamysh Koli -110 m
highest point: Ayrybaba 3,139 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, coal, sulfur, salt

Land use:
arable land: 3%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 63%
forests and woodland: 8%
other: 26% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 13,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: contamination of soil and groundwater
with agricultural chemicals, pesticides; salinization, water-logging
of soil due to poor irrigation methods; Caspian Sea pollution;
diversion of a large share of the flow of the Amu Darya into
irrigation contributes to that river's inability to replenish the Aral
Sea; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous
Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked

@Turkmenistan:People

Population: 4,229,249 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 39% (male 840,168; female 812,573)
15-64 years : 57% (male 1,182,706; female 1,217,484)
65 years and over: 4% (male 66,451; female 109,867) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.61% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 26.61 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.65 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.82 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.6 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 72.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 61.51 years
male: 57.88 years
female: 65.31 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.31 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Turkmen(s)
adjective: Turkmen

Ethnic groups: Turkmen 77%, Uzbek 9.2%, Russian 6.7%, Kazak 2%, other
5.1% (1995)

Religions: Muslim 89%, Eastern Orthodox 9%, unknown 2%

Languages: Turkmen 72%, Russian 12%, Uzbek 9%, other 7%

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98%
male: 99%
female: 97% (1989 est.)

@Turkmenistan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Turkmenistan
local long form: none
local short form: Turkmenistan
former: Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: TX

Government type: republic

National capital: Ashgabat

Administrative divisions: 5 welayatlar (singular - welayat): Ahal
Welayaty (Ashgabat), Balkan Welayaty (Nebitdag), Dashhowuz Welayaty
(formerly Tashauz), Lebap Welayaty (Charjew), Mary Welayaty
note : administrative divisions have the same names as their
administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center name
following in parentheses)

Independence: 27 October 1991 (from the Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 October (1991)

Constitution: adopted 18 May 1992

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President and Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers
Saparmurat NIYAZOV (since 27 October 1990, when the first direct
presidential election occurred); note - the president is both the
chief of state and head of government
head of government: President and Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers
Saparmurat NIYAZOV; note - the president is both the chief of state
and head of government; Deputy Chairmen of the Cabinet of Ministers
Mukhamed ABALAKOV (since NA), Babamurad BAZAROV (since NA), Dadebaya
ANNAGELDIYEV (since NA), Orazgeldy AYDOGDYYEV (since NA), Hudaayguly
HALYKOV (since NA), Aleksandr DADONOV (since NA), Pirkuly ODEYEV
(since NA), Rejep SAPAROV (since NA), Boris SHIKHMURADOV (since NA),
Batyr SARJAYEV (since NA), Ilaman SHYKHYYEV (since NA)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
note: NIYAZOV has been asked by various local groups, most recently on
26 October 1995 at the annual elders meeting, to be "president for
life," but he has declined, saying the status would require an
amendment to the constitution
elections : president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 21 June 1992 (next to be held NA 2002; note -
extension of President NIYAZOV's term for an additional five years
overwhelmingly approved - 99.9% of total vote in favor - by national
referendum held 15 January 1994); deputy chairmen of the cabinet of
ministers are appointed by the president
election results: Saparmurad NIYAZOV elected president without
opposition; percent of vote - Saparmurad NIYAZOV 99.5%

Legislative branch: under the 1992 constitution, there are two
parliamentary bodies, a unicameral People's Council or Halk Maslahaty
(more than 100 seats, some of which are popularly elected and some are
appointed; meets infrequently) and a unicameral Assembly or Majlis (50
seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections : People's Council - no elections; Assembly - last held 11
December 1994 (next to be held NA 1999)
election results: Assembly - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - Democratic Party 45, other 5; note - all 50 preapproved by
President NIYAZOV

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party of Turkmenistan
[Saparmurat NIYAZOV]; Party for Democratic Development [Durdymurat
HOJA-MUHAMEDOV, chairman]; Agzybirlik [Nurberdy NURMAMEDOV,
cochairman, Hubayberdi HALLIYEV, cochairman]
note: formal opposition parties are outlawed; unofficial, small
opposition movements exist underground or in foreign countries

International organization participation: CCC, CIS, EBRD, ECE, ECO,
ESCAP, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, IDB, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat
(nonsignatory user), IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NACC, NAM, OIC,
OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
(observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Halil UGUR
chancery: 2207 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 588-1500
FAX : [1] (202) 588-0697

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Michael W. COTTER
embassy : 9 Pushkin Street, Ashgabat
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone: [9] (9312) 35-00-45, 35-00-46, 35-00-42, Tie Line [8]
962-0000
FAX: [9] (9312) 51-13-05

Flag description: green field, including a vertical stripe on the
hoist side, with a claret vertical stripe in between containing five
white, black, and orange carpet guls (an asymmetrical design used in
producing rugs) associated with five different tribes; a white
crescent and five white stars in the upper left corner to the right of
the carpet guls

Economy

Economy - overview: Turkmenistan is largely desert country with
nomadic cattle raising, intensive agriculture in irrigated oases, and
huge gas and oil resources. One-half of its irrigated land is planted
in cotton, making it the world's tenth largest producer. It also
possesses the world's fifth largest reserves of natural gas and
substantial oil resources. Until the end of 1993, Turkmenistan had
experienced less economic disruption than other former Soviet states
because its economy received a boost from higher prices for oil and
gas and a sharp increase in hard currency earnings. In 1994, Russia's
refusal to export Turkmen gas to hard currency markets and mounting
debts of its major customers in the former USSR for gas deliveries
contributed to a sharp fall in industrial production and caused the
budget to shift from a surplus to a slight deficit. The economy
recovered slightly in 1996, but high inflation continued. Furthermore,
with an authoritarian ex-communist regime in power and a tribally
based social structure, Turkmenistan has taken a cautious approach to
economic reform, hoping to use gas and cotton sales to sustain its
inefficient economy. In 1996, the government set in place a
stabilization program aimed at a unified and market-based exchange
rate, allocation of government credits by auction, and strict limits
on budget deficits. Privatization goals remain limited. Turkmenistan
is working hard to open new gas export channels through Iran and
Turkey to Europe, but these will take many years to realize.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $11.8 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: 0.1% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,840 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 16%
industry: 48%
services: 36% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 600% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 1.68 million (1995)
by occupation: agriculture and forestry 43%, industry and construction
20%, other 37% (1992)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: natural gas, oil, petroleum products, textiles, food
processing

Industrial production growth rate: 17.9% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 3.95 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 9.87 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,855 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: cotton, grain; livestock

Exports:
total value: $1.8 billion to states outside the FSU (1996 est.)
commodities: natural gas, cotton, petroleum products, electricity,
textiles, carpets
partners: FSU, Eastern Europe, Turkey, Argentina

Imports:
total value : $1.3 billion from states outside the FSU (1996 est.)
commodities: machinery and parts, grain and food, plastics and rubber,
consumer durables, textiles
partners: FSU, Germany, Poland, Czech Republic, Turkey

Debt - external: $400 million (of which $275 million to Russia) (1995
est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $10 million (1993)
note: commitments, $1,830 million ($375 million drawn), 1992-95

Currency: 1 Tukmen manat (TMM) = 100 tenesi; Turkmenistan introduced
its national currency on 1 November 1993

Exchange rates: manats per US$1 - 4,070 (January 1997), 2,400 (January
1996)
note: government established a unified rate in mid-January 1996

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Turkmenistan:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system: poorly developed
domestic: NA
international : linked by cable and microwave radio relay to other CIS
republics and to other countries by leased connections to the Moscow
international gateway switch; a new telephone link from Ashgabat to
Iran has been established; a new exchange in Ashgabat switches
international traffic through Turkey via Intelsat; satellite earth
stations - 1 Orbita and 1 Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: 1 state-owned radio broadcast station of NA
type

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 state-run

Televisions: NA

@Turkmenistan:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,187 km
broad gauge: 2,187 km 1.520-m gauge (1996 est.)

Highways:
total: 23,000 km
paved: 18,300 km (note - these roads are said to be hard-surfaced,
meaning that some are paved and some are all-weather gravel surfaced
unpaved: 4,700 km (1990 est.)

Waterways: the Amu Darya is an important inland waterway

Pipelines: crude oil 250 km; natural gas 4,400 km

Ports and harbors: Turkmenbashi (formerly Krasnowodsk)

Merchant marine:
total: 1 oil tanker ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,896 GRT/3,389
DWT (1996 est.)

Airports: 64 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 22
2,438 to 3,047 m: 13
1,524 to 2,437 m : 8
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 42
914 to 1,523 m: 7
under 914 m: 35 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Air and Air Defense, Republic Security Forces
(internal and border troops), National Guard

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,052,184 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 856,380 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 42,948 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 4.5 billion manats (1995); note
- conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the current
exchange rate could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet
determined among Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakstan, Russia, and Turkmenistan

Illicit drugs: limited illicit cultivator of opium poppy, mostly for
domestic consumption; limited government eradication program;
increasingly used as transshipment point for illicit drugs from
Southwest Asia to Russia and Western Europe; also a transshipment
point for acetic anhydride destined for Afghanistan
______________________________________________________________________

TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS

(dependent territory of the UK)

@Turks and Caicos Islands:Geography

Location: Caribbean, two island groups in the North Atlantic Ocean,
southeast of The Bahamas

Geographic coordinates: 21 45 N, 71 35 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 430 sq km
land: 430 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 389 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; marine; moderated by trade winds; sunny and
relatively dry

Terrain: low, flat limestone; extensive marshes and mangrove swamps

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Blue Hills 49 m

Natural resources: spiny lobster, conch

Land use:
arable land : 2%
permanent crops: NA%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: 98% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: frequent hurricanes

Environment - current issues: limited natural fresh water resources,
private cisterns collect rainwater

Environment - international agreements:
party to : NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: 30 islands (eight inhabited)

@Turks and Caicos Islands:People

Population: 14,631 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years : NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 1.88% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 12.3 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.14 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 11.64 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years : NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 12.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 75.42 years
male: 73.49 years
female: 77.1 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.78 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: none
adjective: none

Ethnic groups: black

Religions: Baptist 41.2%, Methodist 18.9%, Anglican 18.3%, Seventh-Day
Adventist 1.7%, other 19.9% (1980)

Languages: English (official)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
total population : 98%
male: 99%
female: 98% (1970 est.)

@Turks and Caicos Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Turks and Caicos Islands

Data code: TK

Dependency status: dependent territory of the UK

Government type: NA

National capital: Grand Turk

Administrative divisions: none (dependent territory of the UK)

Independence: none (dependent territory of the UK)

National holiday: Constitution Day, 30 August (1976)

Constitution: introduced 30 August 1976, suspended in 1986, restored
and revised 5 March 1988

Legal system: based on laws of England and Wales with a small number
adopted from Jamaica and The Bahamas

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1953),
represented by Governor John KELLY (since NA September 1996)
head of government: Chief Minister Derek H. TAYLOR (since 31 January
1995)
cabinet: Executive Council consists of three ex officio members and
five appointed by the governor from among the members of the
Legislative Council
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor appointed
by the queen; chief minister appointed by the governor

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council (19 seats, of which
13 are popularly elected; members serve three-year terms)
elections: last held 31 January 1995 (next to be held by NA December
1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - PDM
8, PNP 4, independent (Norman SAUNDERS) 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Progressive National Party (PNP),
Washington MISICK; People's Democratic Movement (PDM), Derek H.
TAYLOR; United Democratic Party (UDP), Wendal SWANN

International organization participation: Caricom (associate), CDB,
Interpol (subbureau)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (dependent territory of
the UK)

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
quadrant and the colonial shield centered on the outer half of the
flag; the shield is yellow and contains a conch shell, lobster, and
cactus

Economy

Economy - overview: The Turks and Caicos economy is based on tourism,
fishing, and offshore financial services. Most food for domestic
consumption is imported; there is some subsistence farming - mainly
corn, cassava, citrus, and beans - on the Caicos Islands. The tourism
sector expanded in 1995, posting a 10% increase in the first quarter
as compared to the same period in 1994. The US was the leading source
of tourists in 1995, accounting for upward of 70% of arrivals or about
60,000 visitors. Major sources of government revenue include fees from
offshore financial activities and customs receipts as the Islands rely
on imports for nearly all consumption and capital goods.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $84.5 million (1993 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2% (1993 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,400 (1993 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 4,848 (1990 est.)
by occupation: majority engaged in fishing and tourist industries;
some subsistence agriculture

Unemployment rate: 12% (1992)

Budget:
revenues: $31.9 million
expenditures: $30.4 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995)

Industries: fishing, tourism, offshore financial services

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: corn, beans; fish

Exports:
total value: $6.8 million (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: lobster, dried and fresh conch, conch shells
partners: US, UK

Imports:
total value: $42.8 million (1993)
commodities: food and beverages, tobacco, clothing, manufactures,
construction materials
partners: US, UK

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Turks and Caicos Islands:Communications

Telephones: 1,359 (1988 est.)

Telephone system: fair cable and radiotelephone services
domestic: NA
international : 2 submarine cables; satellite earth station - 1
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 7,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: television programs are available from
a cable network, and broadcasts from the Bahamas can be received in
the islands

Televisions: NA

@Turks and Caicos Islands:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 121 km
paved : 24 km
unpaved: 97 km

Ports and harbors: Grand Turk, Providenciales

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 7 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 5
1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
914 to 1,523 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 2
914 to 1,523 m : 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for South American narcotics
destined for the US
______________________________________________________________________

TUVALU

@Tuvalu:Geography

Location: Oceania, island group consisting of nine coral atolls in the
South Pacific Ocean, about one-half of the way from Hawaii to
Australia

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 S, 178 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total : 26 sq km
land: 26 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: 0.1 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 24 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by easterly trade winds (March to
November); westerly gales and heavy rain (November to March)

Terrain: very low-lying and narrow coral atolls

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 5 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other : 100% (1993 est.)
note: Tuvalu's nine coral atolls have enough soil to grow coconuts and
support subsistence agriculture

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: severe tropical storms are rare

Environment - current issues: since there are no streams or rivers and
groundwater is not potable, all water needs must be met by catchment
systems with storage facilities; beachhead erosion because of the use
of sand for building materials; excessive clearance of forest
undergrowth for use as fuel; damage to coral reefs from the spread of
the crown of thorns starfish

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Climate Change, Endangered Species, Marine Dumping, Ozone
Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Law of the Sea

@Tuvalu:People

Population: 10,297 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 36% (male 1,871; female 1,803)
15-64 years : 59% (male 2,903; female 3,226)
65 years and over: 5% (male 229; female 265) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.45% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.31 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.84 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.9 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.86 male(s)/female
total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 26.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 63.61 years
male: 62.44 years
female : 64.84 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.11 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Tuvaluan(s)
adjective: Tuvaluan

Ethnic groups: Polynesian 96%

Religions: Church of Tuvalu (Congregationalist) 97%, Seventh-Day
Adventist 1.4%, Baha'i 1%, other 0.6%

Languages: Tuvaluan, English

Literacy: NA; note - education is free and compulsory from ages 6
through 13

@Tuvalu:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : none
conventional short form: Tuvalu
former: Ellice Islands

Data code: TV

Government type: democracy; began debating republic status in 1992

National capital: Funafuti

Administrative divisions: none

Independence: 1 October 1978 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 October (1978)

Constitution: 1 October 1978

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II of the UK (since 6 February 1952),
represented by Governor General Manuella TULAGA (since NA June 1994)
head of government : Prime Minister Bikenibeu PAENIU (since 23
December 1996) and Deputy Prime Minister Ionatana IONATANA (since 23
December 1996)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the
recommendation of the prime minister
elections: the queen is a hereditary monarch; governor general
appointed by the queen on the recommendation of the prime minister;
prime minister and deputy prime minister elected by and from the
members of Parliament; election last held NA December 1996 (next to be
held by NA 1997)
election results: Bikenibeu PAENIU elected prime minister; percent of
Parliament vote - NA; Ionatana IONATANA elected deputy prime minister;
percent of Parliament vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Fale I Fono (12 seats -
two from each island with more than 1,000 inhabitants, one from all
the other inhabited islands; members elected by popular vote to serve
four-year terms)
elections: last held 25 November 1993 (next to be held by NA 1997)
election results : percent of vote - NA; seats - independents 12

Judicial branch: High Court; note - a chief justice visits twice a
year to preside over sessions of the High Court

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: AsDB, C (special), ESCAP,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), ITU, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UNESCO, UPU,
WHO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Tuvalu does not have an embassy
in the US

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Tuvalu; the US ambassador to Fiji is accredited to Tuvalu

Flag description: light blue with the flag of the UK in the upper
hoist-side quadrant; the outer half of the flag represents a map of
the country with nine yellow five-pointed stars symbolizing the nine
islands

Economy

Economy - overview: Tuvalu consists of a densely populated, scattered
group of nine coral atolls with poor soil. The country has no known
mineral resources and few exports. Subsistence farming and fishing are
the primary economic activities. The islands are too small and too
remote for development of a large-scale tourist industry. Government
revenues largely come from the sale of stamps and coins and worker
remittances. About 1,000 Tuvaluans work in Nauru in the phosphate
mining industry. Nauru has begun repatriating Tuvaluans, however, as
phosphate resources decline, which will present additional problems
for Tuvalu's already stretched economy. Substantial income is received
annually from an international trust fund established in 1987 by
Australia, NZ, and the UK and supported also by Japan and South Korea.
In an effort to reduce its dependence on foreign aid, the government
is pursuing public sector reforms, including privatization of some
government functions and personnel cuts of up to 7%.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $7.8 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 8.7% (1995)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $800 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.9% (1989)

Labor force: NA
by occupation : NA
note: people make a living mainly through exploitation of the sea,
reefs, and atolls and from wages sent home by those working abroad
(mostly workers in the phosphate industry and sailors)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $4.3 million
expenditures: $4.3 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1989 est.)

Industries: fishing, tourism, copra

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 2,600 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 3 million kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: coconuts; fish

Exports:
total value: $165,000 (f.o.b., 1989)
commodities: copra
partners: Fiji, Australia, NZ

Imports:
total value: $4.4 million (c.i.f., 1989)
commodities : food, animals, mineral fuels, machinery, manufactured
goods
partners: Fiji, Australia, NZ

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $1.725 million from Australia (FY96/97 est.); $1.7
million from NZ (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 Tuvaluan dollar ($T) or 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100
cents

Exchange rates: Tuvaluan dollars ($T) or Australian dollars ($A) per
US$1 - 1.2835 (January 1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995), 1.3667
(1994), 1.4704 (1993), 1.3600 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Tuvalu:Communications

Telephones: 130 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: radiotelephone communications between islands
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 4,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: NA

@Tuvalu:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 8 km (1995 est.)
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Funafuti, Nukufetau

Merchant marine:
total: 13 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 49,488 GRT/80,968 DWT
ships by type: cargo 7, chemical tanker 4, oil tanker 1,
passenger-cargo 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: no regular military forces; Police Force (consists
of full-time personnel 45, part-time personnel 16)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

UGANDA

@Uganda:Geography

Location: Eastern Africa, west of Kenya

Geographic coordinates: 1 00 N, 32 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 236,040 sq km
land: 199,710 sq km
water: 36,330 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Oregon

Land boundaries:
total: 2,698 km
border countries: Democratic Republic of the Congo 765 km, Kenya 933
km, Rwanda 169 km, Sudan 435 km, Tanzania 396 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; generally rainy with two dry seasons (December to
February, June to August); semiarid in northeast

Terrain: mostly plateau with rim of mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Lake Albert 621 m
highest point: Margherita (Mount Stanley) 5,110 m

Natural resources: copper, cobalt, limestone, salt

Land use:
arable land: 25%
permanent crops : 9%
permanent pastures: 9%
forests and woodland: 28%
other: 29% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 90 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: draining of wetlands for agricultural
use; deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; poaching is widespread

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of the
Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Desertification, Environmental Modification

Geography - note: landlocked

@Uganda:People

Population: 20,604,874 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 50% (male 5,126,249; female 5,092,583)
15-64 years : 48% (male 4,948,859; female 4,963,718)
65 years and over: 2% (male 234,351; female 239,114) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.14% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 45.08 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 20.98 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.66 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)
note : Uganda is host to refugees from a number of neighboring
countries, including Sudan, Rwanda, and Democratic Republic of the
Congo, formerly Zaire; probably in excess of 100,000 southern Sudanese
fled to Uganda during the past year; many of the 10,000 Rwandans who
took refuge in Uganda have returned home

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.98 male(s)/female
total population: 1 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 98.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 39.69 years
male: 39.3 years
female: 40.1 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.52 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Ugandan(s)
adjective: Ugandan

Ethnic groups: Baganda 17%, Karamojong 12%, Basogo 8%, Iteso 8%, Langi
6%, Rwanda 6%, Bagisu 5%, Acholi 4%, Lugbara 4%, Bunyoro 3%, Batobo
3%, non-African (European, Asian, Arab) 1%, other 23%

Religions: Roman Catholic 33%, Protestant 33%, Muslim 16%, indigenous
beliefs 18%

Languages: English (official), Luganda, Swahili, Bantu languages,
Nilotic languages

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 61.8%
male: 73.7%
female: 50.2% (1995 est.)

@Uganda:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Uganda
conventional short form: Uganda

Data code: UG

Government type: republic

National capital: Kampala

Administrative divisions: 39 districts; Apac, Arua, Bundibugyo,
Bushenyi, Gulu, Hoima, Iganga, Jinja, Kabale, Kabarole, Kalangala,
Kampala, Kamuli, Kapchorwa, Kasese, Kibale, Kiboga, Kisoro, Kitgum,
Kotido, Kumi, Lira, Luwero, Masaka, Masindi, Mbale, Mbarara, Moroto,
Moyo, Mpigi, Mubende, Mukono, Nebbi, Ntungamo, Pallisa, Rakai,
Rukungiri, Soroti, Tororo

Independence: 9 October 1962 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 9 October (1962)

Constitution: 8 October 1995; adopted by the interim, 284-member
Constituent Assembly, charged with debating the draft constitution
that had been proposed in May 1993; the Constituent Assembly was
dissolved on promulgation of the constitution in October 1995

Legal system: in 1995, the government restored the legal system to one
based on English common law and customary law and reinstituted a
normal judicial system; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI (since
seizing power 29 January 1986); note - the president is both chief of
state and head of government
head of government: President Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI (since
seizing power 29 January 1986); Prime Minister Kintu MUSOKE (since 18
November 1994) note - the president is both chief of state and head of
government; the prime minister assists the president in the
supervision of the cabinet
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president from among elected
legislators
elections: president elected by popular vote; election last held 9 May
1996 (next to be held by 31 May 2001); note - first popular election
for president since independence in 1962; prime minister appointed by
the president
election results: Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI elected president;
percent of vote - Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI 74%, Paul Kawanga
SSEMOGERERE 24%, Muhammad MAYANJA 2%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (276 members serve
five-year terms; 214 directly elected by universal suffrage, but 62
are nominated by legally established special interest groups and
approved by the president - women 39, army 10, disabled 5, youth 5,
labor 3)
elections: elections to the National Assembly (formerly the National
Resistance Council) took place on 27 June 1996 (next election to be
held in 2001);
election results: NA; note - election campaigning by party was not
permitted

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal; High Court

Political parties and leaders: only one political organization, the
National Resistance Movement or NRM [Dr. Samson KISEKKA, chairman] is
recognized; note - this is the party of President MUSEVENI; the
president maintains that the NRM is not a political party, but a
movement which claims the loyalty of all Ugandans
note: of the political parties which exist but are prohibited from
sponsoring candidates, the most important are the Ugandan People's
Congress or UPC [Milton OBOTE], Democratic Party or DP [Paul
SSEMOGERERE], and Conservative Party or CP [Joshua S. MAYANJA-NKANGI];
the new constitution confirms the suspension of political party
activity until 2000

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, EADB,
ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, IGADD, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO
(correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Edith Grace SSEMPALA
chancery: 5911 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011
telephone: [1] (202) 726-7100 through 7102, 0416
FAX: [1] (202) 726-1727

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador E. Michael SOUTHWICK
embassy : Parliament Avenue, Kampala
mailing address: P. O. Box 7007, Kampala
telephone: [256] (41) 259792, 259793, 259795
FAX: [256] (41) 259794

Flag description: six equal horizontal bands of black (top), yellow,
red, black, yellow, and red; a white disk is superimposed at the
center and depicts a red-crested crane (the national symbol) facing
the hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: Uganda has substantial natural resources,
including fertile soils, regular rainfall, and sizable mineral
deposits of copper and cobalt. Agriculture is the most important
sector of the economy, employing over 80% of the work force. Coffee is
the major export crop and accounts for the bulk of export revenues.
Since 1986 the government - with the support of foreign countries and
international agencies - has acted to rehabilitate and stabilize the
economy by undertaking currency reform, raising producer prices on
export crops, increasing prices of petroleum products, and improving
civil service wages. The policy changes are especially aimed at
dampening inflation and boosting production and export earnings. In
1990-94, the economy turned in a solid performance based on continued
investment in the rehabilitation of infrastructure, improved
incentives for production and exports, and gradually improving
domestic security. The economy again prospered in 1995 with rapid
growth, low inflation, growing foreign investment, a trimmed
bureaucracy, and the continued return of exiled Indian-Ugandan
entrepreneurs.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $16.8 billion (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7.1% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $900 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 55%
industry : 12%
services: 33% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 7.3% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 8.361 million (1993 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 86%, industry 4%, services 10% (1980 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $766.5 million
expenditures : $894.3 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY94/95 est.)

Industries: sugar, brewing, tobacco, cotton textiles, cement

Industrial production growth rate: 15% (1994)

Electricity - capacity: 155,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 611 million kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 31 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coffee, tea, cotton, tobacco, cassava
(tapioca), potatoes, corn, millet, pulses; beef, goat meat, milk,
poultry

Exports:
total value: $555 million (f.o.b., FY94/95)
commodities : gold, cotton, coffee, tea, corn, fish
partners: Spain 23%, France 14%, Germany 14%, Italy 10%, Netherlands
8%

Imports:
total value: $1.18 billion (c.i.f., FY94/95)
commodities: petroleum products, machinery, metals, transportation
equipment, cotton piece goods, food
partners: Kenya 26%, UK 12%, Japan 8%, Germany 8%, India 5.5%

Debt - external: $3.4 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Ugandan shilling (USh) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Ugandan shillings (USh) per US$1 - 1,030.3 (December
1996), 1,046.1 (1996), 968.9 (1995), 979.4 (1994), 1,195.0 (1993),
1,133.8 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Uganda:Communications

Telephones: 54,900 (1989 est.)

Telephone system: fair system
domestic: microwave radio relay and radiotelephone communications
stations
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 10, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 2.04 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 9 (1987 est.)

Televisions: 193,000 (1992 est.)

@Uganda:Transportation

Railways:
total: 1,241 km
narrow gauge: 1,241 km 1.000-m gauge
note : a program to rehabilitate the railroad is underway (1995)

Highways:
total: 27,000 km
paved: 1,800 km
unpaved: 25,200 km (of which about 4,800 km are all-weather roads)
(1990 est.)

Waterways: Lake Victoria, Lake Albert, Lake Kyoga, Lake George, Lake
Edward; Victoria Nile, Albert Nile

Ports and harbors: Entebbe, Jinja, Port Bell

Merchant marine:
total: 3 roll-on/roll-off cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
5,091 GRT/5,943 DWT (1996 est.)

Airports: 21 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 10
over 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m : 1
under 914 m: 7 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 11
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m : 5
914 to 1,523 m: 5 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Wing

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 4,466,851 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 2,423,556 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $56 million (FY93/94)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.7% (FY93/94)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

UKRAINE

@Ukraine:Geography

Location: Eastern Europe, bordering the Black Sea, between Poland and
Russia

Geographic coordinates: 49 00 N, 32 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
total: 603,700 sq km
land: 603,700 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 4,558 km
border countries: Belarus 891 km, Hungary 103 km, Moldova 939 km,
Poland 428 km, Romania (southwest) 169 km, Romania (west) 362 km,
Russia 1,576 km, Slovakia 90 km

Coastline: 2,782 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: temperate continental; Mediterranean only on the southern
Crimean coast; precipitation disproportionately distributed, highest
in west and north, lesser in east and southeast; winters vary from
cool along the Black Sea to cold farther inland; summers are warm
across the greater part of the country, hot in the south

Terrain: most of Ukraine consists of fertile plains (steppes) and
plateaus, mountains being found only in the west (the Carpathians),
and in the Crimean Peninsula in the extreme south

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Black Sea 0 m
highest point: Hora Hoverla 2,061 m

Natural resources: iron ore, coal, manganese, natural gas, oil, salt,
sulfur, graphite, titanium, magnesium, kaolin, nickel, mercury, timber

Land use:
arable land: 58%
permanent crops: 2%
permanent pastures : 13%
forests and woodland: 18%
other: 9% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 26,050 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: inadequate supplies of potable water;
air and water pollution; deforestation; radiation contamination in the
northeast from 1986 accident at Chornobyl' Nuclear Power Plant

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 85, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Environmental
Modification, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Climate Change, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: strategic position at the crossroads between Europe
and Asia; second-largest country in Europe

@Ukraine:People

Population: 50,447,719 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 19% (male 5,000,518; female 4,802,193)
15-64 years: 67% (male 16,087,147; female 17,429,313)
65 years and over: 14% (male 2,308,354; female 4,820,194) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: -0.65% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 9.55 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 16.26 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.23 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.48 male(s)/female
total population: 0.86 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 21.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 65.77 years
male: 59.93 years
female: 71.91 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.36 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Ukrainian(s)
adjective: Ukrainian

Ethnic groups: Ukrainian 73%, Russian 22%, Jewish 1%, other 4%

Religions: Ukrainian Orthodox - Moscow Patriarchate, Ukrainian
Orthodox - Kiev Patriarchate, Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox,
Ukrainian Catholic (Uniate), Protestant, Jewish

Languages: Ukrainian, Russian, Romanian, Polish, Hungarian

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 98%
male: 100%
female: 97% (1989 est.)

@Ukraine:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Ukraine
local long form: none
local short form: Ukrayina
former: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: UP

Government type: republic

National capital: Kiev (Kyyiv)

Administrative divisions: 24 oblasti (singular - oblast'), 1
autonomous republic* (avtomnaya respublika), and 2 municipalities
(mista, singular - misto) with oblast status**; Cherkas'ka (Cherkasy),
Chernihivs'ka (Chernihiv), Chernivets'ka (Chernivtsi),
Dnipropetrovs'ka (Dnipropetrovs'k), Donets'ka (Donets'k),
Ivano-Frankivs'ka (Ivano-Frankivs'k), Kharkivs'ka (Kharkiv),
Khersons'ka (Kherson), Khmel'nyts'ka (Khmel'nyts'kyy), Kirovohrads'ka
(Kirovohrad), Kyyiv**, Kyyivs'ka (Kiev), Luhans'ka (Luhans'k),
L'vivs'ka (L'viv), Mykolayivs'ka (Mykolayiv), Odes'ka (Odesa),
Poltavs'ka (Poltava), Avtonomna Respublika Krym* (Simferopol'),
Rivnens'ka (Rivne), Sevastopol'**, Sums'ka (Sumy), Ternopil's'ka
(Ternopil'), Vinnyts'ka (Vinnytsya), Volyns'ka (Luts'k), Zakarpats'ka
(Uzhhorod), Zaporiz'ka (Zaporizhzhya), Zhytomyrs'ka (Zhytomyr)
note: oblasts have the administrative center name following in
parentheses

Independence: 1 December 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 24 August (1991)

Constitution: adopted 28 June 1996

Legal system: based on civil law system; judicial review of
legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Leonid D. KUCHMA (since 19 July 1994)
head of government: Prime Minister Pavlo LAZARENKO (since NA May
1996), First Deputy Prime Minister Vasyl DURDYNETS (since NA July
1996), and three deputy prime ministers
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president and approved
by the Supreme Council
note: there is also a National Security and Defense Council or NSDC
originally created in 1992 as the National Security Council, but
significantly revamped and strengthened under President KUCHMA; the
NSDC includes the president, prime minister, ministers of defense,
internal affairs, foreign relations, and chairman of the security
service; the NSC staff is tasked with developing national security
policy on domestic and international matters and advising the
president; a Presidential Administration that helps draft presidential
edicts and provides policy support to the president; and a Council of
Regions that serves as an advisory body created by President KUCHMA in
September 1994 that includes the Kiev and Sevastopol City Supreme
Councils and the chairmen of Oblast
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 26 June and 10 July 1994 (next to be held NA 1999);
prime minister and deputy prime ministers appointed by the president
and approved by the Supreme Council
election results: Leonid D. KUCHMA elected president; percent of vote
- Leonid KUCHMA 52.15%, Leonid KRAVCHUK 45.06%

Legislative branch: unicameral Supreme Council or Verkhovna Rada (450
seats; members are elected by popular vote from one-member districts
by complex procedures to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 27 March 1994 with repeat elections continuing
through December 1998 to fill empty seats (next to be held NA March
1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
Communists 91, Rukh 22, Agrarians 18, Socialists 15, Republicans 11,
Congress of Ukrainian Nationalists 5, Labor 5, Party of Democratic
Revival 4, Democrats 2, Social Democrats 2, Civil Congress 2,
Conservative Republicans 1, Party of Economic Revival of Crimea 1,
Christian Democrats 1, independents 225; note - most recent repeat
election held in April 1996 filling 422 of 450 seats as follows:
independents 238, Communist 95, Rukh 22, Agrarians 18, Socialist 15,
Republicans 11, Congress of Ukrainian Nationalists 5, Labor 5, Party
of Democratic Revival 4, Democratic Party of Ukraine 2, Social
Democrats 2, Civil Congress 2, Conservative Republicans 1, Party of
Economic Revival of Crimea 1, Christian Democrats 1, vacant 28 (in
February 1997 there were 35 vacant seats)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Constitutional Court

Political parties and leaders: Green Party of Ukraine [Vitaliy
KONONOV, leader]; Liberal Party of Ukraine; Liberal Democratic Party
of Ukraine [Volodymyr KLYMCHUK, chairman]; Democratic Party of Ukraine
[Volodymyr Oleksandrovych YAVORIVSKIY, chairman]; People's Party of
Ukraine; Peasants' Party of Ukraine; Party of Democratic Rebirth or
Revival of Ukraine [Volodymyr FILENKO, chairman]; Social Democratic
Party of Ukraine [Vasyl ONOPENKO, chairman]; Socialist Party of
Ukraine [Oleksandr MOROZ, chairman]; Ukrainian Christian Democratic
Party [Vitaliy ZHURAVSKYY, chairman]; Ukrainian Conservative
Republican Party [Stepan KHMARA, chairman]; Ukrainian Labor Party
[Valentyn LANDYK, chairman]; Ukrainian Party of Justice [Yuriy ZUBKO,
chairman]; Ukrainian Peasants' Democratic Party [Serhiy PLACHINDA,
chairman]; Ukrainian Republican Party [Bondan YAROSHPSKYY, chairman];
Ukrainian National Conservative Party; Ukrainian People's Movement for
Restructuring or Rukh [Vyacheslav CHORNOVIL, chairman]; Ukrainian
Communist Party [Petr SYMONENKO]; Agrarian Party; Congress of
Ukrainian Nationalists [Slava STESTKO]; Civil Congress [O. BAZYLUK];
Party of Economic Revival of Crimea; Progressive Socialist Party of
Ukraine [Nataliya VITRENKO and Volodymyr MARCHENKO, leaders]; People's
Democratic Party [Anatoliy MATVIYENKO, chairman]

Political pressure groups and leaders: New Ukraine (Nova Ukrayina);
Congress of National Democratic Forces

International organization participation: BSEC, CCC, CE, CEI, CIS,
EBRD, ECE, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Inmarsat, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer),
ISO, ITU, NACC, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNMOT, UNPREDEP, UNTAES, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Yuriy Mikolayevych SHCHERBAK
chancery: 3350 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone: [1] (202) 333-0606
FAX: [1] (202) 333-0817
consulate(s) general : Chicago and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador William Green MILLER
embassy: 10 Yuria Kotsyubinskovo, 254053 Kiev 53
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone: [380] (44) 244-7345
FAX: [380] (44) 244-7350

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of azure (top) and golden
yellow represent grainfields under a blue sky

Economy

Economy - overview: After Russia, the Ukrainian republic was far and
away the most important economic component of the former Soviet Union,
producing about four times the output of the next-ranking republic.
Its fertile black soil generated more than one-fourth of Soviet
agricultural output, and its farms provided substantial quantities of
meat, milk, grain, and vegetables to other republics. Likewise, its
diversified heavy industry supplied equipment and raw materials to
industrial and mining sites in other regions of the former USSR.
Shortly after the implosion of the USSR in December 1991, the
Ukrainian Government liberalized most prices and erected a legal
framework for privatization, but widespread resistance to reform
within the government and the legislature soon stalled reform efforts
and led to some backtracking. Output in 1992-96 fell precipitously to
less than half the 1991 level. Loose monetary policies pushed
inflation to hyperinflationary levels in late 1993. Since his election
in July 1994, President KUCHMA has pushed a comprehensive economic
reform program, maintained financial discipline, and tried to remove
almost all remaining controls over prices and foreign trade.
Implementation of KUCHMA's economic agenda is encountering
considerable resistance from parliament, entrenched bureaucrats, and
industrial interests. However, if KUCHMA succeeds in implementing
aggressive market reforms during 1997, the economy should reverse its
downward trend, with real growth occurring by late 1997 and into 1998.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $161.1 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: -10% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,170 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 14%
industry: 45%
services: 41% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 40% (yearend 1996)

Labor force:
total: 23 million (January 1996)
by occupation: industry and construction 33%, agriculture and forestry
21%, health, education, and culture 16%, trade and distribution 7%,
transport and communication 7%, other 16% (1992)

Unemployment rate: 1% officially registered; large number of
unregistered or underemployed workers (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: coal, electric power, ferrous and nonferrous metals,
machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, food-processing
(especially sugar)

Industrial production growth rate: -5.1% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 54.24 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 181 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 3,487 kWh (1996)

Agriculture - products: grain, sugar beets, vegetables; meat, milk

Exports:
total value : $18.6 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: coal, electric power, ferrous and nonferrous metals,
chemicals, machinery and transport equipment, grain, meat
partners: Russia, Belarus, US, Germany, China (1995)

Imports:
total value : $19.4 billion (1996 est.)
commodities: energy, machinery and parts, transportation equipment,
chemicals, textiles
partners: Russia, Turkmenistan, Belarus, Germany, Switzerland

Debt - external: $8.8 billion (including $4.5 billion to Russia) (late
1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $220 million (1993)
note : commitments, 1992-95, $4.5 billion ($4.1 billion drawn)

Currency: on 2 September 1996, Ukraine introduced the long-awaited
hryvnia (plural hryvni) as its national currency, replacing the
karbovanets (in circulation since 12 November 1992) at a rate of
100,000 karbovantsi to 1 hryvnia

Exchange rates: hryvnia per US$1 - 1.8592 (November 1996), 1.4731
(1995), 0.3275 (1994), 0.0453 (1993)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Ukraine:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system: system is unsatisfactory both for business and for
personal use; 3.56 million applications for telephones had not been
satisfied as of January 1991; electronic mail services have been
established in Kiev, Odessa, and Luhans'k by Sprint
domestic: an NMT-450 analog cellular telephone network operates in
Kiev (Kyyiv) and allows direct dialing of international calls through
Kiev's digital exchange
international: calls to other CIS countries are carried by landline or
microwave radio relay; calls to 167 other countries are carried by
satellite or by the 150 leased lines through the Moscow international
gateway switch; satellite earth stations - NA Intelsat, 1 Inmarsat
(Atlantic and Indian Ocean Regions), and NA Intersputnik

Radio broadcast stations: 2 radio broadcast stations of NA type

Radios: 15 million (1990)

Television broadcast stations: at least 2

Televisions: 17.3 million (1992)

@Ukraine:Transportation

Railways:
total : 23,350 km
broad gauge: 23,350 km 1.524-m gauge (8,600 km electrified)

Highways:
total: 172,257 km
paved: 163,300 km (including 1,875 km of expressways); note - these
roads are said to be hard-surfaced, meaning that some are paved and
some are all-weather gravel surfaced
unpaved: 8,957 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 4,400 km navigable waterways, of which 1,672 km were on the
Pryp''yat' and Dnistr (1990)

Pipelines: crude oil 2,010 km; petroleum products 1,920 km; natural
gas 7,800 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Berdyans'k, Illichivs'k, Izmayil, Kerch, Kherson,
Kiev (Kyyiv), Mariupol', Mykolayiv, Odesa, Reni

Merchant marine:
total : 301 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,507,463 GRT/3,156,522
DWT
ships by type: barge carrier 5, bulk 21, cargo 192, chemical tanker 2,
combination bulk 1, container 10, multifunction large-load carrier 3,
oil tanker 23, passenger 7, passenger-cargo 4, railcar carrier 2,
refrigerated cargo 5, roll-on/roll-off cargo 20, short-sea passenger 6
note : Ukraine owns an additional 61 ships (1,000 GRT or over)
totaling 1,283,735 DWT operating under the registries of The Bahamas,
Cyprus, Liberia, Malta, Panama, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
(1996 est.)

Airports: 706 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 163
over 3,047 m: 14
2,438 to 3,047 m: 55
1,524 to 2,437 m : 34
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m : 57 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 543
over 3,047 m: 7
2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
1,524 to 2,437 m : 16
914 to 1,523 m: 37
under 914 m: 476 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Internal
Troops, National Guard, Border Troops

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 12,408,912 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 9,720,351 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 366,086 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 1.35 billion hryvni (Ukrainian
Government's forecast for 1996); note - conversion of defense
expenditures into US dollars using the current exchange rate could
produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: less than 2% (Ukrainian
Government's forecast for 1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: dispute with Romania over continental shelf
of the Black Sea under which significant gas and oil deposits may
exist; agreed to two-year negotiating period, after which either party
can refer dispute to the International Court of Justice; potential
dispute with Russia over Crimea; has made no territorial claim in
Antarctica (but has reserved the right to do so) and does not
recognize the claims of any other nation

Illicit drugs: limited cultivation of cannabis and opium poppy, mostly
for CIS consumption; limited government eradication program; used as
transshipment point for opiates and other illicit drugs to Western
Europe and Russia
______________________________________________________________________

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

@United Arab Emirates:Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Gulf of Oman and the Persian
Gulf, between Oman and Saudi Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 24 00 N, 54 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 82,880 sq km
land: 82,880 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maine

Land boundaries:
total: 867 km
border countries: Oman 410 km, Saudi Arabia 457 km

Coastline: 1,318 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: desert; cooler in eastern mountains

Terrain: flat, barren coastal plain merging into rolling sand dunes of
vast desert wasteland; mountains in east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
highest point: Jabal Yibir 1,527 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 2%
forests and woodland : 0%
other: 98% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 50 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent sand and dust storms

Environment - current issues: lack of natural freshwater resources
being overcome by desalination plants; desertification; beach
pollution from oil spills

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine
Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified : Biodiversity, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: strategic location along southern approaches to
Strait of Hormuz, a vital transit point for world crude oil

@United Arab Emirates:People

Population: 2,262,309 (July 1997 est.)
note: includes 1,546,547 non-nationals (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 32% (male 375,709; female 360,199)
15-64 years: 66% (male 975,868; female 511,692)
65 years and over: 2% (male 25,869; female 12,972) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.79% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 18.46 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 3.01 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.48 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.91 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 1.99 male(s)/female
total population: 1.56 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 15.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 74.64 years
male: 73.18 years
female : 76.17 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.62 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Emiri(s)
adjective: Emiri

Ethnic groups: Emiri 19%, other Arab and Iranian 23%, South Asian 50%,
other expatriates (includes Westerners and East Asians) 8% (1982)
note: less than 20% are UAE citizens (1982)

Religions: Muslim 96% (Shi'a 16%), Christian, Hindu, and other 4%

Languages: Arabic (official), Persian, English, Hindi, Urdu

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write but definition of
literacy not available
total population: 79.2%
male : 78.9%
female: 79.8% (1995 est.)

@United Arab Emirates:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : United Arab Emirates
conventional short form: none
local long form: Al Imarat al Arabiyah al Muttahidah
local short form: none
former: Trucial States
abbreviation : UAE

Data code: TC

Government type: federation with specified powers delegated to the UAE
federal government and other powers reserved to member emirates

National capital: Abu Dhabi

Administrative divisions: 7 emirates (imarat, singular - imarah); Abu
Zaby (Abu Dhabi), 'Ajman, Al Fujayrah, Ash Shariqah (Sharjah), Dubayy
(Dubai), Ra's al Khaymah, Umm al Qaywayn

Independence: 2 December 1971 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 2 December (1971)

Constitution: 2 December 1971 (made permanent in 1996)

Legal system: federal court system introduced in 1971; all emirates
except Dubayy (Dubai) and Ras al Khaymah have joined the federal
system; all emirates have secular and Islamic law for civil, criminal,
and high courts

Suffrage: none

Executive branch:
chief of state: President ZAYID bin Sultan Al Nuhayyan (since 2
December 1971), ruler of Abu Zaby (Abu Dhabi) (since 6 August 1966)
and Vice President MAKTUM bin Rashid al-Maktum (since 8 October 1990),
ruler of Dubayy (Dubai)
head of government: Prime Minister MAKTUM bin Rashid al-Maktum (since
8 October 1990), ruler of Dubayy (Dubai) and Deputy Prime Minister
SULTAN bin Zayid Al Nuhayyan (since 20 November 1990)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
note : there is also a Supreme Council of Rulers which is composed of
the seven emirate rulers; the council is the highest constitutional
authority in the UAE; establishes general policies and sanctions
federal legislation, Abu Zaby (Abu Dhabi) and Dubayy (Dubai) rulers
have effective veto power; meets four times a year
elections : president and vice president elected by the Supreme
Council of Rulers (a group of seven electors) for five-year terms;
election last held NA October 1996 (next to be held NA 2001); prime
minister and deputy prime minister appointed by the president
election results: ZAYID bin Sultan Al Nuhayyan reelected president;
percent of Supreme Council of Rulers vote - NA, but believed to be
unanimous; MAKTUM bin Rashid al-Maktum elected vice president; percent
of Supreme Council of Rulers vote - NA, but believed to be unanimous

Legislative branch: unicameral Federal National Council or Majlis
al-Ittihad al-Watani (40 seats; members appointed by the rulers of the
constituent states to serve two-year terms)
elections: none
note: reviews legislation, but cannot change or veto

Judicial branch: Union Supreme Court, judges appointed by the
president

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF,
CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol,
IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPEC, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Muhammad bin Husayn al-SHAALI
chancery: Suite 600, 3000 K Street NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone: [1] (202) 338-6500

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador David C. LITT
embassy: Al-Sudan Street, Abu Dhabi
mailing address: P. O. Box 4009, Abu Dhabi; American Embassy Abu
Dhabi, Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-6010 (pouch); note -
work week is Saturday through Wednesday
telephone: [971] (2) 436691, 436692
FAX: [971] (2) 435441
consulate(s) general: Dubai

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white,
and black with a thicker vertical red band on the hoist side

Economy

Economy - overview: The UAE has an open economy with one of the
world's highest incomes per capita and with a sizable annual trade
surplus. Its wealth is based on oil and gas output (about 33% of GDP),
and the fortunes of the economy fluctuate with the prices of those
commodities. Since 1973, the UAE has undergone a profound
transformation from an impoverished region of small desert
principalities to a modern state with a high standard of living. At
present levels of production, crude oil reserves should last for over
100 years. The UAE Government is encouraging increased privatization
within the economy, and industrial development is expected to pick up
in 1997.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $72.9 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $23,800 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 2%
industry: 43%
services : 55% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 5.2% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 794,400 (1993 est.)
by occupation: industry and commerce 56%, services 38%, agriculture 6%
(1990 est.)
note: 75.73% of the population in the 15-64 age group is non-national
(July 1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $5.1 billion
expenditures: $5.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: petroleum, fishing, petrochemicals, construction
materials, some boat building, handicrafts, pearling

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 5.29 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 17.74 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 5,724 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: dates, vegetables, watermelons; poultry, eggs,
dairy products; fish

Exports:
total value: $31.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: crude oil 66%, natural gas, reexports, dried fish, dates
partners: Japan 38%, India 6%, South Korea 6%, Singapore 5%, Iran 4%,
Oman 4% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $22.3 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: manufactured goods, machinery and transport equipment,
food
partners : Japan 9%, US 8%, UK 8%, Italy 7%, Germany 7%, South Korea
5% (1995)

Debt - external: $14 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 Emirian dirham (Dh) = 100 fils

Exchange rates: Emirian dirhams (Dh) per US$1 - 3.6710 (fixed rate)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@United Arab Emirates:Communications

Telephones: 677,793 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: modern system consisting of microwave radio relay
and coaxial cable; key centers are Abu Dhabi and Dubai
domestic: microwave radio relay and coaxial cable
international: satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
and 2 Indian Ocean) and 1 Arabsat; submarine cables to Qatar, Bahrain,
India, and Pakistan; tropospheric scatter to Bahrain; microwave radio
relay to Saudi Arabia

Radio broadcast stations: AM 8, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 545,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 12

Televisions: 170,000 (1993 est.)

@United Arab Emirates:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 4,750 km
paved: 4,750 km
unpaved : 0 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 830 km; natural gas, including natural gas
liquids, 870 km

Ports and harbors: 'Ajman, Al Fujayrah, Das Island, Khawr Fakkan,
Mina' Jabal 'Ali, Mina' Khalid, Mina' Rashid, Mina' Saqr, Mina' Zayid,
Umm al Qaywayn

Merchant marine:
total: 60 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,128,495 GRT/1,955,344
DWT
ships by type: bulk 3, cargo 18, chemical tanker 3, container 6,
liquefied gas tanker 1, livestock carrier 1, oil tanker 22,
refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 5 (1996 est.)

Airports: 36 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 27
over 3,047 m : 9
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 3
under 914 m: 10 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 9
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 7 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary (includes
Federal Police Force)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 790,838 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 424,962 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 20,584 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.59 billion (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 4.3% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: location and status of boundary with Saudi
Arabia is not final, de facto boundary reflects 1974 agreement; no
defined boundary with most of Oman, but Administrative Line in far
north; claims two islands in the Persian Gulf occupied by Iran: Lesser
Tunb (called Tunb as Sughra in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Tonb-e
Kuchek in Persian by Iran) and Greater Tunb (called Tunb al Kubra in
Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Bozorg in Persian by Iran); claims
island in the Persian Gulf jointly administered with Iran (called Abu
Musa in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Abu Musa in Persian by Iran) -
over which Iran has taken steps to exert unilateral control since
1992, including access restrictions and a military build-up on the
island; the UAE has garnered significant diplomatic support in the
region in protesting these Iranian actions

Illicit drugs: growing role as heroin transshipment and
money-laundering center due to its proximity to southwest Asian
producing countries and the bustling free trade zone in Dubai
______________________________________________________________________

UNITED KINGDOM

@United Kingdom:Geography

Location: Western Europe, islands including the northern one-sixth of
the island of Ireland between the North Atlantic Ocean and the North
Sea, northwest of France

Geographic coordinates: 54 00 N, 2 00 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
total: 244,820 sq km
land: 241,590 sq km
water : 3,230 sq km
note: includes Rockall and Shetland Islands

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Oregon

Land boundaries:
total: 360 km
border countries : Ireland 360 km

Coastline: 12,429 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf : as defined in continental shelf orders or in
accordance with agreed upon boundaries
exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; moderated by prevailing southwest winds over the
North Atlantic Current; more than one-half of the days are overcast

Terrain: mostly rugged hills and low mountains; level to rolling
plains in east and southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : Fenland -4 m
highest point: Ben Nevis 1,343 m

Natural resources: coal, petroleum, natural gas, tin, limestone, iron
ore, salt, clay, chalk, gypsum, lead, silica

Land use:
arable land: 25%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 46%
forests and woodland : 10%
other: 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,080 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: sulfur dioxide emissions from power
plants contribute to air pollution; some rivers polluted by
agricultural wastes and coastal waters polluted because of large-scale
disposal of sewage at sea

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: lies near vital North Atlantic sea lanes; only 35 km
from France and now linked by tunnel under the English Channel;
because of heavily indented coastline, no location is more than 125 km
from tidal waters

@United Kingdom:People

Population: 57,591,677 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 19% (male 5,647,549; female 5,386,750)
15-64 years : 65% (male 18,532,243; female 18,757,168)
65 years and over: 16% (male 3,808,399; female 5,459,568) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.24% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 11.83 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 10.77 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.32 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.25 years
male: 74.67 years
female: 79.96 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.65 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Briton(s), British (collective plural)
adjective: British

Ethnic groups: English 81.5%, Scottish 9.6%, Irish 2.4%, Welsh 1.9%,
Ulster 1.8%, West Indian, Indian, Pakistani, and other 2.8%

Religions: Anglican 27 million, Roman Catholic 9 million, Muslim 1
million, Presbyterian 800,000, Methodist 760,000, Sikh 400,000, Hindu
350,000, Jewish 300,000 (1991 est.)
note: the UK does not include a question on religion in its census

Languages: English, Welsh (about 26% of the population of Wales),
Scottish form of Gaelic (about 60,000 in Scotland)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over has completed five or more years of
schooling
total population: 99% (1978 est.)
male: NA%
female : NA%

@United Kingdom:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
conventional short form: United Kingdom
abbreviation: UK

Data code: UK

Government type: constitutional monarchy

National capital: London

Administrative divisions: 47 counties, 7 metropolitan counties, 26
districts, 9 regions, and 3 islands areas; England - 39 counties, 7
metropolitan counties*; Avon, Bedford, Berkshire, Buckingham,
Cambridge, Cheshire, Cleveland, Cornwall, Cumbria, Derby, Devon,
Dorset, Durham, East Sussex, Essex, Gloucester, Greater London*,
Greater Manchester*, Hampshire, Hereford and Worcester, Hertford,
Humberside, Isle of Wight, Kent, Lancashire, Leicester, Lincoln,
Merseyside*, Norfolk, Northampton, Northumberland, North Yorkshire,
Nottingham, Oxford, Shropshire, Somerset, South Yorkshire*, Stafford,
Suffolk, Surrey, Tyne and Wear*, Warwick, West Midlands*, West Sussex,
West Yorkshire*, Wiltshire; Northern Ireland - 26 districts; Antrim,
Ards, Armagh, Ballymena, Ballymoney, Banbridge, Belfast,
Carrickfergus, Castlereagh, Coleraine, Cookstown, Craigavon, Down,
Dungannon, Fermanagh, Larne, Limavady, Lisburn, Londonderry,
Magherafelt, Moyle, Newry and Mourne, Newtownabbey, North Down, Omagh,
Strabane; Scotland - 9 regions, 3 islands areas*; Borders, Central,
Dumfries and Galloway, Fife, Grampian, Highland, Lothian, Orkney*,
Shetland*, Strathclyde, Tayside, Western Isles*; Wales - 8 counties;
Clwyd, Dyfed, Gwent, Gwynedd, Mid Glamorgan, Powys, South Glamorgan,
West Glamorgan

Dependent areas: Anguilla, Bermuda, British Indian Ocean Territory,
British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Gibraltar,
Guernsey, Hong Kong (scheduled to become a Special Administrative
Region of China on 1 July 1997), Jersey, Isle of Man, Montserrat,
Pitcairn Islands, Saint Helena, South Georgia and the South Sandwich
Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands

Independence: 1 January 1801 (United Kingdom established)

National holiday: Celebration of the Birthday of the Queen (second
Saturday in June)

Constitution: unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and
practice

Legal system: common law tradition with early Roman and modern
continental influences; no judicial review of Acts of Parliament;
accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952); Heir
Apparent Prince CHARLES (son of the queen, born 14 November 1948)
head of government: Prime Minister Tony BLAIR (since 2 May 1997)
cabinet: Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the prime minister
elections: none; the queen is a hereditary monarch; prime minister is
the leader of the majority party in the House of Commons and must have
the consent of the monarch

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of House of Lords
(1,200 seats; four-fifths of the members are hereditary peers, two
archbishops, 24 other senior bishops, serving and retired Lords of
Appeal in Ordinary, other life peers, Scottish peers) and House of
Commons (659 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms)
elections: House of Lords - no elections; House of Commons - last held
1 May 1997 (next to be held by NA May 2002)
election results: House of Commons - percent of vote by party - Labor
44.5%, Conservative 31%, Liberal Democratic 17%, other 7.5%; seats by
party - Labor 418, Conservative 165, Liberal Democratic 46, other 30

Judicial branch: House of Lords, several Lords of Appeal in Ordinary
are appointed by the monarch for life

Political parties and leaders: Conservative and Unionist Party [John
MAJOR]; Labor Party [Anthony (Tony) Blair]; Liberal Democrats or LD
[Jeremy (Paddy) ASHDOWN]; Scottish National Party [Alex SALMOND];
Welsh National Party (Plaid Cymru) [Dafydd Iwan WIGLEY]; Ulster
Unionist Party (Northern Ireland) [David TRIMBLE]; Democratic Unionist
Party (Northern Ireland) [Rev. Ian PAISLEY]; Social Democratic and
Labor Party or SDLP (Northern Ireland) [John HUME]; Sinn Fein
(Northern Ireland) [Gerry ADAMS]; Alliance Party (Northern Ireland)
[Lord ALDERDICE]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Trades Union Congress;
Confederation of British Industry; National Farmers' Union; Campaign
for Nuclear Disarmament

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB,
Australia Group, BIS, C, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE, CERN, EBRD, ECA
(associate), ECE, ECLAC, EIB, ESA, ESCAP, EU, FAO, G- 5, G- 7, G-10,
IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer),
ISO, ITU, MTCR, NACC, NATO, NEA, NSG, OECD, OSCE, PCA, UN, UN Security
Council, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOMIG,
UNRWA, UNTAES, UNU, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Sir John Olav KERR (will return to London
in late 1997)
chancery: 3100 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone : [1] (202) 588-6500
FAX: [1] (202) 588-7870
consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Houston,
Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco
consulate(s): Dallas, Miami, and Seattle

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador William J. CROWE, Jr.
embassy: 24/31 Grosvenor Square, London, W. 1A1AE
mailing address: PSC 801, Box 40, London; FPO AE 09498-4040
telephone: [44] (71) 499-9000
FAX : [44] (71) 409-1637
consulate(s) general: Belfast, Edinburgh

Flag description: blue with the red cross of Saint George (patron
saint of England) edged in white superimposed on the diagonal red
cross of Saint Patrick (patron saint of Ireland) which is superimposed
on the diagonal white cross of Saint Andrew (patron saint of
Scotland); known as the Union Flag or Union Jack; the design and
colors (especially the Blue Ensign) have been the basis for a number
of other flags including dependencies, Commonwealth countries, and
others

Economy

Economy - overview: The UK is one of the world's great trading powers
and financial centers, and its essentially capitalistic economy ranks
among the four largest in Western Europe. Over the past 17 years the
ruling Tories have greatly reduced public ownership and contained the
growth of social welfare programs. Agriculture is intensive, highly
mechanized, and efficient by European standards, producing about 60%
of food needs with only about 1% of the labor force. The UK has large
coal, natural gas, and oil reserves; primary energy production
accounts for 12% of GDP, one of the highest shares of any industrial
nation. Services, particularly banking, insurance, and business
services, account by far for the largest proportion of GDP while
industry continues to decline in importance, now employing only 25% of
the work force. The economy registered 3.9% GDP growth in 1994, the
best rate for six years, but slipped back to 2.7% in 1995 and 2.4% in
1996. Exports and manufacturing output have been the primary engines
of growth. Unemployment is gradually falling. Inflation is a
comfortable 2.6%. A major economic policy question for the UK in the
late 1990s is the terms on which it participates in the financial and
economic integration of Europe.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.19 trillion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $20,400 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 1.9%
industry: 34.1%
services : 64% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 2.6% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total : 28.1 million (September 1996)
by occupation: services 62.8%, manufacturing and construction 25.0%,
government 9.1%, energy 1.9%, agriculture 1.2% (June 1992)

Unemployment rate: 6.7% (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues : $421.5 billion
expenditures: $474.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY95/96 est.)

Industries: production machinery including machine tools, electric
power equipment, automation equipment, railroad equipment,
shipbuilding, aircraft, motor vehicles and parts, electronics and
communications equipment, metals, chemicals, coal, petroleum, paper
and paper products, food processing, textiles, clothing, and other
consumer goods

Industrial production growth rate: 1% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 66.15 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 327.7 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 5,178 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: cereals, oilseed, potatoes, vegetables;
cattle, sheep, poultry; fish

Exports:
total value: $240.4 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities : manufactured goods, machinery, fuels, chemicals,
semifinished goods, transport equipment
partners: EU countries 56.4% (Germany 12.7%, France 9.9%, Netherlands
7.0%), US 13.1% (1994)

Imports:
total value : $258.8 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: manufactured goods, machinery, semifinished goods,
foodstuffs, consumer goods
partners: EU countries 54.9% (Germany 14.6%, France 10.0%, Netherlands
6.7%), US 12.2% (1994)

Debt - external: $16.2 billion (June 1992)

Economic aid:
donor: ODA, $2.908 billion (1993)

Currency: 1 British pound (£) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: British pounds (£) per US$1 - 0.6023 (January 1997),
0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995), 0.6529 (1994), 0.6658 (1993), 0.5664
(1992)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March

@United Kingdom:Communications

Telephones: 29.5 million (1987 est.)

Telephone system: technologically advanced domestic and international
system
domestic: equal mix of buried cables, microwave radio relay, and
fiber-optic systems
international: 40 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth stations -
10 Intelsat (7 Atlantic Ocean and 3 Indian Ocean), 1 Inmarsat
(Atlantic Ocean region), and 1 Eutelsat; at least 8 large
international switching centers

Radio broadcast stations: AM 225, FM 525 (mostly repeaters), shortwave
0

Radios: 70 million

Television broadcast stations: 207 (repeaters 3,210)

Televisions: 20 million

@United Kingdom:Transportation

Railways:
total : 17,561 km
broad gauge: 434 km 1.600-m gauge (190 km double track); note - all
1.600-m gauge track, of which 357 km is in common carrier use, is in
Northern Ireland
standard gauge: 16,892 km 1.435-m gauge (4,928 km electrified; 12,591
km double or multiple track); note - 16,532 km of 1.435-m routes are
in common carrier service; the remaining 360 km are operated by a
total of 40 tourist or other private companies
narrow gauge: 235 km 0.260-m, 0.311-m, 0.381-m, 0.600-m, 0.610-m,
0.686-m, 0.760-m, 0.762-m, 0.800-m, 0.825-m, 0.914-m and 1.067-m
gauges; note - these short, narrow-gage lines are operated by a total
of 25 tourist and other private firms (1995)

Highways:
total: 388,831 km (1994 est.)
paved: NA km (including 3,284 km of expressways)
unpaved: NA km

Waterways: 3,200 km under British Waterways Board

Pipelines: crude oil (almost all insignificant) 933 km; petroleum
products 2,993 km; natural gas 12,800 km

Ports and harbors: Aberdeen, Belfast, Bristol, Cardiff, Grangemouth,
Hull, Leith, Liverpool, London, Manchester, Sullom Voe, Tees, Tyne

Merchant marine:
total: 150 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,719,891 GRT/3,246,718
DWT
ships by type: bulk 8, cargo 28, chemical tanker 2, container 21,
liquefied gas tanker 2, oil tanker 54, passenger 8, passenger-cargo 1,
refrigerated tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 12, short-sea passenger
12, specialized tanker 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 387 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 366
over 3,047 m: 9
2,438 to 3,047 m: 29
1,524 to 2,437 m: 103
914 to 1,523 m: 59
under 914 m: 166 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 21
914 to 1,523 m: 21 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 12 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Royal Navy (includes Royal Marines), Royal
Air Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 13,829,704 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 11,527,058 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $35.1 billion (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.1% (FY95/96)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Northern Ireland question with Ireland;
Gibraltar question with Spain; Argentina claims Falkland Islands
(Islas Malvinas); Argentina claims South Georgia and the South
Sandwich Islands; Mauritius claims island of Diego Garcia in British
Indian Ocean Territory; Rockall continental shelf dispute involving
Denmark, Iceland, and Ireland (Ireland and the UK have signed a
boundary agreement in the Rockall area); territorial claim in
Antarctica (British Antarctic Territory)

Illicit drugs: gateway country for Latin American cocaine entering the
European market; producer of synthetic drugs, precursor chemicals;
transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin; money-laundering
center
______________________________________________________________________

UNITED STATES

@United States:Geography

Location: North America, bordering both the North Atlantic Ocean and
the North Pacific Ocean, between Canada and Mexico

Geographic coordinates: 38 00 N, 97 00 W

Map references: North America

Area:
total: 9,629,091 sq km
land: 9,158,960 sq km
water : 470,131 sq km
note: includes only the 50 states and District of Columbia

Area - comparative: about one-half the size of Russia; about
three-tenths the size of Africa; about one-half the size of South
America (or slightly larger than Brazil); slightly larger than China;
about two and one-half times the size of Western Europe

Land boundaries:
total: 12,248 km
border countries : Canada 8,893 km (including 2,477 km with Alaska),
Cuba 29 km (US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay), Mexico 3,326 km
note: Guantanamo Naval Base is leased by the US and thus remains part
of Cuba

Coastline: 19,924 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 12 nm
continental shelf: not specified
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly temperate, but tropical in Hawaii and Florida and
arctic in Alaska, semiarid in the great plains west of the Mississippi
River and arid in the Great Basin of the southwest; low winter
temperatures in the northwest are ameliorated occasionally in January
and February by warm chinook winds from the eastern slopes of the
Rocky Mountains

Terrain: vast central plain, mountains in west, hills and low
mountains in east; rugged mountains and broad river valleys in Alaska;
rugged, volcanic topography in Hawaii

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Death Valley -86 m
highest point: Mount McKinley 6,194 m

Natural resources: coal, copper, lead, molybdenum, phosphates,
uranium, bauxite, gold, iron, mercury, nickel, potash, silver,
tungsten, zinc, petroleum, natural gas, timber

Land use:
arable land: 19%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 25%
forests and woodland: 30%
other: 26% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 207,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: tsunamis, volcanoes, and earthquake activity around
Pacific Basin; hurricanes along the Atlantic coast; tornadoes in the
midwest; mud slides in California; forest fires in the west; flooding;
permafrost in northern Alaska is a major impediment to development

Environment - current issues: air pollution resulting in acid rain in
both the US and Canada; the US is the largest single emitter of carbon
dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels; water pollution from runoff
of pesticides and fertilizers; very limited natural fresh water
resources in much of the western part of the country require careful
management; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Antarctic
Treaty, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test
Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity, Desertification,
Hazardous Wastes

Geography - note: world's third-largest country (after Russia and
Canada)

@United States:People

Population: 267,954,764 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 22% (male 29,837,393; female 28,450,028)
15-64 years: 65% (male 87,170,245; female 88,400,551)
65 years and over : 13% (male 13,975,746; female 20,120,801) (July
1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.89% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 14.6 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.8 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.1 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years : 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.55 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 76.04 years
male: 72.75 years
female : 79.49 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.06 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: American(s)
adjective: American

Ethnic groups: white 83.4%, black 12.4%, Asian 3.3%, Amerindian 0.8%
(1992)

Religions: Protestant 56%, Roman Catholic 28%, Jewish 2%, other 4%,
none 10% (1989)

Languages: English, Spanish (spoken by a sizable minority)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 97%
male: 97%
female: 97% (1979 est.)

@United States:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : United States of America
conventional short form: United States
abbreviation: US or USA

Data code: US

Government type: federal republic; strong democratic tradition

National capital: Washington, DC

Administrative divisions: 50 states and 1 district*; Alabama, Alaska,
Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware,
District of Columbia*, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland,
Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana,
Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York,
North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania,
Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah,
Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin, Wyoming

Dependent areas: American Samoa, Baker Island, Guam, Howland Island,
Jarvis Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Islands, Navassa
Island, Northern Mariana Islands, Palmyra Atoll, Puerto Rico, Virgin
Islands, Wake Island
note: from 18 July 1947 until 1 October 1994, the US administered the
Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, but recently entered into a
new political relationship with all four political units: the Northern
Mariana Islands is a Commonwealth in political union with the US
(effective 3 November 1986); Palau concluded a Compact of Free
Association with the US (effective 1 October 1994); the Federated
States of Micronesia signed a Compact of Free Association with the US
(effective 3 November 1986); the Republic of the Marshall Islands
signed a Compact of Free Association with the US (effective 21 October
1986)

Independence: 4 July 1776 (from England)

National holiday: Independence Day, 4 July (1776)

Constitution: 17 September 1787, effective 4 March 1789

Legal system: based on English common law; judicial review of
legislative acts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President William Jefferson CLINTON (since 20 January
1993) and Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January 1993);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President William Jefferson CLINTON (since 20
January 1993) and Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January
1993); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president with Senate approval
elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket by
a college of representatives who are elected directly from each state;
president and vice president serve four-year terms; election last held
5 November 1996 (next to be held 7 November 2000)
election results: William Jefferson CLINTON elected president; percent
of popular vote - William Jefferson CLINTON (Democratic Party) 49.2%,
Bob DOLE (Republican Party) 40.7%, Ross PEROT (Reform Party) 8.4%,
other 1.7%

Legislative branch: bicameral Congress consists of Senate (100 seats,
one-third are renewed every two years; two members are elected from
each state by popular vote to serve six-year terms) and House of
Representatives (435 seats; members are directly elected by popular
vote to serve two-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 5 November 1996 (next to be held 2
November 1998); House of Representatives - last held 5 November 1996
(next to be held 2 November 1998)
election results : Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - Republican Party 55, Democratic Party 45; House of
Representatives - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
Republican Party 227, Democratic Party 205, independent 1, vacant 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, justices are appointed for life by the
president with confirmation by the Senate

Political parties and leaders: Republican Party, Jim NICHOLSON,
national committee chairman; Democratic Party, Steve GROSSMAN,
national committee chairman; several other groups or parties of minor
political significance

International organization participation: AfDB, AG (observer), ANZUS,
APEC, AsDB, Australia Group, BIS, CCC, CE (observer), CP, EBRD, ECE,
ECLAC, ESCAP, FAO, G- 2, G- 5, G- 7, G- 8, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD,
ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MTCR,
NACC, NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS, OECD, OSCE, PCA, SPC, UN, UN Security
Council, UNCTAD, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMIH, UNOMIG,
UNPREDEP, UNRWA, UNTAES, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO, ZC

Flag description: thirteen equal horizontal stripes of red (top and
bottom) alternating with white; there is a blue rectangle in the upper
hoist-side corner bearing 50 small white five-pointed stars arranged
in nine offset horizontal rows of six stars (top and bottom)
alternating with rows of five stars; the 50 stars represent the 50
states, the 13 stripes represent the 13 original colonies; known as
Old Glory; the design and colors have been the basis for a number of
other flags including Chile, Liberia, Malaysia, and Puerto Rico

Economy

Economy - overview: The US has the most powerful, diverse, and
technologically advanced economy in the world, with a per capita GDP
of $28,600, the largest among major industrial nations. In this
market-oriented economy, private individuals and business firms make
most of the decisions, and government buys needed goods and services
predominantly in the private marketplace. US business firms enjoy
considerably greater flexibility than their counterparts in Western
Europe and Japan in decisions to expand capital plant, lay off surplus
workers, and develop new products. At the same time, they face higher
barriers to entry in their rivals' home markets than the barriers to
entry of foreign firms in US markets. In all economic sectors, US
firms are at or near the forefront in technological advances,
especially in computers, and medical, aerospace, and military
equipment, although their advantage has narrowed since the end of
World War II. The onrush of technology largely explains the gradual
development of a "two-tier labor market" in which those at the bottom
lack the education and the professional/technical skills of those at
the top and, more and more, fail to get pay raises, health insurance
coverage, and other benefits. The years 1994-96 witnessed moderate
gains in real output, low inflation rates, and a drop in unemployment
below 6%. Long-term problems include inadequate investment in economic
infrastructure, rapidly rising medical costs of an aging population,
sizable budget and trade deficits, and stagnation of family income in
the lower economic groups. The outlook for 1997 is for continued
moderate growth, low inflation, and about the same level of
unemployment.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $7.61 trillion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $28,600 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 2%
industry: 23%
services: 75% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 133.943 million (includes unemployed) (1996)
by occupation: managerial and professional 28.8%, technical, sales and
administrative support 29.7%, services 13.6%, manufacturing, mining,
transportation, and crafts 25.1%, farming, forestry, and fishing 2.8%

Unemployment rate: 5.4% (1996)

Budget:
revenues: $1.351 trillion
expenditures: $1.514 trillion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995)

Industries: leading industrial power in the world, highly diversified
and technologically advanced; petroleum, steel, motor vehicles,
aerospace, telecommunications, chemicals, electronics, food
processing, consumer goods, lumber, mining

Industrial production growth rate: 3.1% (1996)

Electricity - capacity: 702.7 million kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 3.5357 trillion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 11,636 kWh (1994 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, other grains, corn, fruits, vegetables,
cotton; beef, pork, poultry, dairy products; forest products; fish

Exports:
total value: $584.7 billion (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities : capital goods, automobiles, industrial supplies and raw
materials, consumer goods, agricultural products
partners: Canada 22%, Western Europe 21%, Japan 11%, Mexico 8% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $771 billion (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: crude oil and refined petroleum products, machinery,
automobiles, consumer goods, industrial raw materials, food and
beverages
partners : Canada, 20%, Western Europe 18%, Japan 16.5%, Mexico 8%
(1995)

Debt - external: $862 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
donor : ODA, $9.721 billion (1993)

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: British pounds (£) per US$ - 0.6023 (January 1997),
0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995), 0.6529 (1994), 0.6658 (1993), 0.5664
(1992); Canadian dollars (Can$) per US$ - 1.3486 (January 1997),
1.3635 (1996), 1.3724 (1995), 1.3656 (1994), 1.2901 (1993), 1.2087
(1992); French francs (F) per US$ - 5.4169 (January 1997), 5.1155
(1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520 (1994), 5.6632 (1993), 5.2938 (1992);
Italian lire (Lit) per US$ - 1,568.1 (January 1997), 1,542.9 (1996),
1,628.9 (1995), 1,612.4 (1994), 1,573.7 (1993), 1,232.4 (1992);
Japanese yen (¥) per US$ - 118.02 (January 1997), 108.78 (1996), 94.06
(1995), 102.21 (1994), 111.20 (1993), 126.65 (1992); German deutsche
marks (DM) per US$ - 1.6043 (January 1997), 1.5048 (1996), 1.4331
(1995), 1.6228 (1994), 1.6533 (1993), 1.5617 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September

@United States:Communications

Telephones: 182.558 million (1987 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: large system of fiber-optic cable, microwave radio relay,
coaxial cable, and domestic satellites
international : 24 ocean cable systems in use; satellite earth
stations - 61 Intelsat (45 Atlantic Ocean and 16 Pacific Ocean) (1990
est.), 5 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region), and 4 Inmarsat (Pacific
and Atlantic Ocean regions)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4,987, FM 4,932, shortwave 0

Radios: 540.5 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1,092 (in addition, there are about
9,000 cable TV systems)

Televisions: 215 million (1993 est.)

@United States:Transportation

Railways:
total: 240,000 km mainline routes (nongovernment owned)
standard gauge: 240,000 km 1.435-m gauge (1989)

Highways:
total : 6,261,154 km
paved: 3,759,516 km (including 88,500 km of expressways)
unpaved: 2,501,638 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 41,009 km of navigable inland channels, exclusive of the
Great Lakes

Pipelines: petroleum products 276,000 km; natural gas 331,000 km
(1991)

Ports and harbors: Anchorage, Baltimore, Boston, Charleston, Chicago,
Duluth, Hampton Roads, Honolulu, Houston, Jacksonville, Los Angeles,
New Orleans, New York, Philadelphia, Port Canaveral, Portland
(Oregon), Prudhoe Bay, San Francisco, Savannah, Seattle, Tampa, Toledo

Merchant marine:
total: 305 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 10,319,000
GRT/14,454,000 DWT
ships by type : bulk 15, cargo 22, chemical tanker 16, intermodal 119,
liquefied gas tanker 14, passenger-cargo 3, tanker 104, tanker
tug-barge 12
note: in addition, there are 193 government-owned vessels (1996 est.)

Airports: 13,396 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 11,677
over 3,047 m: 180
2,438 to 3,047 m: 201
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1,217
914 to 1,523 m: 2,354
under 914 m : 7,725 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1,719
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
1,524 to 2,437 m : 152
914 to 1,523 m: 1,559 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 103 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Department of the Army, Department of the Navy
(includes Marine Corps), Department of the Air Force
note: the Coast Guard falls under the Department of Transportation,
but in wartime reports to the Department of the Navy

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 69,414,007 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 1,864,580 (1996 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $267.2 billion (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.4% (1997 est.)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: maritime boundary disputes with Canada
(Dixon Entrance, Beaufort Sea, Strait of Juan de Fuca, Machias Seal
Island); US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay is leased from Cuba and only
mutual agreement or US abandonment of the area can terminate the
lease; Haiti claims Navassa Island; US has made no territorial claim
in Antarctica (but has reserved the right to do so) and does not
recognize the claims of any other nation; Republic of Marshall Islands
claims Wake Island

Illicit drugs: consumer of cocaine shipped from Colombia through
Mexico and the Caribbean; consumer of heroin, marijuana, and
increasingly methamphetamines from Mexico; consumer of high-quality
Southeast Asian heroin; illicit producer of cannabis, marijuana,
depressants, stimulants, hallucinogens, and methamphetamines; drug
money-laundering center
______________________________________________________________________

URUGUAY

@Uruguay:Geography

Location: Southern South America, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean,
between Argentina and Brazil

Geographic coordinates: 33 00 S, 56 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total: 176,220 sq km
land: 173,620 sq km
water: 2,600 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Washington State

Land boundaries:
total: 1,564 km
border countries : Argentina 579 km, Brazil 985 km

Coastline: 660 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
territorial sea : 200 nm; overflight and navigation guaranteed beyond
12 nm

Climate: warm temperate; freezing temperatures almost unknown

Terrain: mostly rolling plains and low hills; fertile coastal lowland

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
highest point: Cerro Catedral 514 m

Natural resources: fertile soil, hydropower potential, minor minerals

Land use:
arable land: 7%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 77%
forests and woodland: 5%
other : 11% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,400 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: seasonally high winds (the pampero is a chilly and
occasional violent wind which blows north from the Argentine pampas),
droughts, floods; because of the absence of mountains, which act as
weather barriers, all locations are particularly vulnerable to rapid
changes in weather fronts

Environment - current issues: substantial pollution from Brazilian
industry along border; one-fifth of country affected by acid rain
generated by Brazil; water pollution from meat packing/tannery
industry; inadequate solid/hazardous waste disposal

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified : Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation

@Uruguay:People

Population: 3,270,707 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 24% (male 405,016; female 385,863)
15-64 years: 63% (male 1,021,166; female 1,042,401)
65 years and over: 13% (male 173,345; female 242,916) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.7% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 16.98 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.97 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.99 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.71 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 14.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 75.23 years
male: 72.09 years
female : 78.55 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.3 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Uruguayan(s)
adjective: Uruguayan

Ethnic groups: white 88%, mestizo 8%, black 4%, Amerindian,
specifically, the Charrua, which are practically nonexistent and make
up probably less than 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 66% (less than one-half of the adult
population attends church regularly), Protestant 2%, Jewish 2%,
nonprofessing or other 30%

Languages: Spanish, Portunon, or Brazilero (Portuguese-Spanish mix on
the Brazilian frontier)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 97.3%
male: 96.9%
female: 97.7% (1995 est.)

@Uruguay:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Oriental Republic of Uruguay
conventional short form: Uruguay
local long form: Republica Oriental del Uruguay
local short form : Uruguay

Data code: UY

Government type: republic

National capital: Montevideo

Administrative divisions: 19 departments (departamentos, singular -
departamento); Artigas, Canelones, Cerro Largo, Colonia, Durazno,
Flores, Florida, Lavalleja, Maldonado, Montevideo, Paysandu, Rio
Negro, Rivera, Rocha, Salto, San Jose, Soriano, Tacuarembo, Treinta y
Tres

Independence: 25 August 1828 (from Brazil)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 August (1828)

Constitution: 27 November 1966, effective February 1967, suspended 27
June 1973, new constitution rejected by referendum 30 November 1980;
constitutional reforms approved by plebiscite 7 January 1997

Legal system: based on Spanish civil law system; accepts compulsory
ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Julio Maria SANGUINETTI (since 1 March 1995)
and Vice President Hugo BATALLA (since 1 March 1995); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government as well as
the Senate president
head of government : President Julio Maria SANGUINETTI (since 1 March
1995) and Vice President Hugo BATALLA (since 1 March 1995); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government as well as
the Senate president
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections : president and vice president elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 27 November 1994
(next to be held NA November 1999)
election results: Julio Maria SANGUINETTI elected president; percent
of vote - NA

Legislative branch: bicameral General Assembly or Asamblea General
consists of Chamber of Senators or Camara de Senadores (30 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms) and
Chamber of Representatives or Camara de Representantes (99 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: Chamber of Senators - last held 27 November 1994 (next to
be held NA November 1999); Chamber of Representatives - last held 27
November 1994 (next to be held NA November 1999)
election results: Chamber of Senators - percent of vote by party -
Colorado 36%, Blanco 34%, Encuentro Progresista 27%, New Sector 3%;
seats by party - Colorado 11, Blanco 10, Encuentro Progresista 8, New
Sector 1; Chamber of Representatives - percent of vote by party -
Colorado 32%, Blanco 31%, Encuentro Progresista 31%, New Sector 5%;
seats by party - Colorado 32, Blanco 31, Encuentro Progresista 31, New
Sector 5

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are nominated by the president
and elected for 10-year terms by the General Assembly

Political parties and leaders: National (Blanco) Party, Alberto
VOLONTE Berro; Herrerista faction of the Blanco Party, Luis LACALLE;
Colorado Party, Jorge BATLLE; Broad Front Coalition, Tabare VAZQUEZ
(as of 22 December 1996); New Sector Coalition, Rafael MICHELINI;
Party for the Government by the People (PGP), Hugo BATALLA;
Progressive Encounter (Encuentro Progresista), Tabare VAZQUEZ

International organization participation: AG (observer), CCC, ECLAC,
FAO, G-11, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES,
LAIA, Mercosur, MINURSO, NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN,
UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMOGIP, UNMOT, UNOMIG,
UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Alvaro DIEZ DE MEDINA SUAREZ
chancery : 2715 M Street, NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone: [1] (202) 331-1313 through 1316
FAX : [1] (202) 331-8147
consulate(s) general: Los Angeles, Miami, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Thomas J. DODD
embassy: Lauro Muller 1776, Montevideo
mailing address : APO AA 34035
telephone: [598] (2) 23 60 61, 48 77 77
FAX: [598] (2) 48 86 11

Flag description: nine equal horizontal stripes of white (top and
bottom) alternating with blue; there is a white square in the upper
hoist-side corner with a yellow sun bearing a human face known as the
Sun of May and 16 rays alternately triangular and wavy

Economy

Economy - overview: Uruguay's small economy benefits from a favorable
climate for agriculture and substantial hydropower potential. Economic
development has been restrained in recent years by high - though
declining - inflation and extensive government regulation. The
SANGUINETTI government's conservative monetary and fiscal policies are
aimed at continuing to reduce inflation, at 24.3% at yearend 1996;
other priorities include extensive reform of the social security
system and increased investment in education. Uruguay recovered from
recession in 1996 - partly due to the recovery in Argentina - and
ended the year with a nearly 5% rise in GDP. Uruguayan trade continued
to expand and the potential for new markets continued to open through
the negotiations of Mercosur (Southern Cone Common Market) with
neighboring countries and the European Union (EU). The economy is
expected to continue growing at a healthy rate in 1997 along with
other regional economies.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $26 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.9% (1996)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $8,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 10.8%
industry: 27.4%
services: 61.8% (1995)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 24.4% (December 1996)

Labor force:
total: 1.436 million (1996 est.)
by occupation: government 25%, manufacturing 19%, agriculture 11%,
commerce 12%, utilities, construction, transport, and communications
12%, other services 21% (1988 est.)

Unemployment rate: 12% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $3.03 billion
expenditures : $3.37 billion with capital expenditures of $NA (1994
est.)

Industries: meat processing, wool and hides, sugar, textiles,
footwear, leather apparel, tires, cement, petroleum refining, wine

Industrial production growth rate: 3.2% (1996)

Electricity - capacity: 2.142 million kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 6.308 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,568 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: wheat, rice, corn, sorghum; livestock; fishing

Exports:
total value : $2.4 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: wool and textile manufactures, beef and other animal
products, leather, rice
partners: Brazil, Argentina, US, China, Italy

Imports:
total value: $3.3 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: machinery and equipment, vehicles, chemicals, minerals,
plastics, oil
partners: Brazil, Argentina, US, Nigeria

Debt - external: $5 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $91 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Uruguayan peso ($Ur) = 100 centesimos

Exchange rates: Uruguayan pesos ($Ur) per US$1 - 8.6550 (January
1997), 7.9718 (1996), 6.3491 (1995), 5.0529 (1994), 3.9484 (1993),
3.0270 (1992)
note: on 1 March 1993 the former new peso (N$Ur) was replaced as
Uruguay's unit of currency by the peso which is equal to 1,000 of the
new pesos

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Uruguay:Communications

Telephones: 451,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: some modern facilities
domestic : most modern facilities concentrated in Montevideo; new
nationwide microwave radio relay network
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 99, FM 0, shortwave 9

Radios: 1.89 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 26

Televisions: 725,000 (1992 est.)

@Uruguay:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,070 km (461 km closed; additional 460 km only partially
operational)
standard gauge: 2,070 km 1.435-m gauge

Highways:
total: 50,900 km
paved: 6,973 km
unpaved: 43,927 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,600 km; used by coastal and shallow-draft river craft

Ports and harbors: Fray Bentos, Montevideo, Nueva Palmira, Paysandu,
Punta del Este

Merchant marine:
total: 2 oil tanker ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 44,042
GRT/83,684 DWT (1996 est.)

Airports: 60 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 45
2,438 to 3,047 m : 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
914 to 1,523 m: 8
under 914 m: 31 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 15
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 13 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Naval Air Arm, Coast Guard,
Marines), Air Force, Grenadier Guards, Coracero Guard, Police

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 792,365 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 643,137 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $256 million (1994)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.5% (1994)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: two short sections of the boundary with
Brazil are in dispute - Arroyo de la Invernada (Arroio Invernada) area
of the Rio Cuareim (Rio Quarai) and the islands at the confluence of
the Rio Cuareim (Rio Quarai) and the Uruguay River
______________________________________________________________________

UZBEKISTAN

@Uzbekistan:Geography

Location: Central Asia, north of Afghanistan

Geographic coordinates: 41 00 N, 64 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
total: 447,400 sq km
land: 425,400 sq km
water: 22,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries:
total: 6,221 km
border countries: Afghanistan 137 km, Kazakstan 2,203 km, Kyrgyzstan
1,099 km, Tajikistan 1,161 km, Turkmenistan 1,621 km

Coastline: 0 km
note : Uzbekistan borders the Aral Sea (420 km)

Maritime claims: none (doubly landlocked)

Climate: mostly midlatitude desert, long, hot summers, mild winters;
semiarid grassland in east

Terrain: mostly flat-to-rolling sandy desert with dunes; broad, flat
intensely irrigated river valleys along course of Amu Darya and Syr
Darya; Fergana Valley in east surrounded by mountainous Tajikistan and
Kyrgyzstan; shrinking Aral Sea in west

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Sariqarnish Kuli -12 m
highest point: Adelunga Toghi 4,301 m

Natural resources: natural gas, petroleum, coal, gold, uranium,
silver, copper, lead and zinc, tungsten, molybdenum

Land use:
arable land: 9%
permanent crops : 1%
permanent pastures: 46%
forests and woodland: 3%
other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 40,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: drying up of the Aral Sea is resulting
in growing concentrations of chemical pesticides and natural salts;
these substances are then blown from the increasingly exposed lake bed
and contribute to desertification; water pollution from industrial
wastes and the heavy use of fertilizers and pesticides is the cause of
many human health disorders; increasing soil salinization; soil
contamination from agricultural chemicals, including DDT

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: Uzbekistan and Liechtenstein are the only two doubly
landlocked countries in the world

@Uzbekistan:People

Population: 23,467,724 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 39% (male 4,609,766; female 4,474,481)
15-64 years: 57% (male 6,593,525; female 6,703,482)
65 years and over : 4% (male 421,609; female 664,861) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.35% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 24.02 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 7.63 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.92 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.63 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 70.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 64.31 years
male : 60.69 years
female: 68.11 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.92 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Uzbekistani(s)
adjective: Uzbekistani

Ethnic groups: Uzbek 80%, Russian 5.5%, Tajik 5%, Kazak 3%, Karakalpak
2.5%, Tatar 1.5%, other 2.5% (1996 est.)

Religions: Muslim 88% (mostly Sunnis), Eastern Orthodox 9%, other 3%

Languages: Uzbek 74.3%, Russian 14.2%, Tajik 4.4%, other 7.1%

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 97%
male: 98%
female: 96% (1989 est.)

@Uzbekistan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Uzbekistan
conventional short form: Uzbekistan
local long form: Uzbekiston Respublikasi
local short form: none
former : Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: UZ

Government type: republic

National capital: Tashkent (Toshkent)

Administrative divisions: 12 wiloyatlar (singular - wiloyat), 1
autonomous republic* (respublikasi), and 1 city** (shahri); Andijon
Wiloyati, Bukhoro Wiloyati, Jizzakh Wiloyati, Farghona Wiloyati,
Qoraqalpoghiston* (Nukus), Qashqadaryo Wiloyati (Qarshi), Khorazm
Wiloyati (Urganch), Namangan Wiloyati, Nawoiy Wiloyati, Samarqand
Wiloyati, Sirdaryo Wiloyati (Guliston), Surkhondaryo Wiloyati
(Termiz), Toshkent Shahri**, Toshkent Wiloyati
note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center name
following in parentheses)

Independence: 31 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 September (1991)

Constitution: new constitution adopted 8 December 1992

Legal system: evolution of Soviet civil law; still lacks independent
judicial system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Islom KARIMOV (since 24 March 1990, when he
was elected president by the then Supreme Soviet)
head of government: Prime Minister Utkur SULTONOV (since December
1995); First Deputy Prime Minister Ismoil JURABEKOV (since NA); First
Deputy Prime Minister for Agriculture Qobiljon OBIDOV (since NA);
Deputy Prime Ministers Viktor CHIZHEN (since NA), Bakhtiyor HAMIDOV
(since NA), Kayim HAQQULOV (since NA), Dilbar GHOLOMOVA (since NA),
Alisher AZIZKHOJAYEV (since NA), Mirabror USMONOV (since NA), Murat
SHARIFKHOJAYEV (since NA), Rustam YUNUSOV (since NA)
cabinet: Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president with approval
of the Supreme Assembly
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 29 December 1991 (next to be held NA 2000; note -
extension of President KARIMOV's term for an additional four years
overwhelmingly approved - 99.6% of total vote in favor - by national
referendum held 26 March 1995); prime minister and deputy prime
ministers appointed by the president
election results: Islom KARIMOV elected president; percent of vote -
Islom KARIMOV 86%, Mukhammad SOLIKH 12%, other 2%

Legislative branch: unicameral Supreme Assembly or Oliy Majlis (250
seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 25 December 1994 (next to be held NA 1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
People's Democratic Party 207, Fatherland Progress Party 12, other 31;
note - final runoffs were held 22 January 1995; seating was as
follows: People's Democratic Party 69, Fatherland Progress Party 14,
Social Democratic Party 47, local government 120
note: all parties in parliament support President KARIMOV

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are nominated by the president
and confirmed by the Supreme Assembly

Political parties and leaders: People's Democratic Party or PDP
(formerly Communist Party) [Islom A. KARIMOV, chairman]; Fatherland
Progress Party or FPP [Anwar YULDASHEV, chairman]; Social Democratic
Party [Anvar JORABAYEV, chairman]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Birlik (Unity) People's
Movement or BPM [Ibrahim BURIYEV, chairman]; Islamic Rebirth Party or
IRP [Abdullah UTAYEV, chairman]; Erk (Freedom) Democratic Party was
banned 9 December 1992
note: UTAYEV or IRP is either in prison or in exile

International organization participation: AsDB, CCC, CIS, EBRD, ECE,
ECO, ESCAP, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Interpol,
IOC, ISO, ITU, NACC, NAM, OIC, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Sodyk SAFAYEV
chancery: 1746 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
telephone: [1] (202) 887-5300
FAX: [1] (202) 293-6804
consulate(s) general : New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Stanley T. ESCUDERO
embassy: 82 Chilanzarskaya, Tashkent
mailing address: use embassy street address
telephone : [7] (3712) 77-14-07, 77-10-81, 77-69-86
FAX: [7] (3712) 40-63-35

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white,
and green separated by red fimbriations with a crescent moon and 12
stars in the upper hoist-side quadrant

Economy

Economy - overview: Uzbekistan is a dry, landlocked country of which
10% consists of intensely cultivated, irrigated river valleys. It was
one of the poorest areas of the former Soviet Union with more than 60%
of its population living in overpopulated rural communities.
Uzbekistan is now the world's third largest cotton exporter, a major
producer of gold and natural gas, and a regionally significant
producer of chemicals and machinery. Following independence in
December 1991, the government sought to prop up its Soviet-style
command economy with subsidies and tight controls on production and
prices. Faced with high rates of inflation, however, the government
stepped up the pace of reform in mid-1994, by introducing tighter
monetary policies, expanding privatization, slightly reducing the role
of the state in the economy, and improving the environment for foreign
investors. Nevertheless, the state continues to be a dominating
influence in the economy, and reforms have so far failed to bring
about much-needed structural changes. The IMF suspended Uzbekistan's
$185 million standby arrangement in late 1996 because of governmental
steps that made impossible fulfillment of Fund conditions.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $57 billion (1996 estimate as
extrapolated from World Bank estimate for 1994)

GDP - real growth rate: 1.6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,430 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 29%
industry: 24%
services: 47% (1995 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 55% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 8.2 million
by occupation: agriculture and forestry 44%, industry and construction
20%, other 36% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 0.3% includes only officially registered
unemployed; large numbers of underemployed workers (December 1996)

Budget:
revenues : $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: textiles, food processing, machine building, metallurgy,
natural gas

Industrial production growth rate: 6% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 11.82 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 45.15 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,970 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: cotton, vegetables, fruits, grain; livestock

Exports:
total value: $3.2 billion (1996)
commodities: cotton, gold, natural gas, mineral fertilizers, ferrous
metals, textiles, food products, autos
partners: Russia, Ukraine, Eastern Europe, Western Europe

Imports:
total value: $3.2 billion (1996)
commodities : grain, machinery and parts, consumer durables, other
foods
partners: principally other FSU, Czech Republic, Western Europe

Debt - external: $1.285 billion (of which $510 million to Russia)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $71 million (1993)
note: commitments, $2,915 million ($135 million in disbursements)
(1992-95)

Currency: introduced provisional som-coupons 10 November 1993 which
circulated parallel to the Russian rubles; became the sole legal
currency 31 January 1994; was replaced in July 1994 by the som
currency

Exchange rates: Uzbekistani soms (UKS) per US$1 - 51.1 (January 1997),
35.8 (end December 1995), 25 (yearend 1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Uzbekistan:Communications

Telephones: 1.458 million (1995 est.)

Telephone system: poorly developed
domestic: NMT-450 analog cellular network established in Tashkent
international: linked by landline or microwave radio relay with CIS
member states and to other countries by leased connection via the
Moscow international gateway switch; new Intelsat links to Tokyo and
Ankara give Uzbekistan international access independent of Russian
facilities; satellite earth stations - NA Orbita and NA Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA; note - there is
at least one state-owned broadcast station of NA type

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2 national, many local

Televisions: NA

@Uzbekistan:Transportation

Railways:
total: 3,380 km in common carrier service; does not include industrial
lines
broad gauge: 3,380 km 1.520-m gauge (300 km electrified) (1993)

Highways:
total: 80,000 km
paved : 69,760 km (note - these roads are said to be hard surfaced,
meaning that some are paved and some are all-weather gravel surfaced)
unpaved: 10,240 km dirt (1995 est.)

Waterways: 1,100 (1990)

Pipelines: crude oil 250 km; petroleum products 40 km; natural gas 810
km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Termiz (Amu Darya river)

Airports: 261 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 35
over 3,047 m : 6
2,438 to 3,047 m: 14
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m: 8
under 914 m: 5 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 226
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 7
under 914 m : 216 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Air and Air Defense, Security Forces
(internal and border troops), National Guard

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 5,833,862 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 4,748,539 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 239,978 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: 164 million soms (1993); note -
conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the current
exchange rate could produce misleading results

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.7% (1993)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: limited illicit cultivator of cannabis and small
amounts of opium poppy; mostly for domestic consumption; limited
government eradication program; increasingly used as transshipment
point for illicit drugs to Russia and Western Europe
______________________________________________________________________

VANUATU

@Vanuatu:Geography

Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean, about
three-quarters of the way from Hawaii to Australia

Geographic coordinates: 16 00 S, 167 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total : 14,760 sq km
land: 14,760 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes more than 80 islands

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 2,528 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
contiguous zone: 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by southeast trade winds

Terrain: mostly mountains of volcanic origin; narrow coastal plains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mount Tabwemasana 1,877 m

Natural resources: manganese, hardwood forests, fish

Land use:
arable land: 2%
permanent crops: 10%
permanent pastures : 2%
forests and woodland: 75%
other: 11% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: tropical cyclones or typhoons (January to April);
volcanism causes minor earthquakes

Environment - current issues: a majority of the population does not
have access to a potable and reliable supply of water; deforestation

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Marine
Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution
signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Law of the Sea

@Vanuatu:People

Population: 181,358 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 40% (male 36,655; female 35,359)
15-64 years: 57% (male 53,506; female 50,508)
65 years and over: 3% (male 2,904; female 2,426) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.12% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 29.87 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 8.63 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 1.2 male(s)/female
total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 62.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 60.56 years
male: 58.65 years
female: 62.58 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.88 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Ni-Vanuatu (singular and plural)
adjective: Ni-Vanuatu

Ethnic groups: indigenous Melanesian 94%, French 4%, Vietnamese,
Chinese, Pacific Islanders

Religions: Presbyterian 36.7%, Anglican 15%, Catholic 15%, indigenous
beliefs 7.6%, Seventh-Day Adventist 6.2%, Church of Christ 3.8%, other
15.7%

Languages: English (official), French (official), pidgin (known as
Bislama or Bichelama)

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 53%
male: 57%
female: 48% (1979 est.)

@Vanuatu:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Vanuatu
conventional short form: Vanuatu
former: New Hebrides

Data code: NH

Government type: republic

National capital: Port-Vila

Administrative divisions: 6 provinces; Malampa, Penama, Sanma, Shefa,
Tafea, Torba

Independence: 30 July 1980 (from France and UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 30 July (1980)

Constitution: 30 July 1980

Legal system: unified system being created from former dual French and
British systems

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Jean Marie LEYE (since 2 March 1994)
head of government: Prime Minister Rialuth Serge VOHOR (since 30
September 1996); Deputy Prime Minister Donald KALPOKAS (since 25
October 1996)
cabinet : Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister,
responsible to Parliament
elections: president elected by an electoral college consisting of
Parliament and the presidents of the regional councils for a five-year
term; election for president last held 2 March 1994 (next to be held
NA 1999); following legislative elections, the leader of the majority
party or majority coalition is usually elected prime minister by
Parliament from among its members; election for prime minister last
held 30 September 1996 (next to be held NA November 1999); note - the
general legislative elections in November 1995 did not give a majority
to any of the political parties; since the election, there have been
three changes of government - all of which have been coalitions formed
by Parliamentary vote; Rialuth Serge VOHOR was prime minister from
November 1995 until he resigned 7 February 1996 when faced with a
no-confidence vote in Parliament; Maxime Carlot KORMAN was then
elected prime minister and served until he was ousted in a
no-confidence motion on 30 September 1996; VOHOR was then elected
prime minister for a second time
election results: Jean Marie LEYE elected president; percent of
electoral college vote - NA; Serge VOHOR elected prime minister by a
Parliamentary vote of 28 to 22

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (50 seats; members elected
by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections : last held 30 November 1995 (next to be held NA November
1999)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - UMP
17, VP 14, NUP 9, MPP 5, TU 2, Na-Griamel Movement 1, Friend
Melanesian Party 1, independent 1; note - political party associations
are fluid; there have been three changes of government since the
November 1995 elections
note : the National Council of Chiefs advises on matters of custom and
land

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chief justice is appointed by the
president after consultation with the prime minister and the leader of
the opposition, three other justices are appointed by the president on
the advice of the Judicial Service Commission

Political parties and leaders: Union of Moderate Parties (UMP), Serge
VOHOR; National United Party (NUP), Walter LINI; Vanuatu Party (VP),
Donald KALPOKAS; Melanesian Progressive Party (MPP), Barak SOPE; Tan
Union (TU), Vincent BOULEKONE; Na-Griamel Movement, Frankie STEVENS;
Friend Melanesian Party, Albert RAUUTIA

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP,
FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, NAM, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Vanuatu does not have an embassy
in the US

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an embassy
in Vanuatu; the ambassador to Papua New Guinea is accredited to
Vanuatu

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and green
with a black isosceles triangle (based on the hoist side) all
separated by a black-edged yellow stripe in the shape of a horizontal
Y (the two points of the Y face the hoist side and enclose the
triangle); centered in the triangle is a boar's tusk encircling two
crossed namele leaves, all in yellow

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is based primarily on subsistence or
small-scale agriculture which provides a living for 65% of the
population. Fishing and tourism are the other mainstays of the
economy, with 43,000 visitors in 1992. Mineral deposits are
negligible; the country has no known petroleum deposits. A small light
industry sector caters to the local market. Tax revenues come mainly
from import duties. Economic development is hindered by dependence on
relatively few commodity exports, vulnerability to natural disasters,
and long distances from main markets and between constituent islands.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $219 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2% (1995)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,230 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 25%
industry: 9%
services: 66%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 66,597 (1989 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 65%, services 32%, industry 3% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues : $74.8 million
expenditures: $76.1 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1994 est.)

Industries: food and fish freezing, wood processing, meat canning

Industrial production growth rate: 3.4% (1993 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 11,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 30 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: copra, coconuts, cocoa, coffee, taro, yams,
coconuts, fruits, vegetables; fish, beef

Exports:
total value: $28 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities: copra, beef, cocoa, timber, coffee
partners : EU 32%, Japan 29%, Australia 11%, New Caledonia 7% (1993)

Imports:
total value: $93 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: machines and vehicles, food and beverages, basic
manufactures, raw materials and fuels, chemicals
partners: Australia 41%, France 15%, NZ 11%, Japan 9%, Fiji 6% (1992)

Debt - external: $38.2 million (yearend 1993)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $9.6 million from Australia (FY96/97 est.); $3.1
million from NZ (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 vatu (VT) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: vatu (VT) per US$1 - 112.36 (January 1997), 111.72
(1996), 112.11 (1995), 116.41 (1994), 121.58 (1993), 113.39 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Vanuatu:Communications

Telephones: 3,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: 2,000 (1992 est.)

@Vanuatu:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 1,050 km
paved: 250 km
unpaved: 800 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Forari, Port-Vila, Santo (Espiritu Santo)

Merchant marine:
total : 100 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,451,548 GRT/1,945,514
DWT
ships by type: bulk 32, cargo 30, chemical tanker 2, combination bulk
1, container 2, liquefied gas tanker 5, oil tanker 7, refrigerated
cargo 13, vehicle carrier 8
note : a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 17
countries among which are Japan 31, India 10, Greece 7, Netherlands 7,
US 7, Hong Kong 6, Canada 4, France 4, Australia 2, and Singapore 2
(1996 est.)

Airports: 30 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 19
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
under 914 m: 17 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 11
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m : 10 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: no regular military forces; Vanuatu Police Force
(VPF; includes the paramilitary Vanuatu Mobile Force or VMF)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims Matthew and Hunter Islands east of
New Caledonia
______________________________________________________________________

VENEZUELA

@Venezuela:Geography

Location: Northern South America, bordering the Caribbean Sea and the
North Atlantic Ocean, between Colombia and Guyana

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 N, 66 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
total: 912,050 sq km
land: 882,050 sq km
water: 30,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of California

Land boundaries:
total: 4,993 km
border countries: Brazil 2,200 km, Colombia 2,050 km, Guyana 743 km

Coastline: 2,800 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 15 nm
continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; more moderate in highlands

Terrain: Andes Mountains and Maracaibo Lowlands in northwest; central
plains (llanos); Guiana Highlands in southeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point : Pico Bolivar (La Columna) 5,007 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, gold, bauxite,
other minerals, hydropower, diamonds

Land use:
arable land : 4%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures : 20%
forests and woodland: 34%
other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,900 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: subject to floods, rockslides, mud slides; periodic
droughts

Environment - current issues: sewage pollution of Lago de Valencia;
oil and urban pollution of Lago de Maracaibo; deforestation; soil
degradation; urban and industrial pollution, especially along the
Caribbean coast

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Marine
Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Tropical
Timber 94

Geography - note: on major sea and air routes linking North and South
America

@Venezuela:People

Population: 22,396,407 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 34% (male 3,964,886; female 3,720,984)
15-64 years: 61% (male 6,877,890; female 6,838,799)
65 years and over: 5% (male 456,182; female 537,666) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.83% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.67 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.03 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.32 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.85 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 28.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 72.37 years
male: 69.4 years
female : 75.58 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.78 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Venezuelan(s)
adjective: Venezuelan

Ethnic groups: mestizo 67%, white 21%, black 10%, Amerindian 2%

Religions: nominally Roman Catholic 96%, Protestant 2%

Languages: Spanish (official), native dialects spoken by about 200,000
Amerindians in the remote interior

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 91.1%
male: 91.8%
female: 90.3% (1995 est.)

@Venezuela:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Republic of Venezuela
conventional short form: Venezuela
local long form: Republica de Venezuela
local short form : Venezuela

Data code: VE

Government type: republic

National capital: Caracas

Administrative divisions: 22 states (estados, singular - estado),1
federal district* (distrito federal), and 1 federal dependency**
(dependencia federal); Amazonas, Anzoategui, Apure, Aragua, Barinas,
Bolivar, Carabobo, Cojedes, Delta Amacuro, Dependencias Federales**,
Distrito Federal*, Falcon, Guarico, Lara, Merida, Miranda, Monagas,
Nueva Esparta, Portuguesa, Sucre, Tachira, Trujillo, Yaracuy, Zulia
note: the federal dependency consists of 11 federally controlled
island groups with a total of 72 individual islands

Independence: 5 July 1811 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 5 July (1811)

Constitution: 23 January 1961

Legal system: based on Napoleonic code; judicial review of legislative
acts in Cassation Court only; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Rafael CALDERA Rodriguez (since 2 February
1994); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government
head of government: President Rafael CALDERA Rodriguez (since 2
February 1994); note - the president is both the chief of state and
head of government
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 5 December 1993 (next to be held NA December 1998)
election results : Rafael CALDERA Rodriguez elected president; percent
of vote - Rafael CALDERA Rodriguez (National Convergence) 30.45%,
Claudio FERMIN (AD) 23.59%, Oswaldo ALVAREZ PAZ (COPEI) 22.72%, Andres
VELASQUEZ (Causa R) 21.94%, other 1.3%

Legislative branch: bicameral Congress of the Republic or Congreso de
la Republica consists of the Senate or Senado (53 seats, two from each
state and the Federal District, and retired presidents; members are
elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms) and Chamber of
Deputies or Camara de Diputados (203 seats; members are elected by
popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: Senate - last held 5 December 1993 (next to be held NA
December 1998); Chamber of Deputies - last held 5 December 1993 (next
to be held NA December 1998)
election results: Senate - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - AD 18, COPEI 15, Causa R 9, MAS 5, National Convergence 6;
note - three former presidents (2 from AD, 1 from COPEI) hold lifetime
Senate seats; Chamber of Deputies - percent of vote by party - AD
27.9%, COPEI 26.9%, MAS 12.4%, National Convergence 12.9%, Causa R
19.9%; seats by party - AD 55, COPEI 53, MAS 24, National Convergence
26, Causa R 40, other 5

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justicia),
magistrates are elected by both chambers in joint session

Political parties and leaders: National Convergence (Convergencia),
Jose Miguel UZCATEGUI, president, Juan Jose CALDERA, national
coordinator; Social Christian Party (COPEI), Luis HERRERA Campins,
president, and Donald RAMIREZ, secretary general; Democratic Action
(AD), Pedro PARIS Montesinos, president, and Luis ALFARO Ucero,
secretary general; Movement Toward Socialism (MAS), Gustavo MARQUEZ,
president, and Enrique OCHOA Antich, secretary general; Radical Cause
(La Causa R), Lucas MATHEUS, secretary general

Political pressure groups and leaders: FEDECAMARAS, a conservative
business group; Venezuelan Confederation of Workers (CTV, labor
organization dominated by the Democratic Action); VECINOS groups

International organization participation: AG, BCIE, Caricom
(observer), CCC, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G- 3, G-11, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77,
IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA, MINURSO,
NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPEC, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
UNIKOM, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Pedro Luis ECHEVERRIA
chancery: 1099 30th Street NW, Washington, DC 20007
telephone : [1] (202) 342-2214
FAX: [1] (202) 342-6820
consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Houston, Miami, New Orleans,
New York, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador John Francis MAISTO
embassy: Calle F con Calle Suapure, Colinas de Valle Arriba, Caracas
1060
mailing address: P. O. Box 62291, Caracas 1060-A; APO AA 34037
telephone: [58] (2) 977-2011
FAX: [58] (2) 977-0843

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of yellow (top), blue,
and red with the coat of arms on the hoist side of the yellow band and
an arc of seven white five-pointed stars centered in the blue band

Economy

Economy - overview: The petroleum sector dominates the economy,
accounting for roughly 25% of GDP, 70% of export earnings, and 50% of
central government revenues. It is likely to become even more
important as the state petroleum company plans to double its
production over the next ten years. The non-petroleum sectors have
been contracting, however, with GDP shrinking by 1.6% during 1996.
Realizing the failure of interventionist policies, the CALDERA
administration embarked on a comprehensive reform program and
successfully negotiated a $1.4 billion stand-by agreement with the
IMF. The state eliminated price and exchange controls, reduced the
long-standing subsidy on gasoline, and revitalized its stalled
privatization program. Foreign investors reacted positively and the
Caracas stock exchange ended 1996 as the world's best performing stock
market. The influx of foreign investment and a windfall of oil
revenues resulting from higher-than-expected international oil prices
raised Venezuela's reserves to over $15 billion. As a result,
Venezuela used only the first tranche of the IMF credit - $400
million. The currency depreciated sharply following the exchange
liberalization, and caused an inflationary burst that led to a 103%
yearly rate of inflation, the highest in Venezuelan history. The
bolivar has since strengthened and inflation fell near the end of the
year. The macroeconomic adjustments should take hold in 1997, and the
economy is expected to grow by 4% or more. Increased salary demands by
public and private sector workers, however, threaten a renewal of
inflationary pressures.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $197 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -1.6% (1996)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $9,000 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 5%
industry: 41%
services: 54% (1993)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 103% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 8.8 million
by occupation : services 64%, industry 23%, agriculture 13% (1993)

Unemployment rate: 13% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $11.99 billion
expenditures : $11.48 billion, including capital expenditures of $2.3
billion (1996 est.)

Industries: petroleum, iron ore mining, construction materials, food
processing, textiles, steel, aluminum, motor vehicle assembly

Industrial production growth rate: 0.5% (1995 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 18.966 million kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 74.886 billion kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 2,887 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: corn, sorghum, sugarcane, rice, bananas,
vegetables, coffee; beef, pork, milk, eggs; fish

Exports:
total value : $22.8 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: petroleum 72%, bauxite and aluminum, steel, chemicals,
agricultural products, basic manufactures
partners: US and Puerto Rico 55%, Japan, Netherlands, Italy

Imports:
total value : $10.2 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: raw materials, machinery and equipment, transport
equipment, construction materials
partners: US 40%, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Canada

Debt - external: $26.5 billion (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $46 million (1993)

Currency: 1 bolivar (Bs) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates: bolivares (Bs) per US$1 - 476.840 (January 1997),
417.333 (1996), 176.843 (1995), 148.503 (1994), 90.826 (1993), 68.376
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Venezuela:Communications

Telephones: 1.44 million (1987 est.)

Telephone system: modern and expanding
domestic: domestic satellite system with 3 earth stations
international: 3 submarine coaxial cables; satellite earth station - 1
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 181, FM 0, shortwave 26

Radios: 9.04 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 59

Televisions: 3.3 million (1992 est.)

@Venezuela:Transportation

Railways:
total : 584 km (336 km single track; 248 km privately owned)
standard gauge: 584 km 1.435-m gauge

Highways:
total: 82,700 km
paved: 32,501 km
unpaved: 50,199 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 7,100 km; Rio Orinoco and Lago de Maracaibo accept
oceangoing vessels

Pipelines: crude oil 6,370 km; petroleum products 480 km; natural gas
4,010 km

Ports and harbors: Amuay, Bajo Grande, El Tablazo, La Guaira, La
Salina, Maracaibo, Matanzas, Palua, Puerto Cabello, Puerto la Cruz,
Puerto Ordaz, Puerto Sucre, Punta Cardon

Merchant marine:
total: 28 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 525,123 GRT/933,016 DWT
ships by type: bulk 4, cargo 7, combination bulk 1, container 1,
liquefied gas tanker 2, oil tanker 9, passenger-cargo 1,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 2, short-sea passenger 1 (1996 est.)

Airports: 360 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 261
over 3,047 m: 5
2,438 to 3,047 m: 10
1,524 to 2,437 m: 35
914 to 1,523 m: 58
under 914 m: 153 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 99
1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
914 to 1,523 m: 92 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: National Armed Forces (Fuerzas Armadas Nacionales
or FAN) includes Ground Forces or Army (Fuerzas Terrestres or
Ejercito), Naval Forces (Fuerzas Navales or Armada), Air Force
(Fuerzas Aereas or Aviacion), Armed Forces of Cooperation or National
Guard (Fuerzas Armadas de Cooperacion or Guardia Nacional)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 5,997,099 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 4,333,497 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 238,650 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $902 million (1996)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.4% (1996)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims all of Guyana west of the Essequibo
River; maritime boundary dispute with Colombia in the Gulf of
Venezuela

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis, opium, and coca leaf for
the international drug trade on a small scale; however, large
quantities of cocaine and heroin transit the country from Colombia;
important money-laundering hub; active aerial eradication program
primarily targeting opium
______________________________________________________________________

VIETNAM

@Vietnam:Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, bordering the Gulf of Thailand, Gulf of
Tonkin, and South China Sea, between China and Cambodia

Geographic coordinates: 16 00 N, 106 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 329,560 sq km
land: 325,360 sq km
water : 4,200 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than New Mexico

Land boundaries:
total: 4,639 km
border countries: Cambodia 1,228 km, China 1,281 km, Laos 2,130 km

Coastline: 3,444 km (excludes islands)

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone : 24 nm
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical in south; monsoonal in north with hot, rainy season
(mid-May to mid-September) and warm, dry season (mid-October to
mid-March)

Terrain: low, flat delta in south and north; central highlands; hilly,
mountainous in far north and northwest

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: South China Sea 0 m
highest point: Ngoc Linh 3,143 m

Natural resources: phosphates, coal, manganese, bauxite, chromate,
offshore oil and gas deposits, forests

Land use:
arable land: 17%
permanent crops: 4%
permanent pastures : 1%
forests and woodland: 30%
other: 48% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 18,600 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons (May to January) with extensive
flooding

Environment - current issues: logging and slash-and-burn agricultural
practices contribute to deforestation and soil degradation; water
pollution and overfishing threaten marine life populations;
groundwater contamination limits potable water supply; growing urban
industrialization and population migration are rapidly degrading
environment in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone
Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: Nuclear Test Ban

@Vietnam:People

Population: 75,123,880 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 36% (male 13,713,340; female 12,946,322)
15-64 years: 59% (male 21,547,228; female 22,997,231)
65 years and over : 5% (male 1,573,823; female 2,345,936) (July 1997
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.51% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 22.3 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 6.8 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.41 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.67 male(s)/female
total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 37.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 67.38 years
male: 65.03 years
female: 69.86 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.6 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Vietnamese (singular and plural)
adjective: Vietnamese

Ethnic groups: Vietnamese 85%-90%, Chinese 3%, Muong, Tai, Meo, Khmer,
Man, Cham

Religions: Buddhist, Taoist, Roman Catholic, indigenous beliefs,
Islam, Protestant, Cao Dai, Hoa Hao

Languages: Vietnamese (official), Chinese, English, French, Khmer,
tribal languages (Mon-Khmer and Malayo-Polynesian)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 93.7%
male: 96.5%
female: 91.2% (1995 est.)

@Vietnam:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Socialist Republic of Vietnam
conventional short form: Vietnam
local long form: Cong Hoa Chu Nghia Viet Nam
local short form : Viet Nam
abbreviation: SRV

Data code: VM

Government type: Communist state

National capital: Hanoi

Administrative divisions: 50 provinces (tinh, singular and plural), 3
municipalities* (thu do, singular and plural); An Giang, Ba Ria-Vung
Tau, Bac Thai, Ben Tre, Binh Dinh, Binh Thuan, Can Tho, Cao Bang, Dac
Lac, Dong Nai, Dong Thap, Gia Lai, Ha Bac, Ha Giang, Ha Noi*, Ha Tay,
Ha Tinh, Hai Hung, Hai Phong*, Ho Chi Minh*, Hoa Binh, Khanh Hoa, Kien
Giang, Kon Tum, Lai Chau, Lam Dong, Lang Son, Lao Cai, Long An, Minh
Hai, Nam Ha, Nghe An, Ninh Binh, Ninh Thuan, Phu Yen, Quang Binh,
Quang Nam-Da Nang, Quang Ngai, Quang Ninh, Quang Tri, Soc Trang, Son
La, Song Be, Tay Ninh, Thai Binh, Thanh Hoa, Thua Thien-Hue, Tien
Giang, Tra Vinh, Tuyen Quang, Vinh Long, Vinh Phu, Yen Bai
note: eight existing provinces (Bac Thai, Ha Bac, Hai Hung, Minh Hai,
Nam Ha, Quang Nam-Da Nang, Song Be, and Vinh Phu) may have been
abolished and from their territory 15 new provinces and one new
municipality* (Bac Can, Bac Giang, Bac Lieu, Bac Ninh, Binh Duong,
Binh Phuoc, Ca Mau, Da Nang City*, Ha Nam, Hai Duong, Hung Yen, Nam
Dinh, Phu Tho, Quang Nam, Thai Nguyen, and Vinh Phuc) may have been
created

Independence: 2 September 1945 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 2 September (1945)

Constitution: 15 April 1992

Legal system: based on communist legal theory and French civil law
system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President Le Duc ANH (since 23 September 1992)
head of government: Prime Minister Vo Van KIET (since 9 August 1991);
First Deputy Prime Minister Phan Van KHAI (since 10 August 1991);
Deputy Prime Ministers Nguyen KHANH (since NA February 1987) and Tran
Duc LUONG (since NA February 1987)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president on the proposal of the
prime minister and ratification of the National Assembly
elections: president elected by the National Assembly from among its
members for a five-year term; election last held 23 September 1992
(next to be held when National Assembly meets following legislative
elections in July 1997); prime minister appointed by the president
from among the members of the National Assembly; deputy prime
ministers appointed by the prime minister
election results: Le Duc ANH elected president; percent of National
Assembly vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Quoc-Hoi (395
seats; members elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 19 July 1992 (next to be held 20 July 1997)
election results: percent of vote by party - CPV or CPV-approved 100%;
seats by party - CPV or CPV-approved 395

Judicial branch: Supreme People's Court, chief justice is elected for
a five-year term by the National Assembly on the recommendation of the
president

Political parties and leaders: only party - Communist Party of Vietnam
(CPV), DO MUOI, general secretary

International organization participation: ACCT, AsDB, ASEAN, CCC,
ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, Mekong
Group, NAM, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission : Ambassador Le Van BANG
chancery: 1233 20th Street NW, Washington, DC 20036, Suite 501
telephone: [1] (202) 861-0737
FAX: [1] (202) 861-0917

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Douglas "Pete" Peterson
embassy : 7 Lang Ha Road, Ba Dinh District, Hanoi
mailing address: PSC 461, Box 400, FPO AP 96521-0002
telephone: [84] (4) 8431500
FAX: [84] (4) 8350484 or 8431510

Flag description: red with a large yellow five-pointed star in the
center

Economy

Economy - overview: Vietnam is a poor, densely populated country that
has had to recover from the ravages of war, the loss of financial
support from the old Soviet Bloc, and the rigidities of a centrally
planned economy. Substantial progress has been achieved over the past
10 years in moving forward from an extremely low starting point.
Economic growth continued at a strong pace during 1996 with industrial
output rising by 14% and real GDP expanding by 9.4%. Foreign direct
investment rose to an estimated $2.3 billion for the year, up by about
30% from 1995. These positive numbers, however, masked some major
difficulties that are emerging in economic performance. Many domestic
industries, including coal, cement, steel, and paper, reported large
stockpiles of inventory and tough competition from more efficient
foreign producers. Vietnam's trade deficit widened to $4 billion in
1996, up over 80% from a year ago. While disbursements of aid and
foreign direct investment have risen, they are not large enough to
finance the rapid increase in imports and it is widely believed that
Vietnam may be using short-term trade credits to bridge the gap - a
risky strategy that could result in a foreign exchange crunch during
1997. Meanwhile, Vietnamese authorities continue to move very slowly
toward implementing the structural reforms needed to revitalize the
economy and produce more competitive, export-driven industries.
Privatization of state enterprises remains bogged down in political
controversy, while the country's dynamic private sector is denied both
financing and access to markets. Reform of the banking sector is
proceeding slowly, raising concerns that the country will be unable to
tap sufficient domestic savings to maintain current high levels of
growth. Administrative and legal barriers are also causing costly
delays for foreign investors and are raising similar doubts about
Vietnam's ability to maintain the inflow of foreign capital.
Ideological bias in favor of state intervention and control of the
economy is slowing progress toward a more liberalized investment
environment.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $108.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 9.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,470 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 28%
industry: 28%
services: 44% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 4.5% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 32.7 million
by occupation: agriculture 65%, industry and services 35% (1990 est.)

Unemployment rate: 25% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $4.67 billion
expenditures: $5 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.36
billion (1995 est.)

Industries: food processing, garments, shoes, machine building,
mining, cement, chemical fertilizer, glass, tires, oil

Industrial production growth rate: 14% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 5.32 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 11.78 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 154 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: paddy rice, corn, potatoes, rubber, soybeans,
coffee, tea, bananas; poultry, pigs; fish

Exports:
total value : $7.1 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: crude oil, rice, marine products, coffee, rubber, tea,
garments, shoes
partners: Japan, Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong, France, South Korea

Imports:
total value: $11.1 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: petroleum products, machinery and equipment, steel
products, fertilizer, raw cotton, grain, cement, motorcycles
partners: Singapore, South Korea, Japan, France, Hong Kong, Taiwan

Debt - external: $7.3 billion Western countries; $4.5 billion CEMA
debts primarily to Russia; $9 billion to $18 billion nonconvertible
debt (former CEMA, Iraq, Iran)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA
note: $2.4 billion in credits and grants pledged by international
donors for 1997

Currency: 1 new dong (D) = 100 xu

Exchange rates: new dong (D) per US$1 - 11,100 (December 1996), 11,193
(1995 average), 11,000 (October 1994), 10,800 (November 1993), 8,100
(July 1991)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Vietnam:Communications

Telephones: 800,000 (1995 est.)

Telephone system: while Vietnam's telecommunication sector lags far
behind other countries in Southeast Asia, Hanoi has made considerable
progress since 1991 in upgrading the system; Vietnam has digitized all
provincial switch boards, while fiber-optic and microwave transmission
systems have been extended from Hanoi, Da Nang, and Ho Chi Minh City
to all provinces; the density of telephone receivers nationwide
doubled from 1993 to 1995, but is still far behind other countries in
the region; Vietnam's telecommunications strategy aims to increase
telephone density to 30 per 1,000 inhabitants by the year 2000 and
authorities estimate that approximately $2.7 billion will be spent on
telecommunications upgrades through the end of the decade
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean
region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM 228, shortwave 0

Radios: 7.215 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 36 (repeaters 77)

Televisions: 2.9 million (1992 est.)

@Vietnam:Transportation

Railways:
total : 2,835 km (in addition, there are 224 km not restored to
service after war damage)
standard gauge: 151 km 1.435-m gauge
narrow gauge: 2,454 km 1.000-m gauge
other gauge: 230 km NA-m dual gauge (three rails)

Highways:
total : 106,048 km
paved: 27,466 km
unpaved: 78,582 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 17,702 km navigable; more than 5,149 km navigable at all
times by vessels up to 1.8 m draft

Pipelines: petroleum products 150 km

Ports and harbors: Cam Ranh, Da Nang, Haiphong, Ho Chi Minh City, Hong
Gai, Qui Nhon, Nha Trang

Merchant marine:
total : 121 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 534,937 GRT/863,307 DWT
ships by type: bulk 5, cargo 100, chemical tanker 1, oil tanker 9,
refrigerated cargo 5, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1
note: Vietnam owns an additional 8 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
107,592 DWT operating under the registries of The Bahamas, Honduras,
Malta, Panama, and Vanuatu (1996 est.)

Airports: 48 (1994 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 36
over 3,047 m: 8
2,438 to 3,047 m : 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
914 to 1,523 m: 13
under 914 m: 7 (1994 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 12
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
914 to 1,523 m : 5
under 914 m: 5 (1994 est.)

Military

Military branches: People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) (includes Ground
Forces, Navy, and Air Force)

Military manpower - military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 19,172,473 (1996 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 12,123,118 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males : 802,154 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $544 million (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.7% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: maritime boundary with Cambodia not defined;
involved in a complex dispute over the Spratly Islands in the South
China Sea with China, Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan, and possibly
Brunei; unresolved maritime boundary with Thailand; maritime boundary
dispute with China in the Gulf of Tonkin; Paracel Islands in the South
China Sea occupied by China but claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan;
offshore islands and sections of boundary with Cambodia are in dispute

Illicit drugs: key growing areas in Vietnam cultivated 3,150 hectares
of poppy in 1996, producing 25 tons of opium; opium producer and
increasingly important transit point for Southeast Asian heroin
destined for the US and Europe; growing opium addiction; possible
small-scale heroin production
______________________________________________________________________

VIRGIN ISLANDS

(territory of the US)

@Virgin Islands:Geography

Location: Caribbean, islands between the Caribbean Sea and the North
Atlantic Ocean, east of Puerto Rico

Geographic coordinates: 18 20 N, 64 50 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
total: 352 sq km
land: 349 sq km
water: 3 sq km

Area - comparative: twice the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 188 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: subtropical, tempered by easterly trade winds, relatively low
humidity, little seasonal temperature variation; rainy season May to
November

Terrain: mostly hilly to rugged and mountainous with little level land

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
highest point: Crown Mountain 474 m

Natural resources: sun, sand, sea, surf

Land use:
arable land: 15%
permanent crops: 6%
permanent pastures : 26%
forests and woodland: 6%
other: 47% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: several hurricanes in recent years; frequent and
severe droughts, floods, and earthquakes

Environment - current issues: lack of natural freshwater resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified : NA

Geography - note: important location along the Anegada Passage - a key
shipping lane for the Panama Canal; Saint Thomas has one of the best
natural, deepwater harbors in the Caribbean

@Virgin Islands:People

Population: 97,240 (July 1997 est.)
note: West Indian (45% born in the Virgin Islands and 29% born
elsewhere in the West Indies) 74%, US mainland 13%, Puerto Rican 5%,
other 8%

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years : NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 0.18% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 16.72 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.2 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -9.7 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 12.54 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 75.29 years
male: 73.6 years
female: 77.2 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.18 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Virgin Islander(s)
adjective: Virgin Islander

Ethnic groups: black 80%, white 15%, other 5%

Religions: Baptist 42%, Roman Catholic 34%, Episcopalian 17%, other 7%

Languages: English (official), Spanish, Creole

Literacy: NA

@Virgin Islands:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Virgin Islands of the United States
conventional short form: Virgin Islands
former: Danish West Indies

Data code: VQ

Dependency status: organized, unincorporated territory of the US;
administered by the Office of Territorial and International Affairs,
US Department of the Interior

Government type: NA

National capital: Charlotte Amalie

Administrative divisions: none (territory of the US)

National holiday: Transfer Day, 31 March (1917) (from Denmark to US)

Constitution: Revised Organic Act of 22 July 1954

Legal system: based on US laws

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal; note - indigenous inhabitants
are US citizens but do not vote in US presidential elections

Executive branch:
chief of state : President of the US William Jefferson CLINTON (since
20 January 1993); Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January
1993)
head of government: Governor Dr. Roy L. SCHNEIDER (since 5 January
1995) and Lieutenant Governor Kenneth E. MAPP (since 5 January 1995)
cabinet: NA
elections : governor and lieutenant governor of the Virgin Islands
elected by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 22
November 1994 (next to be held NA November 1998)
election results: Dr. Roy L. SCHNEIDER elected governor of the Virgin
Islands; percent of vote - Roy L. SCHNEIDER (ICM) 54.7%, former
Lieutenant Governor Derek HODGE 42.6%

Legislative branch: unicameral Senate (15 seats; members are elected
by popular vote to serve two-year terms)
elections: last held 5 November 1996 (next to be held NA November
1998)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
independents 6, Democrats 5, Republicans 2, Independent Citizens
Movement 2
note: the Virgin Islands elects one representative to the US House of
Representatives; elections last held 19 November 1996 (next to be held
NA November 1998); results - Dr. Donna GREEN (ICM) 51.5%, Victor O.
FRAZER (independent) 48.5%

Judicial branch: US District Court, handles civil matters over
$200,000, felonies (persons 15 years of age and over), and federal
cases; judges are appointed by the president; Territorial Court,
handles civil matters of unlimited cash amount; felonies, small
claims, juvenile, domestic, misdemeanors, and traffic cases; judges
appointed by the governor

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party, Marilyn STAPLETON;
Independent Citizens' Movement (ICM), Virdin C. BROWN; Republican
Party, Charlotte-Poole DAVIS

International organization participation: ECLAC (associate), IOC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of the US)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of the US)

Flag description: white with a modified US coat of arms in the center
between the large blue initials V and I; the coat of arms shows a
yellow eagle holding an olive branch in one talon and three arrows in
the other with a superimposed shield of vertical red and white stripes
below a blue panel

Economy

Economy - overview: Tourism is the primary economic activity,
accounting for more than 70% of GDP and 70% of employment. The number
of US tourists in the first five months of 1996 was down by 55% from
the same period in 1995, the lingering result of the fierce hurricanes
of 1995. Unemployment rose sharply in 1996. The manufacturing sector
consists of textile, electronics, pharmaceutical, and watch assembly
plants. The agricultural sector is small, most food being imported.
International business and financial services are a small but growing
component of the economy. One of the world's largest petroleum
refineries is at Saint Croix. A major economic problem at the
beginning of 1997 was the more than $1 billion in governmental
arrears, in income tax refunds, payments to vendors, and overdue
wages.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.2 billion (1987 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $12,500 (1987 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services : NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 47,443 (1990 est.)
by occupation: agriculture, industry, services, other (1990 est.)

Unemployment rate: 6.2% (March 1994)

Budget:
revenues: $364.4 million
expenditures : $364.4 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1990 est.)

Industries: tourism, petroleum refining, watch assembly, rum
distilling, construction, pharmaceuticals, textiles, electronics

Industrial production growth rate: 12% (year NA)

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: 990 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 9,565 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: truck garden products, fruit, vegetables,
sorghum; Senepol cattle

Exports:
total value: $1.8 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities : refined petroleum products
partners: US, Puerto Rico

Imports:
total value: $2.2 billion (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: crude oil, foodstuffs, consumer goods, building materials
partners: US, Puerto Rico

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September

@Virgin Islands:Communications

Telephones: 60,000 (1990 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : modern, uses fiber-optic cable and microwave radio relay
international: submarine cable and satellite communications; satellite
earth stations - NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 8, shortwave 0 (1988)

Radios: 105,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1988 est.)

Televisions: 65,000 (1992 est.)

@Virgin Islands:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 856 km
paved: NA km
unpaved : NA km

Ports and harbors: Charlotte Amalie, Christiansted, Cruz Bay, Port
Alucroix

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2
note: international airports on Saint Thomas and Saint Croix (1996
est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 2

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

WAKE ISLAND

(territory of the US)

@Wake Island:Geography

Location: Oceania, island in the North Pacific Ocean, about two-thirds
of the way from Hawaii to the Northern Mariana Islands

Geographic coordinates: 19 17 N, 166 36 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 6.5 sq km
land: 6.5 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 11 times the size of The Mall in Washington,
DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 19.3 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea : 12 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: atoll of three coral islands built up on an underwater
volcano; central lagoon is former crater, islands are part of the rim

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: unnamed location 6 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
arable land: 0%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 0%
other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography - note: strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean;
emergency landing location for transpacific flights

@Wake Island:People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants
note: there are 302 US military and contract personnel (July 1995
est.)

@Wake Island:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form : Wake Island

Data code: WQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US; administered by
the US Army and Strategic Defense Command since 1 October 1994

National capital: none; administered from Washington, DC

Independence: none (territory of the US)

Flag description: the flag of the US is used

Economy

Economy - overview: Economic activity is limited to providing services
to US military personnel and contractors located on the island. All
food and manufactured goods must be imported.

Electricity - capacity: NA kW
note: electricity supplied by the US military

Electricity - production: NA kWh
note: electricity supplied by the US military

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

@Wake Island:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system: satellite communications; 1 DSN circuit off the
Overseas Telephone System (OTS)
domestic : NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 0, FM NA, shortwave NA
note : Armed Forces Radio/Television Service (AFRTS) radio service
provided by satellite

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA
note: Armed Forces Radio/Television Service (AFRTS) television service
provided by satellite

Televisions: NA

@Wake Island:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Ports and harbors: none; two offshore anchorages for large ships

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Transportation - note: formerly an important commercial aviation base,
now used by US military, some commercial cargo planes, as well as the
US Army Space and Strategic Defense Command for missile launches

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claimed by the Republic of the Marshall
Islands
______________________________________________________________________

WALLIS AND FUTUNA

(overseas territory of France)

@Wallis and Futuna:Geography

Location: Oceania, islands in the South Pacific Ocean, about
two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 13 18 S, 176 12 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 274 sq km
land: 274 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Ile Uvea (Wallis Island), Ile Futuna (Futuna Island),
Ile Alofi, and 20 islets

Area - comparative: 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 129 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone : 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, rainy season (November to April); cool, dry
season (May to October); rains 2,500-3,000 mm per year (80% humidity);
average temperature 26.6 degrees C

Terrain: volcanic origin; low hills

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point : Mount Singavi 765 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land : 5%
permanent crops: 20%
permanent pastures: NA%
forests and woodland: NA%
other: 75% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: deforestation (only small portions of
the original forests remain) largely as a result of the continued use
of wood as the main fuel source; as a consequence of cutting down the
forests, the mountainous terrain of Futuna is particularly prone to
erosion; there are no permanent settlements on Alofi because of the
lack of natural fresh water resources

Environment - international agreements:
party to: NA
signed, but not ratified : NA

Geography - note: both island groups have fringing reefs

@Wallis and Futuna:People

Population: 14,817 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years: NA
65 years and over : NA

Population growth rate: 1.08% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23.7 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.9 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -7.95 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 22.26 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 73.29 years
male : 72.7 years
female: 73.9 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.89 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Wallisian(s), Futunan(s), or Wallis and Futuna Islanders
adjective: Wallisian, Futunan, or Wallis and Futuna Islander

Ethnic groups: Polynesian

Religions: Roman Catholic 100%

Languages: French, Wallisian (indigenous Polynesian language)

Literacy:
definition : age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 50%
male: 50%
female: 50% (1969 est.)

@Wallis and Futuna:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Territory of the Wallis and Futuna Islands
conventional short form: Wallis and Futuna
local long form: Territoire des Iles Wallis et Futuna
local short form: Wallis et Futuna

Data code: WF

Dependency status: overseas territory of France

Government type: NA

National capital: Mata-Utu (on Ile Uvea)

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of France); there
are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
Government, but there are three kingdoms named Wallis, Sigave, Alo

Independence: none (overseas territory of France)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French legal system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : President of France Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May
1995), represented by High Administrator Claude PIERRET (since NA)
head of government: President of the Territorial Assembly Keleto
LAKALAKA (since NA)
cabinet: Council of the Territory consists of three kings and three
members appointed by the high administrator on the advice of the
Territorial Assembly
note : there are three traditional kings with limited powers
elections: high administrator appointed by the president of France on
the advice of the French Ministry of the Interior; the presidents of
the Territorial Government and the Territorial Assembly are elected by
the members of the assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral Territorial Assembly or Assemblee
Territoriale (20 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms)
elections : last held 22 March 1992 (next to be held NA March 1997)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - RPR
9, Taumu'a Lelei 11
note: Wallis and Futuna elects one senator to the French Senate and
one deputy to the French National Assembly; French Senate - elections
last held 24 September 1989 (next to be held by NA September 1998);
results - percent of vote by party - NA; seats - (1 total) RPR 1;
French National Assembly - elections last held 21 and 28 March 1993
(next to be held by 25 May-1 June 1997 - special election); results -
percent of vote by party - NA; seats - (1 total) MRG 1

Judicial branch: none; justice generally administered under French law
by the high administrator, but the three traditional kings administer
customary law and there is a magistrate in Mata-Utu

Political parties and leaders: Rally for the Republic or RPR; Union
Populaire Locale or UPL; Union Pour la Democratie Francaise or UDF;
Lua kae tahi (Giscardians); Mouvement des Radicaux de Gauche or MRG;
Taumu'a Lelei

International organization participation: FZ, SPC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory of
France)

Flag description: a large white modified Maltese cross centered on a
red background; the flag of France outlined in white on two sides is
in the upper hoist quadrant; the flag of France is used for official
occasions

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is limited to traditional subsistence
agriculture, with about 80% of the labor force earning its livelihood
from agriculture (coconuts and vegetables), livestock (mostly pigs),
and fishing. About 4% of the population is employed in government.
Revenues come from French Government subsidies, licensing of fishing
rights to Japan and South Korea, import taxes, and remittances from
expatriate workers in New Caledonia. Wallis and Futuna imports food -
particularly sugar, rice, and beef - fuel, clothing, machinery, and
transport equipment, but its exports are negligible, consisting of
copra and handicrafts.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $28.7 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,000 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force: NA
by occupation: agriculture, livestock, and fishing 80%, government 4%
(est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $17 million
expenditures : $17 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1995 est.)

Industries: copra, handicrafts, fishing, lumber

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: yams, taro, bananas; pigs, goats

Exports:
total value: $370,000 (f.o.b., 1995 est.)
commodities: copra, handicrafts
partners: NA

Imports:
total value: $13.5 million (c.i.f., 1995 est.)
commodities: foodstuffs, manufactured goods, transportation equipment,
fuel, clothing
partners : France, Australia, New Zealand

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 CFP franc (CFPF) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique francs (CFPF) per US$1
- 98.48 (January 1997), 93.00 (1996), 90.75 (1995), 100.94 (1994),
102.96 (1993), 96.24 (1992); note - linked at the rate of 18.18 to the
French franc

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Wallis and Futuna:Communications

Telephones: 340 (1985 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic : NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: NA

@Wallis and Futuna:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 120 km (Ile Uvea 100 km, Ile Futuna 20 km)
paved: 16 km (all on Ile Uvea)
unpaved: 104 km (Ile Uvea 84 km, Ile Futuna 20 km)

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Leava, Mata-Utu

Merchant marine:
total: 1 oil tanker (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 25,060 GRT/40,406 DWT
(1996 est.)

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

WEST BANK

Introduction

Current issues: The Israel-PLO Declaration of Principles on Interim
Self-Government Arrangements ("the DOP"), signed in Washington on 13
September 1993, provides for a transitional period not exceeding five
years of Palestinian interim self-government in the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank. Permanent status negotiations began on 5 May 1996. Under
the DOP, Israel agreed to transfer certain powers and responsibilities
to the Palestinian Authority, which includes a Palestinian Legislative
Council elected in January 1996, as part of interim self-governing
arrangements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. A transfer of powers and
responsibilities for the Gaza Strip and Jericho has taken place
pursuant to the Israel-PLO 4 May 1994 Cairo Agreement on the Gaza
Strip and the Jericho Area and in additional areas of the West Bank
pursuant to the Israel-PLO 28 September 1995 Interim Agreement. The
DOP provides that Israel will retain responsibility during the
transitional period for external security and for internal security
and public order of settlements and Israelis. Permanent status is to
be determined through direct negotiations which began on 5 May 1996.

@West Bank:Geography

Location: Middle East, west of Jordan

Geographic coordinates: 32 00 N, 35 15 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 5,860 sq km
land: 5,640 sq km
water: 220 sq km
note: includes West Bank, Latrun Salient, and the northwest quarter of
the Dead Sea, but excludes Mt. Scopus; East Jerusalem and Jerusalem No
Man's Land are also included only as a means of depicting the entire
area occupied by Israel in 1967

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Delaware

Land boundaries:
total : 404 km
border countries: Israel 307 km, Jordan 97 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate, temperature and precipitation vary with altitude,
warm to hot summers, cool to mild winters

Terrain: mostly rugged dissected upland, some vegetation in west, but
barren in east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Dead Sea -408 m
highest point: Tall Asur 1,022 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
arable land: 27%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 32%
forests and woodland: 1%
other: 40%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Environment - international agreements:
party to: none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked; highlands are main recharge area for
Israel's coastal aquifers; there are 203 Israeli settlements and
civilian land use sites in the West Bank and 26 in East Jerusalem
(August 1996 est.)

@West Bank:People

Population: 1,495,683 (July 1997 est.)
note: in addition, there are 136,000 Israeli settlers in the West Bank
and 156,000 in East Jerusalem (August 1996 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 46% (male 347,152; female 329,906)
15-64 years : 51% (male 387,847; female 380,629)
65 years and over: 3% (male 21,223; female 28,926) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 4.32% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 37.71 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 4.5 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 10.03 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.73 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 27.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 72.11 years
male: 70.43 years
female: 73.88 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.06 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : NA
adjective: NA

Ethnic groups: Palestinian Arab and other 83%, Jewish 17%

Religions: Muslim 75% (predominantly Sunni), Jewish 17%, Christian and
other 8%

Languages: Arabic, Hebrew (spoken by Israeli settlers and many
Palestinians), English (widely understood)

Literacy: NA

@West Bank:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: West Bank

Data code: WE

Economy

Economy - overview: Economic progress in the West Bank has been
hampered by tight Israeli security restrictions. Industries using
advanced technology or requiring sizable investment have been
discouraged by a lack of local capital and restrictive Israeli
policies. Capital investment consists largely of residential housing,
not productive assets that would enable local Palestinian firms to
compete with Israeli industry. GDP has been substantially supplemented
by remittances of workers employed in Israel. Such transfers from the
Persian Gulf states dropped after Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990.
In the wake of the Persian Gulf crisis, many Palestinians have
returned to the West Bank, increasing unemployment, and export
revenues have dropped because of the decline of markets in Jordan and
the Gulf states. An estimated 147,000 people were in refugee camps in
1996.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $2.8 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -1% to -2% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,600 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 33%
industry: 25%
services: 42% (1995 est., includes Gaza Strip)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 11% (1995 est.)

Labor force: NA
by occupation: construction 28.2%, agriculture 21.8%, industry 14.5%,
commerce, restaurants, and hotels 12.6%, other services 22.9% (1991)
note: excluding Israeli settlers

Unemployment rate: 35% to 40% (1996 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $684 million
expenditures: $779 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996)
note : includes Gaza Strip

Industries: generally small family businesses that produce cement,
textiles, soap, olive-wood carvings, and mother-of-pearl souvenirs;
the Israelis have established some small-scale, modern industries in
the settlements and industrial centers

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: NA kW
note: most electricity imported from Israel; East Jerusalem Electric
Company buys and distributes electricity to Palestinians in East
Jerusalem and its concession in the West Bank; the Israel Electric
Company directly supplies electricity to most Jewish residents and
military facilities; at the same time, some Palestinian
municipalities, such as Nabulus and Janin, generate their own
electricity from small power plants

Electricity - production: NA kWh
note: most electricity imported from Israel; East Jerusalem Electric
Company buys and distributes electricity to Palestinians in East
Jerusalem and its concession in the West Bank; the Israel Electric
Company directly supplies electricity to most Jewish residents and
military facilities; at the same time, some Palestinian
municipalities, such as Nabulus and Janin, generate their own
electricity from small power plants

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: olives, citrus and other fruits, vegetables;
beef, dairy products

Exports:
total value: $235 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.) (includes Gaza Strip)
commodities : olives, fruit, vegetables
partners: Jordan, Israel

Imports:
total value: $1.55 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.) (includes Gaza Strip)
commodities: food, consumer goods, construction materials
partners : Jordan, Israel

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 new Israeli shekel (NIS) = 100 new agorot; 1 Jordanian
dinar (JD) = 1,000 fils

Exchange rates: new Israeli shekels (NIS) per US$1 - 3.41 (May 1997),
3.2882 (1996), 3.0113 (1995), 3.0111 (1994), 2.8301 (1993), 2.4591
(1992); Jordanian dinars (JD) per US$1 - 0.7090 (January 1997), 0.7090
(1996), 0.7005 (1995), 0.6987 (1994), 0.6928 (1993), 0.6797 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year (since 1 January 1992)

@West Bank:Communications

Telephones: NA
note: 3.1% of Palestinian households have telephones

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international : NA
note: Israeli company BEZEK is responsible for communication services
in the West Bank

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA; note - 82% of Palestinian households have radios (1992
est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0
note: 1 broadcast station is planned for Jericho

Televisions: NA; note - 54% of Palestinian households have televisions
(1992 est.)

@West Bank:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: NA km
paved: NA km
unpaved: NA km
note: small road network; Israelis have developed many highways to
service Jewish settlements

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: NA

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: West Bank and Gaza Strip are Israeli
occupied with current status subject to the Israeli-Palestinian
Interim Agreement - permanent status to be determined through further
negotiation
______________________________________________________________________

WESTERN SAHARA

@Western Sahara:Geography

Location: Northern Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean, between
Mauritania and Morocco

Geographic coordinates: 24 30 N, 13 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 266,000 sq km
land: 266,000 sq km
water: 0 sq km

Area - comparative: about the size of Colorado

Land boundaries:
total: 2,046 km
border countries: Algeria 42 km, Mauritania 1,561 km, Morocco 443 km

Coastline: 1,110 km

Maritime claims: contingent upon resolution of sovereignty issue

Climate: hot, dry desert; rain is rare; cold offshore air currents
produce fog and heavy dew

Terrain: mostly low, flat desert with large areas of rocky or sandy
surfaces rising to small mountains in south and northeast

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Sebjet Tah -55 m
highest point : unnamed location 463 m

Natural resources: phosphates, iron ore

Land use:
arable land : 19%
permanent crops: 24%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 47%
other: 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dust/sand-laden sirocco wind can occur
during winter and spring; widespread harmattan haze exists 60% of
time, often severely restricting visibility

Environment - current issues: sparse water and arable land

Environment - international agreements:
party to: none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

@Western Sahara:People

Population: 228,138 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: NA
15-64 years : NA
65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 2.43% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 46.14 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 17.53 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -4.28 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: NA male(s)/female
under 15 years: NA male(s)/female
15-64 years: NA male(s)/female
65 years and over: NA male(s)/female
total population: NA male(s)/female

Infant mortality rate: 142.75 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 47.71 years
male: 46.66 years
female: 49.09 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.8 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Sahrawi(s), Sahraoui(s)
adjective: Sahrawian, Sahraouian

Ethnic groups: Arab, Berber

Religions: Muslim

Languages: Hassaniya Arabic, Moroccan Arabic

Literacy: NA

@Western Sahara:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Western Sahara

Data code: WI

Government type: legal status of territory and question of sovereignty
unresolved; territory contested by Morocco and Polisario Front
(Popular Front for the Liberation of the Saguia el Hamra and Rio de
Oro), which in February 1976 formally proclaimed a government-in-exile
of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR); territory partitioned
between Morocco and Mauritania in April 1976, with Morocco acquiring
northern two-thirds; Mauritania, under pressure from Polisario
guerrillas, abandoned all claims to its portion in August 1979;
Morocco moved to occupy that sector shortly thereafter and has since
asserted administrative control; the Polisario's government-in-exile
was seated as an OAU member in 1984; guerrilla activities continued
sporadically, until a UN-monitored cease-fire was implemented 6
September 1991

National capital: none

Administrative divisions: none (under de facto control of Morocco)

Suffrage: none; a UN sponsored voter identification campaign has yet
to be completed

Executive branch: none

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none

Diplomatic representation from the US: none

Economy

Economy - overview: Western Sahara, a territory poor in natural
resources and having little rainfall, depends on pastoral nomadism,
fishing, and phosphate mining as the principal sources of income for
the population. Most of the food for the urban population must be
imported. All trade and other economic activities are controlled by
the Moroccan Government. Incomes and standards of living are
substantially below the Moroccan level.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: NA%
industry: NA%
services: 40%-45% (1996 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: NA%

Labor force:
total: 12,000
by occupation: animal husbandry and subsistence farming 50%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $NA
expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: phosphate mining, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 56,000 kW (1995)

Electricity - production: 85 million kWh (1995)

Electricity - consumption per capita: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: fruits and vegetables (grown in the few
oases); camels, sheep, goats (kept by the nomads)

Exports: $NA
commodities: phosphates 62%
partners: Morocco claims and administers Western Sahara, so trade
partners are included in overall Moroccan accounts

Imports: $NA
commodities: fuel for fishing fleet, foodstuffs
partners : Morocco claims and administers Western Sahara, so trade
partners are included in overall Moroccan accounts

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $NA

Currency: 1 Moroccan dirham (DH) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Moroccan dirhams (DH) per US$1 - 9.018 (January 1997),
8.716 (1996), 8.540 (1995), 9.203 (1994), 9.299 (1993), 8.538 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Western Sahara:Communications

Telephones: 2,000

Telephone system: sparse and limited system
domestic: NA
international: tied into Morocco's system by microwave radio relay,
tropospheric scatter, and satellite; satellite earth stations - 2
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) linked to Rabat, Morocco

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2

Televisions: NA

@Western Sahara:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 6,200 km
paved : 1,350 km
unpaved: 4,850 km (1991 est.)

Ports and harbors: Ad Dakhla, Cabo Bojador, El Aaiun

Airports: 12 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 6
2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
under 914 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 6
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 5 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: NA

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claimed and administered by Morocco, but
sovereignty is unresolved and the UN is attempting to hold a
referendum on the issue; the UN-administered cease-fire has been in
effect since September 1991
______________________________________________________________________

WESTERN SAMOA

@Western Samoa:Geography

Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean, about
one-half of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 13 35 S, 172 20 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
total: 2,860 sq km
land: 2,850 sq km
water: 10 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Rhode Island

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 403 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy season (October to March), dry season (May to
October)

Terrain: narrow coastal plain with volcanic, rocky, rugged mountains
in interior

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
highest point: Mauga Silisili 1,857 m

Natural resources: hardwood forests, fish

Land use:
arable land : 19%
permanent crops: 24%
permanent pastures: 0%
forests and woodland: 47%
other: 10%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons; active volcanism

Environment - current issues: soil erosion

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test
Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified : none of the selected agreements

@Western Samoa:People

Population: 219,509 (July 1997 est.)
note: other estimates range as low as 162,000

Age structure:
0-14 years: 40% (male 44,281; female 42,876)
15-64 years: 56% (male 64,433; female 59,006)
65 years and over : 4% (male 4,225; female 4,688) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.34% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 30.4 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.63 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.22 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.09 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.9 male(s)/female
total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 33 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population : 69.09 years
male: 66.7 years
female : 71.6 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.82 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Western Samoan(s)
adjective: Western Samoan

Ethnic groups: Samoan 92.6%, Euronesians 7% (persons of European and
Polynesian blood), Europeans 0.4%

Religions: Christian 99.7% (about one-half of population associated
with the London Missionary Society; includes Congregational, Roman
Catholic, Methodist, Latter-Day Saints, Seventh-Day Adventist)

Languages: Samoan (Polynesian), English

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population : 97%
male: 97%
female: 97% (1971 est.)

@Western Samoa:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: Independent State of Western Samoa
conventional short form: Western Samoa

Data code: WS

Government type: constitutional monarchy under native chief

National capital: Apia

Administrative divisions: 11 districts; A'ana, Aiga-i-le-Tai, Atua,
Fa'asaleleaga, Gaga'emauga, Gagaifomauga, Palauli, Satupa'itea,
Tuamasaga, Va'a-o-Fonoti, Vaisigano

Independence: 1 January 1962 (from New Zealand-administered UN
trusteeship)

National holiday: National Day, 1 June (1962)

Constitution: 1 January 1962

Legal system: based on English common law and local customs; judicial
review of legislative acts with respect to fundamental rights of the
citizen; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state : Chief Susuga MALIETOA Tanumafili II (cochief of state
from 1 January 1962 until becoming sole chief of state 5 April 1963)
head of government: Prime Minister TOFILAU Eti Alesana (since 7 April
1988); Deputy Prime Minister TUILA'EPA Sailele Malielegaoi (since NA
1992)
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the chief of state with the prime
minister's advice
elections : upon the death of Chief Susuga MALIETOA Tanumafili II, a
new chief of state will be elected by the Legislative Assembly to
serve a five-year term; prime minister appointed by the chief of state
with the approval of the Legislative Assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly or Fono (49 seats;
members elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 26 April 1996 (next to be held 26 April 2001)
election results : percent of vote by party - HRPP 45.17%, SNDP 27.1%,
independents 23.7%; seats by party - HRPP 25, SNDP 13, independents 11

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: Human Rights Protection Party (HRPP),
TOFILAU Eti Alesana, chairman; Samoan National Development Party
(SNDP), TAPUA Tamasese Efi, chairman; Samoan Progressive Conservative
Party, LEOTA Ituau Ale; Samoa All People's Party (SAPP), Matatumua
MAIMOAGA

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IMF, IMO, Intelsat
(nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UPU, WHO, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Tuiloma Neroni SLADE
chancery: 820 Second Avenue, Suite 800D, New York, NY 10017
telephone: [1] (212) 599-6196, 6197
FAX : [1] (212) 599-0797

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Josiah Horton BEEMAN (Ambassador to New
Zealand and Western Samoa, resides in Wellington, New Zealand)
embassy: 5th floor, Beach Road, Apia
mailing address: P.O. Box 3430, Apia
telephone : [685] 21631
FAX: [685] 22030

Flag description: red with a blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side
quadrant bearing five white five-pointed stars representing the
Southern Cross constellation

Economy

Economy - overview: The economy of Western Samoa has traditionally
been dependent on development aid, private family remittances from
overseas, and agricultural exports. Increasingly, tourism is becoming
a significant source of revenue, earning approximately $34 million in
1995. While registering an overall economic improvement in 1995,
however, the country continues to struggle with a series of natural
disasters from the early 1990s which wiped out the nation's
infrastructure as well as its then-major export crop, taro root.
Agriculture continues to be a key source of wealth for Apia, employing
more than one-half of the labor force, and furnishing 90% of exports.
The bulk of these export earnings comes from the sale of coconut
cream, coconut oil, and copra. Family remittances also play a key role
in economic viability for the island nation - in 1995, remittances
totaled $34.9 million, four times export earnings. The economy did
well in 1996, supported by a steady flow of foreign aid and
remittances.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $415 million (1995 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6.7% (1995 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,900 (1995 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 50%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 1% (1995)

Labor force:
total: 45,635 (1986 est.)
by occupation : agriculture 65%, services 30%, industry 5% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
revenues: $118 million
expenditures : $128 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY96/97)

Industries: timber, tourism, food processing, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 29,000 kW (1990)

Electricity - production: 60 million kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 287 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: coconuts, bananas, taro, yams

Exports:
total value: $8.7 million (f.o.b., 1995)
commodities : coconut oil and cream, taro, copra, cocoa
partners: New Zealand 44%, Australia 22%, American Samoa, Germany

Imports:
total value: $91 million (c.i.f., 1995)
commodities: intermediate goods 58%, food 17%, capital goods 12%
partners : New Zealand 37%, Australia 21%, US/American Samoa 13%

Debt - external: $178.3 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA; $8.7 million bilateral aid from Australia (FY96/97
est.); $5 million bilateral aid from NZ (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 tala (WS$) = 100 sene

Exchange rates: tala (WS$) per US$1 - 2.4570 (January 1997), 2.4618
(1996), 2.4722 (1995), 2.5349 (1994), 2.5681 (1993), 2.4655 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Western Samoa:Communications

Telephones: 7,500 (1988 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: NA
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 76,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: 6,000 (1992 est.)

@Western Samoa:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total : 2,030 km
paved: 373 km
unpaved: 1,657 km (1988 est.)

Ports and harbors: Apia, Asau, Mulifanua, Salelologa

Merchant marine:
total : 1 roll-on/roll-off cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
3,838 GRT/5,536 DWT (1996 est.)

Airports: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total : 3
2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
under 914 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: no regular armed services; Western Samoa Police
Force

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: NA

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none
______________________________________________________________________

WORLD
[Map of World]

@World:Geography

Map references: World, Time Zones

Area:
total: 510.072 million sq km
land: 148.94 million sq km
water: 361.132 million sq km
note : 70.8% of the world's surface is water, 29.2% is land

Area - comparative: land area about 15 times the size of the US

Land boundaries: the land boundaries in the world total 251,480.24 km
(not counting shared boundaries twice)

Coastline: 356,000 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 24 nm claimed by most but can vary
continental shelf: 200-m depth claimed by most or to depth of
exploitation, others claim 200 nm or to the edge of the continental
margin
exclusive fishing zone : 200 nm claimed by most but can vary
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm claimed by most but can vary
territorial sea: 12 nm claimed by most but can vary
note: boundary situations with neighboring states prevent many
countries from extending their fishing or economic zones to a full 200
nm; 43 nations and other areas that are landlocked include
Afghanistan, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic,
Chad, Czech Republic, Ethiopia, Holy See (Vatican City), Hungary,
Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Mali, Moldova, Mongolia, Nepal, Niger, Paraguay, Rwanda, San
Marino, Slovakia, Swaziland, Switzerland, Tajikistan, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan, West
Bank, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Climate: two large areas of polar climates separated by two rather
narrow temperate zones from a wide equatorial band of tropical to
subtropical climates

Terrain: the greatest ocean depth is the Marianas Trench at 10,924 m
in the Pacific Ocean

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Dead Sea -408 m
highest point: Mount Everest 8,848 m

Natural resources: the rapid using up of nonrenewable mineral
resources, the depletion of forest areas and wetlands, the extinction
of animal and plant species, and the deterioration in air and water
quality (especially in Eastern Europe and the former USSR) pose
serious long-term problems that governments and peoples are only
beginning to address

Land use:
arable land: 10%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 26%
forests and woodland: 32%
other: 31% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 2,481,250 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: large areas subject to severe weather (tropical
cyclones), natural disasters (earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis,
volcanic eruptions)

Environment - current issues: large areas subject to overpopulation,
industrial disasters, pollution (air, water, acid rain, toxic
substances), loss of vegetation (overgrazing, deforestation,
desertification), loss of wildlife, soil degradation, soil depletion,
erosion

Environment - international agreements: selected international
environmental agreements are included under the Environment -
international agreements entry for each country and in the Selected
International Environmental Agreements appendix

@World:People

Population: 5,849,699,041 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 31% (male 922,447,462; female 877,221,909)
15-64 years: 63% (male 1,856,697,495; female 1,808,219,116)
65 years and over: 6% (male 166,513,212; female 218,599,847)

Population growth rate: 1.4% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 23 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 59 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 63 years
male: 61 years
female: 64 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.9 children born/woman (1997 est.)

@World:Government

Data code: none; there is no FIPS 10-4 country code for the World, so
the Factbook uses the "W" data code from DIAM 65-18 "Geopolitical Data
Elements and Related Features," Data Standard No. 3, March 1984,
published by the Defense Intelligence Agency; see the Cross-Reference
List of Country Data Codes appendix

Administrative divisions: 266 nations, dependent areas, other, and
miscellaneous entries

Legal system: varies by individual country; 186 (not including
Yugoslavia) are parties to the UN International Court of Justice (ICJ
or World Court)

Economy

Economy - overview: Real global output - gross world product (GWP) -
rose an estimated 3.6% in 1996, with the newly industrializing Third
World countries again setting the pace. And once more, results varied
widely among regions and countries. Average growth of 2.3% in the GDP
of industrialized countries (55% of GWP in 1996) and average growth of
6.5% in the GDP of less developed countries (39% of GWP) were partly
offset by a 2% drop in the GDP of the former USSR/Eastern Europe area
(only 6% of GWP). With the notable exception of Japan at 3%,
unemployment was typically 6%-12% in the industrial world. The US
accounted for 21% of GWP in 1996; Western Europe accounted for 20%;
and Japan accounted for 8%. These are the three "economic superpowers"
presumably destined to compete for mastery in international markets on
into the 21st century. As for the less developed countries: China,
India, and the Four Dragons - South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and
Singapore - once again posted records of 5% growth or better; however,
many other countries, especially in Africa, continued to suffer from
drought, rapid population growth, inflation, and civil strife. Central
Europe and the 15 successor states to the USSR generally made progress
in moving toward "market-friendly" economies, but output in Russia and
Ukraine continued to fall. Externally, the nation-state, as a bedrock
economic-political institution, is steadily losing control over
international flows of people, goods, funds, and technology.
Internally, the central government in a number of cases is losing
control over resources as separatist regional movements - typically
based on ethnicity - gain momentum, e.g., in the successor states of
the former Soviet Union, in the former Yugoslavia, in India, and in
Canada. In Western Europe, governments face the difficult political
problem of channeling resources away from welfare programs in order to
increase investment and strengthen incentives to seek employment. The
addition of nearly 100 million people each year to an already
overcrowded globe is exacerbating the problems of pollution,
desertification, underemployment, epidemics, and famine. Because of
their own internal problems, the industrialized countries have
inadequate resources to deal effectively with the poorer areas of the
world, which, at least from the economic point of view, are becoming
further marginalized. (For specific economic developments in each
country, see the individual country entries.)

GDP: GWP (gross world product) - purchasing power parity - $35.8
trillion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.6% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,200 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : NA%
industry: NA%
services: NA%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: all countries 25%; developed
countries 2% to 4% typically; developing countries 10% to 60%
typically (1996 est.)
note: national inflation rates vary widely in individual cases, from
stable prices in Japan to hyperinflation in a number of Third World
countries

Labor force:
total : 2.24 billion (1992)
by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: 30% combined unemployment and underemployment in
many non-industrialized countries; developed countries typically
6%-12% unemployment (1996 est.)

Industries: dominated by the onrush of technology, especially in
computers, robotics, telecommunications, and medicines and medical
equipment; most of these advances take place in OECD nations; only a
small portion of non-OECD countries have succeeded in rapidly
adjusting to these technological forces; the accelerated development
of new industrial (and agricultural) technology is complicating
already grim environmental problems

Industrial production growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

Electricity - capacity: 4 billion kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 12.34268 trillion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 1,996 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: the whole gamut of crops, livestock, forest
products, and fish

Exports:
total value: $4.6 trillion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : the whole range of industrial and agricultural goods and
services
partners: in value, about 75% of exports from the developed countries

Imports:
total value : $4.7 trillion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)
commodities: the whole range of industrial and agricultural goods and
services
partners: in value, about 75% of imports by the developed countries

Debt - external: $2 trillion for less developed countries (1996 est.)

Economic aid: worldwide traditional foreign aid $50 billion (1995
est.)

@World:Communications

Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
domestic : NA
international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

@World:Transportation

Railways:
total : 1,201,337 km includes about 190,000 to 195,000 km of
electrified routes of which 147,760 km are in Europe, 24,509 km in the
Far East, 11,050 km in Africa, 4,223 km in South America, and 4,160 km
in North America; note - fastest speed in daily service is 300 km/hr
attained by France's Societe Nationale des Chemins-de-Fer Francais
(SNCF) Le Train a Grande Vitesse (TGV) - Atlantique line
broad gauge: 251,153 km
standard gauge: 710,754 km
narrow gauge: 239,430 km

Highways:
total: NA km
paved: NA km
unpaved : NA km

Ports and harbors: Chiba, Houston, Kawasaki, Kobe, Marseille, Mina' al
Ahmadi (Kuwait), New Orleans, New York, Rotterdam, Yokohama

Merchant marine:
total: 25,521 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 442,276,527
GRT/701,647,274 DWT
ships by type: barge carrier 22, bulk 5,308, cargo 8,089, chemical
tanker 920, combination bulk 307, combination ore/oil 279, container
1,938, liquefied gas tanker 709, livestock carrier 52, multifunction
large-load carrier 62, oil tanker 4,320, passenger 298,
passenger-cargo 117, railcar carrier 21, refrigerated cargo 1,022,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 1,034, short-sea passenger 484, specialized
tanker 81, vehicle carrier 458 (1995 est.)

Military

Military branches: ground, maritime, and air forces at all levels of
technology

Military expenditures - dollar figure: aggregate real expenditure on
arms worldwide in 1996 remained at about the 1995 level, about
three-quarters of a trillion dollars in money terms (1996 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: roughly 2% of gross world
product (1996 est.)
______________________________________________________________________

YEMEN

@Yemen:Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Arabian Sea, Gulf of Aden, and
Red Sea, between Oman and Saudi Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 48 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
total: 527,970 sq km
land: 527,970 sq km
water: 0 sq km
note: includes Perim, Socotra, the former Yemen Arab Republic (YAR or
North Yemen), and the former People's Democratic Republic of Yemen
(PDRY or South Yemen)

Area - comparative: slightly larger than twice the size of Wyoming

Land boundaries:
total: 1,746 km
border countries: Oman 288 km, Saudi Arabia 1,458 km

Coastline: 1,906 km

Maritime claims:
contiguous zone: 18 nm in the North; 24 nm in the South
continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly desert; hot and humid along west coast; temperate in
western mountains affected by seasonal monsoon; extraordinarily hot,
dry, harsh desert in east

Terrain: narrow coastal plain backed by flat-topped hills and rugged
mountains; dissected upland desert plains in center slope into the
desert interior of the Arabian Peninsula

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Arabian Sea 0 m
highest point: Jabal an Nabi Shu'ayb 3,760 m

Natural resources: petroleum, fish, rock salt, marble, small deposits
of coal, gold, lead, nickel, and copper, fertile soil in west

Land use:
arable land : 3%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 30%
forests and woodland: 4%
other : 63% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 3,600 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: sandstorms and dust storms in summer

Environment - current issues: very limited natural fresh water
resources; inadequate supplies of potable water; overgrazing; soil
erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental Modification,
Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: controls Bab el Mandeb, the strait linking the Red
Sea and the Gulf of Aden, one of world's most active shipping lanes

@Yemen:People

Population: 13,972,477 (July 1997 est.)
note: other estimates range as high as 16.6 million

Age structure:
0-14 years: 48% (male 3,421,216; female 3,237,594)
15-64 years : 49% (male 3,454,912; female 3,479,395)
65 years and over: 3% (male 162,600; female 216,760) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.57% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 44.83 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 9.17 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
15-64 years : 0.99 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.75 male(s)/female
total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 68.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 60.31 years
male : 58.9 years
female: 61.78 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 7.18 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Yemeni(s)
adjective: Yemeni

Ethnic groups: predominantly Arab; Afro-Arab concentrations in western
coastal locations; South Asians in southern regions; small European
communities in major metropolitan areas

Religions: Muslim including Sha'fi (Sunni) and Zaydi (Shi'a), small
numbers of Jewish, Christian, and Hindu

Languages: Arabic

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 38%
male: 53%
female: 26% (1990 est.)

@Yemen:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Yemen
conventional short form: Yemen
local long form: Al Jumhuriyah al Yamaniyah
local short form: Al Yaman

Data code: YM

Government type: republic

National capital: Sanaa

Administrative divisions: 17 governorates (muhafazat, singular -
muhafazah); Abyan, Aden, Al Bayda, Al Hudaydah, Al Jawf, Al Mahrah, Al
Mahwit, Ataq, Dhamar, Hadhramaut, Hajjah, Ibb, Lahij, Ma'rib, Sa'dah,
San'a', Ta'izz
note: there may be a new governorate for the capital city of Sanaa

Independence: 22 May 1990 Republic of Yemen was established on 22 May
1990 with the merger of the Yemen Arab Republic {Yemen (Sanaa) or
North Yemen} and the Marxist-dominated People's Democratic Republic of
Yemen {Yemen (Aden) or South Yemen}; previously North Yemen had become
independent on NA November 1918 (from the Ottoman Empire) and South
Yemen had become independent on 30 November 1967 (from the UK)

National holiday: Proclamation of the Republic, 22 May (1990)

Constitution: 16 May 1991; amended 29 September 1994

Legal system: based on Islamic law, Turkish law, English common law,
and local tribal customary law; does not accept compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Lt. Gen. Ali Abdallah SALIH (since 22 May
1990, the former president of North Yemen, assumed office upon the
merger of North and South Yemen); Vice President Maj. Gen. Abd al-Rab
Mansur al-HADI (since NA October 1994)
head of government: Prime Minister Abd al-Aziz ABD AL-GHANI (since NA
October 1994); Deputy Prime Ministers Abd al-Wahhab al-ANISI (since NA
October 1994), Dr. Abd al-Karim Ali al-IRYANI (since NA October 1994),
Dr. Muhammad Said al-ATTAR (since NA October 1994), and Abd al-Qadir
al-BA JAMAL (since NA October 1994)
cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the advice
of the prime minister
elections : president elected by the House of Representatives for a
five-year term; election last held 1 October 1994 (next to be held NA
1999); vice president appointed by the president; prime minister and
deputy prime ministers appointed by the president
election results: Ali Abdallah SALIH elected president; percent of
House of Representatives vote - NA

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Representatives (301 seats;
members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
elections: last held 27 April 1997 (next to be held NA April 2001)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - GPC
189, Islaah 52, Nasserite Unionist Party 3, Baath Party 2,
independents 54, election pending 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: there are over 12 political parties
active in Yemen, some of the more important are: General People's
Congress (GPC), President Ali Abdallah SALIH; Yemeni Reform Grouping
or Islaah, Shaykh Abdallah bin Husayn al-AHMAR; Yemeni Socialist Party
(YSP), Ali Salih UBAYD; Nasserite Unionist Party, leader NA; Baath
Party, leader NA
note: following the May-July 1994 civil war, President SALIH's General
People's Congress and Shaykh Abdallah bin Husayn al-AHMAR's Yemeni
Reform Grouping, or Islaah, formed a coalition government, but it is
unclear whether this coalition will continue in light of the GPC's
landslide victory in the April 1997 legislative election; the YSP, a
loyal opposition party, boycotted the April 1997 legislative election

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACC, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU,
CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent),
ITU, NAM, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant)
chancery : Suite 705, 2600 Virginia Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037
telephone: [1] (202) 965-4760, 4761
FAX: [1] (202) 337-2017

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador David G. NEWTON
embassy: Dhahr Himyar Zone, Sheraton Hotel District, Sanaa
mailing address : P. O. Box 22347, Sanaa
telephone: [967] (1) 238843 through 238852
FAX: [967] (1) 251563

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and black; similar to the flag of Syria which has two green stars and
of Iraq which has three green stars (plus an Arabic inscription) in a
horizontal line centered in the white band; also similar to the flag
of Egypt which has a symbolic eagle centered in the white band

Economy

Economy - overview: The northern city Sanaa is the political capital
of a united Yemen, and the southern city Aden, with its refinery and
port facilities, is the economic and commercial capital. Future
economic development depends heavily on Western-assisted development
of the country's moderate oil resources. Former South Yemen's
willingness to merge stemmed partly from the steady decline in Soviet
economic support. The low level of domestic industry and agriculture
has made northern Yemen dependent on imports for practically all of
its essential needs. Once self-sufficient in food production, northern
Yemen has become a major importer. Land once used for export crops -
cotton, fruit, and vegetables - has been turned over to growing a
shrub called qat, whose leaves are chewed for their stimulant effect
by Yemenis and which has no significant export market. Economic growth
in former South Yemen has been constrained by a lack of incentives,
partly stemming from centralized control over production decisions,
investment allocation, and import choices. Yemen's GDP has been
supplemented by remittances from Yemenis working abroad and by foreign
aid. Since the Gulf crisis, however, remittances have dropped
substantially. Floods in June 1996 caused the loss of much valuable
topsoil in the agricultural sector, increasing the need for imports of
foodstuffs. Oil production and GDP as a whole are expected to increase
moderately in 1997.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $39.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.8% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,900 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 14%
industry: 35%
services : 51%

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 85% (1996 est.)

Labor force: no reliable estimates exist, most people are employed in
agriculture and herding or as expatriate laborers; services,
construction, industry, and commerce account for less than one-half of
the labor force

Unemployment rate: 30% (1995 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $3 billion
expenditures: $3.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: crude oil production and petroleum refining; small-scale
production of cotton textiles and leather goods; food processing;
handicrafts; small aluminum products factory; cement

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - capacity: 810,000 kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 1.84 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 117 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: grain, fruits, vegetables, qat (mildly
narcotic shrub), coffee, cotton; dairy products, poultry, meat; fish

Exports:
total value: $2.5 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities : crude oil, cotton, coffee, hides, vegetables, dried and
salted fish
partners: China 23%, South Korea 19%, Japan 12%, Singapore 10%, Brazil
9%, Thailand 7% (1995)

Imports:
total value: $2.2 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: textiles and other manufactured consumer goods, petroleum
products, sugar, grain, flour, other foodstuffs, cement, machinery,
chemicals
partners: UAE 14%, Saudi Arabia 10%, US 8%, Malaysia 6%, UK 5% (1995)

Debt - external: $8 billion (1996)

Economic aid:
recipient : ODA, $148 million (1993)

Currency: Yemeni rial (YRl) (new currency)

Exchange rates: Yemeni rials (YRl) per US$1 - 50.04 (new official
fixed rate), 40.839 (1995), 12.010 (official fixed rate 1992-94); 490
(market rate, December 1994)
note : on 29 March 1995 the official rate was changed from 12.01
Yemeni rials to 50.04 Yemeni rials per US dollar

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Yemen:Communications

Telephones: 131,655 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: since unification in 1990, efforts have been made to
create a national telecommunications network
domestic: the network consists of microwave radio relay, cable, and
tropospheric scatter
international : satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (2 Indian Ocean
and 1 Atlantic Ocean), 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region), and 2
Arabsat; microwave radio relay to Saudi Arabia and Djibouti

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 325,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 10

Televisions: 100,000 (1993 est.)

@Yemen:Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways:
total: 51,392 km
paved : 4,831 km
unpaved: 46,561 km (1992 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 644 km; petroleum products 32 km

Ports and harbors: Aden, Al Hudaydah, Al Mukalla, Mocha, Nishtun

Merchant marine:
total: 3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 12,059 GRT/18,563 DWT
ships by type : cargo 1, oil tanker 2 (1996 est.)

Airports: 42 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 12
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
under 914 m: 3 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 30
over 3,047 m: 2
2,438 to 3,047 m : 10
1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
914 to 1,523 m : 10 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary (includes
Police)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49 : 3,109,553 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,753,779 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 148,864 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: a large section of boundary with Saudi
Arabia is not defined; a dispute with Eritrea over sovereignty of the
Hanish Islands in the southern Red Sea has been submitted to
arbitration under the auspices of the International Court of Justice
______________________________________________________________________

ZAMBIA

@Zambia:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, east of Angola

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 S, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total: 752,610 sq km
land: 740,720 sq km
water: 11,890 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Texas

Land boundaries:
total: 5,664 km
border countries: Angola 1,110 km, Democratic Republic of the Congo
1,930 km, Malawi 837 km, Mozambique 419 km, Namibia 233 km, Tanzania
338 km, Zimbabwe 797 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; modified by altitude; rainy season (October to
April)

Terrain: mostly high plateau with some hills and mountains

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Zambezi river 329 m
highest point: in Mafinga Hills 2,301 m

Natural resources: copper, cobalt, zinc, lead, coal, emeralds, gold,
silver, uranium, hydropower potential

Land use:
arable land: 7%
permanent crops : 0%
permanent pastures: 40%
forests and woodland: 39%
other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 460 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: tropical storms (November to April)

Environment - current issues: air pollution and resulting acid rain in
the mineral extraction and refining region; poaching seriously
threatens rhinoceros and elephant populations; deforestation; soil
erosion; desertification; lack of adequate water treatment presents
human health risks

Environment - international agreements:
party to : Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
Layer Protection, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked

@Zambia:People

Population: 9,349,975 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 49% (male 2,315,739; female 2,286,829)
15-64 years: 48% (male 2,212,021; female 2,301,354)
65 years and over : 3% (male 112,134; female 121,898) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.02% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 44.37 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 24.18 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.92 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 96.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 35.58 years
male : 35.58 years
female: 35.59 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.48 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Zambian(s)
adjective: Zambian

Ethnic groups: African 98.7%, European 1.1%, other 0.2%

Religions: Christian 50%-75%, Muslim and Hindu 24%-49%, indigenous
beliefs 1%

Languages: English (official), major vernaculars - Bemba, Kaonda,
Lozi, Lunda, Luvale, Nyanja, Tonga, and about 70 other indigenous
languages

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write in English
total population: 78.2%
male: 85.6%
female: 71.3% (1995 est.)

@Zambia:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Zambia
conventional short form: Zambia
former: Northern Rhodesia

Data code: ZA

Government type: republic

National capital: Lusaka

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces; Central, Copperbelt, Eastern,
Luapula, Lusaka, Northern, North-Western, Southern, Western

Independence: 24 October 1964 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 24 October (1964)

Constitution: 2 August 1991

Legal system: based on English common law and customary law; judicial
review of legislative acts in an ad hoc constitutional council; has
not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President Frederick CHILUBA (since 31 October 1991);
Vice President General Godfrey MIYANDA (since NA August 1994); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government: President Frederick CHILUBA (since 31 October
1991); Vice President General Godfrey MIYANDA (since NA August 1994);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members of
the National Assembly
elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 18 November 1996 (next to be held October 2001);
vice president appointed by the president
election results: Frederick CHILUBA elected president; percent of vote
- Frederick CHILUBA 70%, Dean MUNGO'MBA 12%, Humphrey MULEMBA 6%,
Akashambatwa LEWANIKA 4%, Chama CHAKOMBOKA 3%, others 5%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (150 seats; members
are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
elections: last held 18 November 1996 (next to be held October 2001)
election results : percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - MMD
130, NP 5, ZDC 2, AZ 2, independents 11

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, justices are appointed by the
president

Political parties and leaders: Agenda for Zambia or AZ [Akashambatwa
LEWANIKA]; Labor Party or LP [Chibiza MFUNI]; Liberal Progressive
Front or LPF [Roger CHONGWE, president]; Movement for Democratic
Process or MDP [Chama CHAKOM BOKA]; Movement for Multiparty Democracy
or MMD [Frederick CHILUBA]; National Lima Party or NLP [Guy SCOTT and
Ben KAPITA]; National Party or NP [Humphrey MULEMBIA]; United National
Independence Party or UNIP [Kenneth KAUNDA]; Zambia Democratic
Congress or ZADACO [Dean MUNG'OMBA]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO,
G-19, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, NAM, OAU, SADC, UN, UNAVEM
III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Dunstan Weston KAMANA
chancery: 2419 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
telephone: [1] (202) 265-9717 through 9719
FAX : [1] (202) 332-0826

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Arlene RENDER
embassy: corner of Independence Avenue and United Nations Avenue,
Lusaka
mailing address: P. O. Box 31617, Lusaka
telephone: [260] (1) 250-955, 252-230
FAX: [260] (1) 252-225

Flag description: green with a panel of three vertical bands of red
(hoist side), black, and orange below a soaring orange eagle, on the
outer edge of the flag

Economy

Economy - overview: Despite progress in privatization and budgetary
reform, Zambia's economy has a long way to go. Inflation, while
slowing somewhat, continues to be a major concern to the CHILUBA
government. Zambia's copper mining sector, which accounts for over 80%
of the nation's foreign currency intake, is struggling. Production
rates are down as are world copper prices. Aid cuts by Zambia's
donors, arising out of concern for the November 1996 flawed election,
will severely damage Zambia's economic prospects. Urged by the World
Bank, Zambia has embarked on a privatization program which is to
include the all-important copper industry.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $9.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6.4% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,060 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 32%
industry : 33%
services: 35% (1994 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 34% (1995 est.)

Labor force:
total: 3.4 million
by occupation: agriculture 85%, mining, manufacturing, and
construction 6%, transport and services 9%

Unemployment rate: 22% (1991)

Budget:
revenues: $888 million
expenditures: $835 million, including capital expenditures of $110
million (1995 est.)

Industries: copper mining and processing, construction, foodstuffs,
beverages, chemicals, textiles, fertilizer

Industrial production growth rate: -1% (1992)

Electricity - capacity: 2.44 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 7.78 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 610 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: corn, sorghum, rice, peanuts, sunflower seed,
tobacco, cotton, sugarcane, cassava (tapioca); cattle, goats, pigs,
poultry, beef, pork, poultry meat, milk, eggs, hides

Exports:
total value : $975 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: copper, zinc, cobalt, lead, tobacco
partners: EU countries, Japan, South Africa, US, Saudi Arabia, India,
Thailand, Malaysia

Imports:
total value: $990 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: machinery, transportation equipment, foodstuffs, fuels,
petroleum products, electricity, miscellaneous manufactured goods
partners: South Africa, EU countries, Japan, Saudi Arabia, US

Debt - external: $7.2 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $734 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Zambian kwacha (ZK) = 100 ngwee

Exchange rates: Zambian kwacha (ZK) per US$1 - 1,250 (January 1997),
1,250 (1996), 833.33 (1995), 769.23 (1994), 434.78 (1993), 156.25
(1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year

@Zambia:Communications

Telephones: 80,900 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: facilities are among the best in Sub-Saharan Africa
domestic : high-capacity microwave radio relay connects most larger
towns and cities
international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
and 1 Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 11, FM 5, shortwave 0

Radios: 1,889,140

Television broadcast stations: 9

Televisions: 215,000 (1995 est.)

@Zambia:Transportation

Railways:
total: 2,164 km (1995)
narrow gauge: 2,164 km 1.067-m gauge (13 km double track)
note: the total includes 891 km of the Tanzania-Zambia Railway
Authority (TAZARA), which operates 1,860 km of 1.067-m narrow gauge
track between Dar es Salaam and New Kapiri Mposhi where it connects to
the Zambia Railways system; TAZARA is not a part of Zambia Railways

Highways:
total: 37,359 km
paved: 6,575 km (including 56 km of expressways)
unpaved: 30,784 km (1993 est.)

Waterways: 2,250 km, including Zambezi and Luapula rivers, Lake
Tanganyika

Pipelines: crude oil 1,724 km

Ports and harbors: Mpulungu

Airports: 103 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 42
over 3,047 m: 1
2,438 to 3,047 m : 3
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 2
under 914 m: 32 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 61
2,438 to 3,047 m : 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m: 56 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Air Force, paramilitary forces, Police

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 1,990,403 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 1,051,227 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $96 million (1995)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.7% (1995)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: quadripoint with Botswana, Namibia, and
Zimbabwe is in disagreement; Democratic Republic of the
Congo-Tanzania-Zambia tripoint in Lake Tanganyika may no longer be
indefinite since it has been informally reported that the indefinite
section of the Democratic Republic of the Congo-Zambia boundary has
been settled

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for methaqualone, heroin, and
cocaine bound for Southern Africa and Europe; regional
money-laundering center
______________________________________________________________________

ZIMBABWE

@Zimbabwe:Geography

Location: Southern Africa, northeast of Botswana

Geographic coordinates: 20 00 S, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
total : 390,580 sq km
land: 386,670 sq km
water: 3,910 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Montana

Land boundaries:
total: 3,066 km
border countries: Botswana 813 km, Mozambique 1,231 km, South Africa
225 km, Zambia 797 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; moderated by altitude; rainy season (November to
March)

Terrain: mostly high plateau with higher central plateau (high veld);
mountains in east

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: junction of the Lundi and Savi rivers 162 m
highest point: Inyangani 2,592 m

Natural resources: coal, chromium ore, asbestos, gold, nickel, copper,
iron ore, vanadium, lithium, tin, platinum group metals

Land use:
arable land : 7%
permanent crops: 0%
permanent pastures: 13%
forests and woodland: 23%
other: 57% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,930 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring droughts; floods and severe storms are rare

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; land
degradation; air and water pollution; the black rhinoceros herd - once
the largest concentration of the species in the world - has been
significantly reduced by poaching

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of the
Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Desertification

Geography - note: landlocked

@Zimbabwe:People

Population: 11,423,175 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years: 43% (male 2,507,219; female 2,471,357)
15-64 years: 54% (male 3,020,632; female 3,106,729)
65 years and over : 3% (male 154,231; female 163,007) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.26% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 31.65 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 19.02 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population
note: there is a small but steady flow of Zimbabweans into South
Africa in search of better paid employment

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
65 years and over : 0.95 male(s)/female
total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 72.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 40.84 years
male: 40.85 years
female : 40.83 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.94 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Zimbabwean(s)
adjective: Zimbabwean

Ethnic groups: African 98% (Shona 71%, Ndebele 16%, other 11%), white
1%, mixed and Asian 1%

Religions: syncretic (part Christian, part indigenous beliefs) 50%,
Christian 25%, indigenous beliefs 24%, Muslim and other 1%

Languages: English (official), Shona, Sindebele (the language of the
Ndebele, sometimes called Ndebele), numerous but minor tribal dialects

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write in English
total population: 85%
male: 90%
female: 80% (1995 est.)

@Zimbabwe:Government

Country name:
conventional long form : Republic of Zimbabwe
conventional short form: Zimbabwe
former: Southern Rhodesia

Data code: ZI

Government type: parliamentary democracy

National capital: Harare

Administrative divisions: 8 provinces and 2 cities* with provincial
status; Bulawayo*, Harare*, Manicaland, Mashonaland Central,
Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Masvingo (Victoria), Matabeleland
North, Matabeleland South, Midlands

Independence: 18 April 1980 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 18 April (1980)

Constitution: 21 December 1979

Legal system: mixture of Roman-Dutch and English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: Executive President Robert Gabriel MUGABE (since 31
December 1987); Co-Vice Presidents Simon Vengai MUZENDA (since 31
December 1987) and Joshua M. NKOMO (since 6 August 1990); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
head of government : Executive President Robert Gabriel MUGABE (since
31 December 1987); Co-Vice Presidents Simon Vengai MUZENDA (since 31
December 1987) and Joshua M. NKOMO (since 6 August 1990); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government
cabinet : Cabinet appointed by the president; responsible to the House
of Assembly
elections: president nominated by the House of Assembly for a six-year
term (if more than one nomination, an electoral college consisting of
members of the House of Assembly elects the president); election last
held 26-27 March 1996 (next to be held NA March 2002); co-vice
presidents appointed by the president
election results: Robert Gabriel MUGABE elected president; percent of
electoral college vote - Robert Gabriel MUGABE 92.7%, Abel MUZOREWA
4.8%; Ndabaningi SITHOLE 2.4%

Legislative branch: unicameral parliament, called House of Assembly
(150 seats, 120 of which are directly elected by popular vote for
six-year terms; of the other 30 seats, 12 are nominated by the
president, 10 are occupied by traditional chiefs chosen by their
peers, and 8 by provincial governors)
elections: last held 8-9 April 1995 (next to be held NA April 2001)
election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
ZANU-PF 117, ZANU-Ndonga 2, independent 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Zimbabwe African National
Union-Patriotic Front or ZANU-PF [Robert MUGABE]; Zimbabwe African
National Union-NDONGA or ZANU-NDONGA [Ndabaningi SITHOLE]; Zimbabwe
Unity Movement or ZUM [Edgar TEKERE]; Democratic Party or DP [Emmanuel
MAGOCHE]; Forum Party of Zimbabwe [Enock DUMBUTSHENA]; United Parties
[Abel MUZOREWA]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO,
G-15, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, NAM, OAU, PCA,
SADC, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Amos Bernard Muvengwa MIDZI
chancery: 1608 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009
telephone: [1] (202) 332-7100
FAX : [1] (202) 483-9326

Diplomatic representation from the US:
chief of mission: Ambassador Johnnie CARSON
embassy: 172 Herbert Chitepo Avenue, Harare
mailing address: P. O. Box 3340, Harare
telephone : [263] (4) 794521
FAX: [263] (4) 796488

Flag description: seven equal horizontal bands of green, yellow, red,
black, red, yellow, and green with a white equilateral triangle edged
in black based on the hoist side; a yellow Zimbabwe bird is
superimposed on a red five-pointed star in the center of the triangle

Economy

Economy - overview: Agriculture employs 70% of the labor force of this
landlocked nation and supplies almost 40% of exports. Mining accounts
for only 5% of both GDP and employment, but minerals and metals
account for about 40% of exports. Severe drought caused GDP to drop 8%
in 1992, with growth rebounding to 2% in 1993 and 4.5% in 1994, only
to drop by 2.4% in 1995. The government is continuing to push its
IMF/World Bank structural adjustment program aimed at encouraging
exports and foreign investment. Officials face the difficult task of
restraining expenditures in their effort to keep inflation within
bounds.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $26.4 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.5% (1996 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,340 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture: 18.3%
industry: 35.3%
services: 46.4% (1993 est.)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 21.7% (1996 est.)

Labor force:
total: 4.228 million (1993 est.)
by occupation: agriculture 70%, transport and services 22%, industry
8%

Unemployment rate: at least 45% (1994 est.)

Budget:
revenues: $2.5 billion
expenditures : $2.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $29
million (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: mining (coal, clay, numerous metallic and nonmetallic
ores), copper, steel, nickel, tin, wood products, cement, chemicals,
fertilizer, clothing and footwear, foodstuffs, beverages

Industrial production growth rate: 10% (1994)

Electricity - capacity: 2.15 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 7.33 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 747 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: corn, cotton, tobacco, wheat, coffee,
sugarcane, peanuts; cattle, sheep, goats, pigs

Exports:
total value: $2.4 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: agricultural 47% (tobacco 31%), manufactures 27%, gold
12%, textiles 8%, ferrochrome 6% (1994 est.)
partners: South Africa 14%, UK 10%, Germany 8%, Japan 8%, (1995 est.)

Imports:
total value: $2.2 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)
commodities: machinery and transportation equipment 41%, other
manufactures 16%, chemicals 16%, fuels 10% (1994 est.)
partners: South Africa 41%, UK 7%, US 6%, Japan 6% (1995 est.)

Debt - external: $4.4 billion (1994)

Economic aid:
recipient: ODA, $362 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Zimbabwean dollar (Z$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Zimbabwean dollars (Z$) per US$1 - 10.8696 (January
1997), 9.9206 (1996), 8.6580 (1995), 8.1500 (1994), 6.4725 (1993),
5.0942 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Zimbabwe:Communications

Telephones: 301,000 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: system was once one of the best in Africa, but now
suffers from poor maintenance
domestic: consists of microwave radio relay links, open-wire lines,
and radiotelephone communication stations
international: satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 8, FM 18, shortwave 0

Radios: 890,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 8 (1986 est.)

Televisions: 280,000 (1992 est.)

@Zimbabwe:Transportation

Railways:
total : 2,759 km (1995)
narrow gauge: 2,759 km 1.067-m gauge (313 km electrified; 42 km double
track) (1995 est.)

Highways:
total: 91,099 km
paved: 15,486 km
unpaved : 75,613 km (1993 est.)

Waterways: the Mazoe and Zambezi rivers are used for transporting
chrome ore from Harare to Mozambique

Pipelines: petroleum products 212 km

Ports and harbors: Binga, Kariba

Airports: 402 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 203
over 3,047 m: 3
2,438 to 3,047 m : 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 6
914 to 1,523 m: 8
under 914 m: 184 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total : 199
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 198 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Zimbabwe National Army, Air Force of Zimbabwe,
Zimbabwe Republic Police (includes Police Support Unit, Paramilitary
Police)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 2,717,032 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males : 1,687,536 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $236 million (FY95/96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.4% (FY95/96)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: quadripoint with Botswana, Namibia, and
Zambia is in disagreement

Illicit drugs: significant transit point for African cannabis and
South Asian heroin, mandrax, and methamphetamines destined for the
South African and European markets
______________________________________________________________________

TAIWAN

@Taiwan:Geography

Location: Eastern Asia, islands bordering the East China Sea,
Philippine Sea, South China Sea, and Taiwan Strait, north of the
Philippines, off the southeastern coast of China

Geographic coordinates: 23 30 N, 121 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
total: 35,980 sq km
land : 32,260 sq km
water: 3,720 sq km
note: includes the Pescadores, Matsu, and Quemoy

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland and Delaware
combined

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,448 km

Maritime claims:
exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; marine; rainy season during southwest monsoon (June
to August); cloudiness is persistent and extensive all year

Terrain: eastern two-thirds mostly rugged mountains; flat to gently
rolling plains in west

Elevation extremes:
lowest point : South China Sea 0 m
highest point: Yu Shan 3,997 m

Natural resources: small deposits of coal, natural gas, limestone,
marble, and asbestos

Land use:
arable land : 24%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 5%
forests and woodland: 55%
other : 15%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: earthquakes and typhoons

Environment - current issues: water pollution from industrial
emissions, raw sewage; air pollution; contamination of drinking water
supplies; trade in endangered species; low-level radioactive waste
disposal

Environment - international agreements:
party to: none of the selected agreements
signed, but not ratified: Marine Life Conservation

@Taiwan:People

Population: 21,699,776 (July 1997 est.)

Age structure:
0-14 years : 23% (male 2,576,022; female 2,399,926)
15-64 years: 69% (male 7,630,512; female 7,363,155)
65 years and over: 8% (male 937,206; female 792,955) (July 1997 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.95% (1997 est.)

Birth rate: 14.97 births/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Death rate: 5.45 deaths/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.03 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1997 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth : 1.08 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 1.18 male(s)/female
total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (1997 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7 deaths/1,000 live births (1997 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 77.04 years
male: 73.81 years
female: 80.52 years (1997 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.77 children born/woman (1997 est.)

Nationality:
noun : Chinese (singular and plural)
adjective: Chinese

Ethnic groups: Taiwanese 84%, mainland Chinese 14%, aborigine 2%

Religions: mixture of Buddhist, Confucian, and Taoist 93%, Christian
4.5%, other 2.5%

Languages: Mandarin Chinese (official), Taiwanese (Min), Hakka
dialects

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 86%
male: 93%
female: 79% (1980 est.)

@Taiwan:Government

Country name:
conventional long form: none
conventional short form: Taiwan
local long form: none
local short form: T'ai-wan

Data code: TW

Government type: multiparty democratic regime headed by popularly
elected president

National capital: Taipei

Administrative divisions: since in the past the authorities claimed to
be the government of all China, the central administrative divisions
include the provinces of Fu-chien (some 20 offshore islands of Fujian
Province including Quemoy and Matsu) and Taiwan (the island of Taiwan
and the Pescadores islands); note - the more commonly referenced
administrative divisions are those of Taiwan Province - 16 counties
(hsien, singular and plural), 5 municipalities* (shih, singular and
plural), and 2 special municipalities** (chuan-shih, singular and
plural); Chang-hua, Chia-i, Chia-i*, Chi-lung*, Hsin-chu, Hsin-chu*,
Hua-lien, I-lan, Kao-hsiung, Kao-hsiung**, Miao-li, Nan-t'ou,
P'eng-hu, P'ing-tung, T'ai-chung, T'ai-chung*, T'ai-nan, T'ai-nan*,
T'ai-pei, T'ai-pei**, T'ai-tung, T'ao-yuan, and Yun-lin; the
provincial capital is at Chung-hsing-hsin-ts'un
note: Taiwan uses the Wade-Giles system for romanization

National holiday: National Day, 10 October (1911) (Anniversary of the
Revolution)

Constitution: 1 January 1947, amended in 1992, presently undergoing
revision

Legal system: based on civil law system; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
chief of state: President LI Teng-hui (succeeded to the presidency
following the death of President CHIANG Ching-kuo 13 January 1988,
elected by the National Assembly 21 March 1990, elected by popular
vote in the first-ever direct elections for president 23 March 1996);
Vice President LIEN Chan (since 20 May 1996); note - LIEN Chan serves
as both vice president and premier
head of government: Premier (President of the Executive Yuan) LIEN
Chan (since 23 February 1993) and Vice Premier (Vice President of the
Executive Yuan) HSU Li-teh (since 23 February 1993); note - LIEN Chan
serves as both vice president and premier
cabinet: Executive Yuan appointed by the president
elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket by
popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 23 March 1996
(next to be held NA 2000); premier appointed by the president; vice
premiers appointed by the president on the recommendation of the
premier
election results : LI Teng-hui elected president; percent of vote - LI
Teng-hui 54%, PENG Ming-min 21%, LIN Yang-kang 15%, and CHEN Li-an 10%

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Yuan (164 seats - 128
elected by popular vote, 36 indirectly elected on the basis of
proportional representation; members serve three-year terms; note -
national conference agreed to change the term to four years, pending
ratification by the National Assembly) and unicameral National
Assembly (334 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve
four-year terms)
elections : Legislative Yuan - last held 2 December 1995 (next to be
held NA December 1998); National Assembly - last held 23 March 1996
(next to be held NA 2000)
election results: Legislative Yuan - percent of vote by party - KMT
46%, DPP 33%, CNP 13%, independents 8%; seats by party - KMT 85, DPP
54, CNP 21, independents 4; note - since the election, there has been
a change in the distribution of seats, the new distribution is as
follows - KMT 83, DPP 54, CNP 21, independents 6; National Assembly -
percent of vote by party - KMT 55%, DPP 30%, CNP 14%, other 1%; seats
by party - KMT 183, DPP 99, CNP 46, other 6

Judicial branch: Judicial Yuan, justices appointed by the president
with the consent of the National Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Kuomintang (KMT, Nationalist Party), LI
Teng-hui, chairman; Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), HSU
Hsin-Liang, chairman; Chinese New Party (CNP), CHEN Kuei-Miao; Labor
Party (LP), leader NA; Taiwan Independence Party (TAIP), leader NA

Political pressure groups and leaders: Taiwan independence movement,
various environmental groups
note : debate on Taiwan independence has become acceptable within the
mainstream of domestic politics on Taiwan; political liberalization
and the increased representation of the opposition Democratic
Progressive Party in Taiwan's legislature have opened public debate on
the island's national identity; advocates of Taiwan independence,
including within the DPP, oppose the ruling party's traditional stand
that the island will eventually reunify with mainland China; goals of
the Taiwan independence movement include establishing a sovereign
nation on Taiwan and entering the UN; other organizations supporting
Taiwan independence include the World United Formosans for
Independence and the Organization for Taiwan Nation Building

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, BCIE, ICC, IOC,
WCL, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; unofficial commercial and
cultural relations with the people of the US are maintained through a
private instrumentality, the Taipei Economic and Cultural
Representative Office (TECRO) with headquarters in Taipei and field
offices in Washington and 12 other US cities

Diplomatic representation from the US: none; unofficial commercial and
cultural relations with the people of Taiwan are maintained through a
private institution, the American Institute in Taiwan (AIT), which has
offices in Taipei at #7 Lane 134, Hsin Yi Road, Section 3, telephone
[886] (2) 709-2000, FAX [886] (2) 702-7675, and in Kao-hsiung at #2
Chung Cheng 3d Road, telephone [886] (7) 224-0154 through 0157, FAX
[886] (7) 223-8237, and the American Trade Center at Room 3207
International Trade Building, Taipei World Trade Center, 333 Keelung
Road Section 1, Taipei 10548, telephone [886] (2) 720-1550, FAX [886]
757-7162

Flag description: red with a dark blue rectangle in the upper
hoist-side corner bearing a white sun with 12 triangular rays

Economy

Economy - overview: Taiwan has a dynamic capitalist economy with
considerable guidance of investment and foreign trade by government
officials and partial government ownership of some large banks and
industrial firms. Real growth in GDP has averaged about 9% a year
during the past three decades. Export growth has been even faster and
has provided the impetus for industrialization. Inflation and
unemployment are low. Agriculture contributes less than 4% to GDP,
down from 35% in 1952. Traditional labor-intensive industries are
steadily being moved off-shore and replaced with more capital- and
technology-intensive industries. Taiwan has become a major investor in
China, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Vietnam.
The tightening of labor markets has led to an influx of foreign
workers, both legal and illegal.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $315 billion (1996 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.7% (1996)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $14,700 (1996 est.)

GDP - composition by sector:
agriculture : 3.3%
industry: 35.7%
services: 61% (1996)

Inflation rate - consumer price index: 3.1% (1996)

Labor force:
total: 9.31 million
by occupation: services 52%, industry 38%, agriculture 10% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 2.6% (1996)

Budget:
revenues: $57.6 billion
expenditures: $79.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1996 est.)

Industries: electronics, textiles, chemicals, clothing, food
processing, plywood, sugar milling, cement, shipbuilding, petroleum
refining

Industrial production growth rate: 4.1% (1996)

Electricity - capacity: 21.87 million kW (1994)

Electricity - production: 117.16 billion kWh (1994)

Electricity - consumption per capita: 5,270 kWh (1995 est.)

Agriculture - products: rice, wheat, corn, soybeans, vegetables,
fruit, tea; pigs, poultry, beef, milk; fish catch increasing, reached
1.4 million metric tons in 1988

Exports:
total value: $116 billion (f.o.b., 1996)
commodities: machinery and electrical equipment 46.3%, textile
products 13.5%, basic metals and articles 8.8%, chemicals 6.7% (1996
est.)
partners : US 27.6%, Hong Kong 21.7%, EU countries 15.2%, Japan 10.5%
(1994 est.)

Imports:
total value: $102.4 billion (c.i.f., 1996)
commodities: machinery and electrical equipment 35.5%, chemicals
10.9%, basic metals and articles 10.3%, minerals 9.2% (1996 est.)
partners: Japan 30.1%, US 21.7%, EU countries 17.6% (1993 est.)

Debt - external: $600 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid: $NA

Currency: 1 New Taiwan dollar (NT$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: New Taiwan dollars per US$1 - 27.5 (1996), 27.4
(1995), 26.2 (1994), 26.6 (1993), 25.4 (1992)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June

@Taiwan:Communications

Telephones: 9,391,304 (1996 est.)

Telephone system:
domestic: extensive microwave radio relay trunk system on east and
west coasts
international : satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Pacific Ocean
and 1 Indian Ocean); submarine cables to Japan (Okinawa), Philippines,
Guam, Singapore, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Australia, Middle East, and
Western Europe

Radio broadcast stations: AM 91, FM 23, shortwave 0

Radios: 8.62 million

Television broadcast stations: 15 (repeaters 13)

Televisions: 10.8 million (1996 est.)

@Taiwan:Transportation

Railways:
total : 4,600 km (498 km electrified); note - 1,108 km belongs to the
Taiwan Railway Administration and the remaining 3,492 km is dedicated
to industrial use
narrow gauge: 4,600 km 1.067-m

Highways:
total : 19,584 km
paved: 17,124 km (including 387 km of expressways)
unpaved: 2,460 km

Pipelines: petroleum products 615 km; natural gas 97 km

Ports and harbors: Chi-lung (Keelung), Hua-lien, Kao-hsiung, Su-ao,
T'ai-chung

Merchant marine:
total: 200 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,872,739 GRT/8,965,523
DWT
ships by type : bulk 50, cargo 29, combination bulk 3, combination
ore/oil 1, container 85, oil tanker 19, refrigerated cargo 11,
roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 (1996 est.)

Airports: 38 (1996 est.)

Airports - with paved runways:
total: 37
over 3,047 m: 8
2,438 to 3,047 m: 12
1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
914 to 1,523 m : 6
under 914 m: 7 (1996 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways:
total: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1996 est.)

Military

Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Marines), Air Force, Coastal
Patrol and Defense Command, Armed Forces Reserve Command, Combined
Service Forces

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49: 6,394,422 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males: 4,927,346 (1997 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually:
males: 207,332 (1997 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $11.5 billion (FY96/97)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.6% (FY96/97)

Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: involved in complex dispute over the Spratly
Islands with China, Malaysia, Philippines, Vietnam, and possibly
Brunei; Paracel Islands occupied by China, but claimed by Vietnam and
Taiwan; Japanese-administered Senkaku-shoto (Senkaku Islands/Diaoyu
Tai) claimed by China and Taiwan

Illicit drugs: considered an important heroin transit point; major
problem with domestic consumption of methamphetamines and heroin









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The 1997 CIA World Factbook, by 
United States. Central Intelligence Agency.

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 1997 CIA WORLD FACTBOOK ***

***** This file should be named 1662-8.txt or 1662-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/6/1662/

Produced by Dr. Gregory B. Newby

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
