The Project Gutenberg EBook of Navajo Silversmiths, by Washington Matthews

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Navajo Silversmiths
       Second Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology to the
       Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, 1880-1881,
       Government Printing Office, Washington, 1883, pages 167-178

Author: Washington Matthews

Release Date: December 10, 2005 [EBook #17275]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NAVAJO SILVERSMITHS ***




Produced by Verity White, PM for Bureau of American
Ethnology and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Bibliothèque nationale
de France (BnF/Gallica) at http://gallica.bnf.fr)





SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION--BUREAU OF ETHNOLOGY.

NAVAJO SILVERSMITHS.

BY

Dr. WASHINGTON MATTHEWS, U.S.A.




ILLUSTRATIONS.

PLATE XVI.    Objects in silver                        172
      XVII.   Navajo workshop                          175
      XVIII.  Crucible, and Sandstone molds for
                shaping silver objects                 175
      XIX.    Objects in silver                        177
      XX.     Navajo Indian with silver ornaments      178




NAVAJO SILVERSMITHS.

BY WASHINGTON MATTHEWS.


Among the Navajo Indians there are many smiths, who sometimes forge iron
and brass, but who work chiefly in silver. When and how the art of
working metals was introduced among them I have not been able to
determine; but there are many reasons for supposing that they have long
possessed it; many believe that they are not indebted to the Europeans
for it. Doubtless the tools obtained from American and Mexican traders
have influenced their art. Old white residents of the Navajo country
tell me that the art has improved greatly within their recollection;
that the ornaments made fifteen years ago do not compare favorably with
those made at the present time; and they attribute this change largely
to the recent introduction of fine files and emery-paper. At the time of
the Conquest the so-called civilized tribes of Mexico had attained
considerable skill in the working of metal, and it has been inferred
that in the same period the sedentary tribes of New Mexico also wrought
at the forge. From either of these sources the first smiths among the
Navajos may have learned their trade; but those who have seen the
beautiful gold ornaments made by the rude Indians of British Columbia
and Alaska, many of whom are allied in language to the Navajos, may
doubt that the latter derived their art from a people higher in culture
than themselves.

The appliances and processes of the smith are much the same among the
Navajos as among the Pueblo Indians. But the Pueblo artisan, living in a
spacious house, builds a permanent forge on a frame at such a height
that he can work standing, while his less fortunate Navajo _confrère_,
dwelling in a low hut or shelter, which he may abandon any day,
constructs a temporary forge on the ground in the manner hereafter
described. Notwithstanding the greater disadvantages under which the
latter labors, the ornaments made by his hand are generally conceded to
be equal or even superior to those made by the Pueblo Indian.

A large majority of these savage smiths make only such simple articles
as buttons, rosettes, and bracelets; those who make the more elaborate
articles, such as powder-chargers, round beads (Pl. XVI), tobacco cases,
belts, and bridle ornaments are few. Tobacco cases, made in the shape of
an army canteen, such as that represented in Fig. 6, are made by only
three or four men in the tribe, and the design is of very recent origin.

Their tools and materials are few and simple; and rude as the results of
their labor may appear, it is surprising that they do so well with such
imperfect appliances, which usually consist of the following articles: A
forge, a bellows, an anvil, crucibles, molds, tongs, scissors, pliers,
files, awls, cold-chisels, matrix and die for molding buttons, wooden
implement used in grinding buttons, wooden stake, basin, charcoal, tools
and materials for soldering (blow-pipe, braid of cotton rags soaked in
grease, wire, and borax), materials for polishing (sand-paper,
emery-paper, powdered sandstone, sand, ashes, and solid stone), and
materials for whitening (a native mineral substance--almogen--salt and
water). Fig. 1, taken from a photograph, represents the complete shop of
a silversmith, which was set up temporarily in a summer lodge or
_hogan_, near Fort Wingate. Fragments of boards, picked up around the
fort, were used, in part, in the construction of the _hogan_, an old
raisin-box was made to serve as the curb or frame of the forge, and
these things detracted somewhat from the aboriginal aspect of the place.

A forge built in an outhouse on my own premises by an Indian
silversmith, whom I employed to work where I could constantly observe
him, was twenty-three inches long, sixteen inches broad, five inches in
height to the edge of the fire-place, and the latter, which was
bowl-shaped, was eight inches in diameter and three inches deep. No
other Navajo forge that I have seen differed materially in size or shape
from this. The Indian thus constructed it: In the first place, he
obtained a few straight sticks--four would have sufficed--and laid them
on the ground to form a frame or curb; then he prepared some mud, with
which he filled the frame, and which he piled up two inches above the
latter, leaving the depression for the fire-place. Before the structure
of mud was completed he laid in it the wooden nozzle of the bellows,
where it was to remain, with one end about six inches from the
fire-place, and the other end projecting about the same distance beyond
the frame; then he stuck into the nozzle a round piece of wood, which
reached from the nozzle to the fire-place, and when the mud work was
finished the stick was withdrawn, leaving an uninflammable tweer. When
the structure of mud was completed a flat rock about four inches thick
was laid on at the head of the forge--the end next to the bellows--to
form a back to the fire, and lastly the bellows was tied on to the
nozzle, which, as mentioned above, was built into the forge, with a
portion projecting to receive the bellows. The task of constructing this
forge did not occupy more than an hour.

[Illustration: PL. XVI. OBJECTS IN SILVER.]

A bellows, of the kind most commonly used, consists of a tube or bag of
goatskin, about twelve inches in length and about ten inches in
diameter, tied at one end to its nozzle and nailed at the other to a
circular disk of wood, in which is the valve. This disk has two arms:
one above for a handle and the other below for a support. Two or more
rings or hoops of wood are placed in the skin-tube to keep it distended,
while the tube is constricted between the hoops with buckskin thongs,
and thus divided into a number of compartments, as shown in Pl. XVII.
The nozzle is made of four pieces of wood tied together and rounded on
the outside so as to form a cylinder about ten inches long and three
inches in diameter, with a quadrangular hole in the center about one
inch square. The bellows is worked by horizontal movements of the arm. I
have seen among the Navajos one double-chambered bellows with a
sheet-iron tweer. This bellows was about the same size as the single
chambered one described above. It was also moved horizontally, and by
means of an iron rod passing from one end to the other and attached to
the disks, one chamber was opened at the same time that the other was
closed, and _vice versa_. This gave a more constant current of air than
the single-chambered implement, but not as steady a blast as the bellows
of our blacksmiths. Such a bellows, too, I have seen in the Pueblo of
Zuñi.

For an anvil they usually use any suitable piece of iron they may happen
to pick up, as for instance an old wedge or a large bolt, such as the
king-bolt of a wagon. A wedge or other large fragment of iron may be
stuck in the ground to steady it. A bolt is maintained in position by
being driven into a log. Hard stones are still sometimes used for anvils
and perhaps they were, at one time, the only anvils they possessed.

Crucibles are made by the more careful smiths of clay, baked hard, and
they are nearly the same shape as those used by our metallurgists,
having three-cornered edges and rounded bottoms. They are usually about
two inches in every dimension.

Fig. 1, Pl. XVIII represents one of ordinary shape and size, which I
have in my collection. The Navajos are not good potters; their
earthenware being limited to these crucibles and a few unornamented
water-jars; and it is probably in consequence of their inexperience in
the ceramic art that their crucibles are not durable. After being put in
the fire two or three times they swell and become very porous, and when
used for a longer time they often crack and fall to pieces. Some smiths,
instead of making crucibles, melt their metal in suitable fragments of
Pueblo pottery, which may be picked up around ruins in many localities
throughout the Navajo country or purchased from the Pueblo Indians.

The moulds in which they cast their ingots, cut in soft sandstone with a
home-made chisel, are so easily formed that the smith leaves them behind
when he moves his residence. Each mould is cut approximately in the
shape of the article which is to be wrought out of the ingot cast in it,
and it is greased with suet before the metal is poured in. In Figs. 2
and 3, Pl. XVIII, are represented pieces of sand-stone, graven for
molds, now in my possession. The figures are one-third the dimensions of
the subjects. In the middle cavity or mould shown in Fig. 2, Pl. XVIII,
was cast the ingot from which was wrought the arrow-shaped handle of
the powder-charger shown in Pl. XIX; in the lower cavity depicted in the
same figure was moulded the piece from which the bowl of this charger
was formed. The circular depression, delineated in the lower right
corner of Fig. 3, Pl. XVIII, gave form to the ingot from which the sides
of the canteen-shaped tobacco-case (Fig. 6) was made.

Tongs are often made by the Navajo silversmiths. One of these which I
saw had a U-shaped spring joint, and the ends were bent at right angles
downwards, so as more effectually to grasp the flat-sided crucible.
Often nippers or scissors are used as tongs.

Ordinary scissors, purchased from the whites, are used for cutting:
their metal after it is wrought into thin plates. The metal saw and
metal shears do not seem as yet to have been imported for their benefit.
Some of the more poorly provided smiths use their scissors also for
tongs, regardless or ignorant of consequences, and when the shears lose
their temper and become loose-jointed and blunt, the efforts of the
Indian to cut a rather thick plate of silver are curious to see. Often,
then, one or two bystanders are called to hold the plate in a horizontal
position, and perhaps another will be asked to hold the points of the
scissors to keep them from spreading. Scissors are sometimes used as
dividers, by being spread to the desired distance and held in position
by being grasped in the hand. By this means I have seen them attempt to
find centers, but not to describe circles. It is probable that had they
trusted to the eye they might have found their centers as well.

Their iron pliers, hammers, and files they purchase from the whites.
Pliers, both flat-pointed and round-pointed, are used as with us. Of
files they usually employ only small sizes, and the varieties they
prefer are the flat, triangular, and rat-tail. Files are used not only
for their legitimate purposes, as with us, but the shanks serve for
punches and the points for gravers, with which figures are engraved on
silver.

The Indians usually make their own cold-chisels. These are not used
where the scissors and file can be conveniently and economically
employed. The re-entrant rectangles on the bracelet represented in Fig.
4, Pl. XIX, were cut with a cold-chisel and finished with a file.

Awls are used to mark figures on the silver. Often they cut out of paper
a pattern, which they lay on the silver, tracing the outline with an
awl. These tools are sometimes purchased and sometimes made by the
Indians. I have seen one made from a broken knife which had been picked
up around the fort. The blade had been ground down to a point.

Metallic hemispheres for beads and buttons are made in a concave matrix
by means of a round-pointed bolt which I will call a die. These tools
are always made by the Indians. On one bar of iron there may be many
matrices of different sizes, only one die fitting the smallest
concavity, is required to work the metal in all. In the picture of the
smithy (Pl. XVII, in the right lower corner beside the tin-plate), a
piece of an old horse-shoe may be seen in which a few matrices have been
worked, and, beside it, the die used in connection with the matrices.

[Illustration: PL. XVIII. CRUCIBLE, AND SANDSTONE MOLDS FOR
SHAPING SILVER OBJECTS.]

[Illustration: PL. XVII. WORKSHOP OF NAVAJO SILVERSMITH.]

A little instrument employed in levelling the edges of the metallic
hemispheres, is rude but effective. In one end of a cylinder of wood,
about three or four inches long, is cut a small roundish cavity of such
a size that it will hold the hemisphere tightly, but allow the uneven
edges to project. The hemisphere is placed in this, and then rubbed on a
flat piece of sandstone until the edges are worn level with the base of
the wooden cylinder. The uses of the basin and the wooden stake are
described further on.

Their method of preparing charcoal is much more expeditious than that
usually employed by our charcoal-burners, but more wasteful; wood,
however, need not yet be economized on the juniper-covered _mesas_ of
New Mexico. They build a large fire of dry juniper, and when it has
ceased to flame and is reduced to a mass of glowing coals, they smother
it well with earth and leave it to cool. If the fire is kindled at
sunset, the charcoal is ready for use next morning.

The smith makes his own blow-pipe, out of brass, usually by beating a
piece of thick brass wire into a flat strip, and then bending this into
a tube. The pipe is about a foot long, slightly tapering and curved at
one end; there is no arrangement for retaining the moisture proceeding
from the mouth. These Indians do not understand our method of making an
air chamber of the mouth; they blow with undistended cheeks, hence the
current of air directed on the flame is intermitting. The flame used in
soldering with the blow-pipe is derived from a thick braid of cotton
rags soaked in mutton suet or other grease. Their borax is purchased
from the whites, and from the same source is derived the fine wire with
which they bind together the parts to be soldered. I have been told by
reliable persons that it is not many years since the Navajos employed a
flux mined by themselves in their own country; but, finding the pure
borax introduced by the traders to be much better, they gradually
abandoned the use of the former substance.

For polishing, they have sand-paper and emery-paper purchased from the
whites; but as these are expensive, they are usually required only for
the finishing touches, the first part of the work being done with
powdered sandstone, sand, or ashes, all of which are used with or
without water. At certain stages in the progress of the work, some
articles are rubbed on a piece of sandstone to reduce the surfaces to
smoothness; but the stone, in this instance, is more a substitute for
the file than for the sand-paper. Perhaps I should say that the file is
a substitute for the stone, for there is little doubt that stone, sand,
and ashes preceded file and paper in the shop of the Indian smith.

For blanching the silver, when the forging is done, they use a mineral
substance found in various parts of their country, which, I am informed
by Mr. Taylor, of the Smithsonian Institution, is a "hydrous sulphate of
alumina," called almogen. This they dissolve in water, in a metal basin,
with the addition, sometimes, of salt. The silver, being first slightly
heated in the forge, is boiled in this solution and in a short time
becomes very white.

The processes of the Navajo silversmith may be best understood from
descriptions of the ways in which he makes some of his silver ornament.
I once engaged two of the best workmen in the tribe to come to Fort
Wingate and work under my observation for a week. They put up their
forge in a small outbuilding at night, and early next morning they were
at work. Their labor was almost all performed while they were sitting or
crouching on the ground in very constrained positions; yet I never saw
men who worked harder or more steadily. They often labored from twelve
to fifteen hours a day, eating their meals with dispatch and returning
to their toil the moment they had done. Occasionally they stopped to
roll a cigarette or consult about their work, but they lost very few
moments in this way. They worked by the job and their prices were such
that they earned about two dollars a day each.

The first thing they made was a powder charger with a handle in the
shape of a dart (Fig. 2, Pl. XIX). Having cut in sandstone rock (Fig. 2,
Pl. XVIII) the necessary grooves for molds and greased the same, they
melted two Mexican dollars--one for the bowl or receptacle, and one for
the handle--and poured each one into its appropriate mold. Then each
smith went to work on a separate part; but they helped one another when
necessary. The ingot cast for the receptacle was beaten into a plate
(triangular in shape, with obtuse corners), of a size which the smith
guessed would be large enough for his purpose. Before the process of
bending was quite completed the margins that were to form the seam were
straightened by clipping and filing so as to assume a pretty accurate
contact, and when the bending was done, a small gap still left in the
seam was filled with a shred of silver beaten in. The cone, at this
stage, being indented and irregular, the workman thrust into it a
conical stake or mandrel, which he had formed carefully out of hard
wood, and with gentle taps of the hammer soon made the cone even and
shapely. Next, withdrawing the stake, he laid on the seam a mixture of
borax and minute clippings of silver moistened with saliva, put the
article into the fire, seam up, blew with the bellows until the silver
was at a dull red-heat, and then applied the blow-pipe and flame until
the soldering was completed. In the meantime the other smith had, with
hammer and file, wrought the handle until it was sufficiently formed to
be joined to the receptacle, the base of the handle being filed down for
a length of about a quarter of an inch so that it would fit tightly into
the orifice at the apex of the receptacle. The two parts were then
adjusted and bound firmly together with a fine wire passing in various
directions, over the base of the cone, across the protuberances on the
dart-shaped handle, and around both. This done, the parts were soldered
together in the manner already described, the ring by which it is
suspended was fastened on, the edge of the receptacle was clipped and
filed, and the whole was brought into good shape with file, sand,
emery-paper, &c.

[Illustration: PL. XIX. OBJECTS IN SILVER.]

The chasing was the next process. To make the round indentations on
the handle, one smith held the article on the anvil while the other
applied the point of the shank of a file--previously rounded--and struck
the file with a hammer. The other figures were made with the sharpened
point of a file, pushed forward with a zigzag motion of the hand. When
the chasing was done the silver was blanched by the process before
referred to, being occasionally taken from the boiling solution of
almogen to be rubbed with ashes and sand. For about five hours both of
the smiths worked together on this powder-charger; subsequently, for
about three hours' more, there was only one man engaged on it; so that,
in all, thirteen hours labor was spent in constructing it. Of this time,
about ten hours were consumed in forging, about one and one-half hours
in filing and rubbing, and about the same time in ornamenting and
cleaning.

In making the hollow silver beads they did not melt the silver, but beat
out a Mexican dollar until it was of the proper tenuity--frequently
annealing it in the forge as the work advanced. When the plate was ready
they carefully described on it, with an awl, a figure (which, by
courtesy, we will call a circle) that they conjectured would include a
disk large enough to make half a bead of the required size. The disk was
then cut out with scissors, trimmed, and used as a pattern to cut other
circular pieces by. One of the smiths proceeded to cut out the rest of
the planchets, while his partner formed them into hollow hemispheres
with his matrix and die. He did not put them at once into the cavity
from which they were to get their final shape, but first worked them a
little in one or more larger cavities, so as to bring them gradually to
the desired form. Next the hemispheres were leveled at the edges by a
method already described, and subsequently perforated by holding them,
convex surface downwards, on a piece of wood, and driving through them
the shank of a file with blows of a hammer. By this means of boring, a
neck was left projecting from the hole, which was not filed off until
the soldering was done. The hemispheres were now strung or, I may say,
spitted on a stout wire in pairs forming globes. The wire or spit
referred to was bent at one end and supplied with a washer to keep the
heads from slipping off, and all the pieces being pressed closely
together were secured in position by many wraps of finer wire at the
other end of the spit. The mixture of borax, saliva, and silver was next
applied to the seams of all the beads; they were put into the fire and
all soldered at one operation. When taken from the fire they were
finished by filing, polishing and blanching.

These Indians are quite fertile in design. In Pl. XIX are shown two
powder-chargers, which I consider very graceful in form. I have seen
many of these powder-chargers, all very graceful, but no two alike
except in cases where duplicates had been specially ordered. Their
designs upon bracelets and rings are of great variety. Ornaments for
bridles, consisting of broad bands of silver, sufficient in size and
number to almost entirely conceal the leather, are not particularly
handsome, but are greatly in demand among the Navajos and are
extensively manufactured by them. Leather belts studded with large
plates of silver are favorite articles of apparel, and often contain
metal to the value of forty or fifty dollars. Pl. XX represents an
Indian wearing such a belt, in which only three of the plates are shown.
Single and double crosses of silver are represented attached to his
necklace. The cross is much worn by the Navajos, among whom, I
understand, it is not intended to represent the "Cross of Christ," but
is a symbol of the morning star. The lengthening of the lower limb,
however, is probably copied from the usual form of the Christian emblem.
These savage smiths also display much ingenuity in working from models
and from drawings of objects entirely new to them.

They are very wasteful of material. They usually preserve the clippings
and melt them in the crucible, or use them in soldering; but they make
no attempt to save the metal carried off in filing, polishing, and by
oxidizing in the forge, all of which is considerable. In one article of
silver, for which, allowing for clippings saved, 836 grains were given
to the smith, and the work on which I watched so closely throughout that
I am certain none of the material was stolen, there was a loss of 120
grains, or over 14 per cent.

The smiths whom I have seen working had no dividers, square, measure, or
any instrument of precision. As before stated, I have seen scissors used
as compasses, but as a rule they find approximate centers with the eye,
and cut all shapes and engrave all figures by the unaided guidance of
this unreliable organ. Often they cut out their designs in paper first
and from them mark off patterns on the metal. Even in the matter of
cutting patterns they do not seem to know the simple device of doubling
the paper in order to secure lateral uniformity.

Here ends my description of the smithcraft of a rude but docile and
progressive people. I trust that it may serve not only to illustrate
some aspects of their mental condition, their inventive and imitative
talents, but possibly to shed some light on the condition and diffusion
of the art of the metalist in the prehistoric days of our continent,
notwithstanding the fact that some elements of their craft are of recent
introduction and others of doubtful origin.

[Illustration: Pl. XX. NAVAJO INDIAN WITH SILVER ORNAMENTS.]


INDEX.

Almogen used by Navajoes in blanching silver 175
Articles made by Navajo silversmiths 171, 176
Bellows used by Navajo silversmiths 172
Blanching silver, Navajo method of 175
Blow-pipe of Navajo silversmiths 175
Charcoal, Navajo method of preparing 175
Chasing silver, Navajo method of 176
Coin used by Navajo silversmiths 177
Cross design associated with others
    in Navajo silver ornamentation 178
Crucibles of Navajo silversmiths 173
Fertility of design of Navajo silversmiths 177
Files used in engraving silver 174
Forge of the Navajo silversmith 172
Improvement of the silversmith's craft among the Navajoes 171
Matthews, Dr. W., Navajo silversmiths by, 167
Moulds used by Navajo Silversmiths 173
Silversmith's craft among the Navajoes 171
Polishing silver, Navajo method of 175
Processes of the Navajo silversmith 171, 176
    ; blanching 175
    ; chasing 176
    ; polishing 175
    ; soldering 176
Silversmith among the Navajos and Pueblos, Origin of 171
Soldering silver, Navajo method of 176
Tools used by Navajo silversmith 172
    ; anvil 173
    ; awl 174
    ; bellows 172
    ; blow-pipe 175
    ; cold-chisel 174
    ; crucibles 173
    ; files 174
    ; hammers 174
    inefficient 178
    ; metallic hemispheres 174
    ; molds 173
    ; pliers 174
    ; scissors 174, 178
Wastefulness of the Navajo silversmith 174, 178





End of Project Gutenberg's Navajo Silversmiths, by Washington Matthews

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NAVAJO SILVERSMITHS ***

***** This file should be named 17275-8.txt or 17275-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/2/7/17275/

Produced by Verity White, PM for Bureau of American
Ethnology and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Bibliothèque nationale
de France (BnF/Gallica) at http://gallica.bnf.fr)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
