The Project Gutenberg eBook, How to Camp Out, by John M. Gould


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: How to Camp Out


Author: John M. Gould



Release Date: January 22, 2006  [eBook #17575]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO CAMP OUT***


E-text prepared by Suzanne Lybarger, Brian Janes, Emmy, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (https://www.pgdp.net/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 17575-h.htm or 17575-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/7/5/7/17575/17575-h/17575-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/7/5/7/17575/17575-h.zip)





Hints for Camping and Walking.

HOW TO CAMP OUT.

by

JOHN M. GOULD,

Author of History of First-Tenth-Twenty-Ninth Maine Regiment.

First published in 1877







CONTENTS.


CHAPTER.

   I. GETTING READY                                            9

  II. SMALL PARTIES TRAVELLING AFOOT AND CAMPING              14

 III. LARGE PARTIES AFOOT WITH BAGGAGE-WAGON                  25

  IV. CLOTHING                                                35

   V. STOVES AND COOKING-UTENSILS                             39

  VI. COOKING                                                 44

 VII. MARCHING                                                50

VIII. THE CAMP                                                60

  IX. TENTS, TENT POLES AND PINS                              72

   X. MISCELLANEOUS.--GENERAL ADVICE                          90

  XI. DIARY                                                  107

 XII. "HOW TO DO IT," BY REV. EDWARD EVERETT HALE, &C.       113

XIII. HYGIENIC NOTES, BY DR. ELLIOTT COUES, U.S.A.           117




PREFACE.


In these few pages I have tried to prepare something about camping and
walking, such as I should have enjoyed reading when I was a boy; and,
with this thought in my mind, I some years ago began to collect the
subject-matter for a book of this kind, by jotting down all questions
about camping, &c., that my young friends asked me. I have also taken
pains, when I have been off on a walk, or have been camping, to notice
the parties of campers and trampers that I have chanced to meet, and
have made a note of their failures or success. The experiences of the
pleasant days when, in my teens, I climbed the mountains of Oxford
County, or sailed through Casco Bay, have added largely to the stock of
notes; and finally the diaries of "the war," and the recollections of
"the field," have contributed generously; so that, with quotations, and
some help from other sources, a sizable volume is ready.

Although it is prepared for young men,--for students more especially,--it
contains much, I trust, that will prove valuable to campers-out in general.

I am under obligations to Dr. Elliott Coues, of the United States Army,
for the valuable advice contained in Chapter XIII.; and I esteem it a
piece of good fortune that his excellent work ("Field Ornithology")
should have been published before this effort of mine, for I hardly know
where else I could have found the information with authority so
unquestionable.

Prof. Edward S. Morse has increased the debt of gratitude I already owe
him, by taking his precious time to draw my illustrations, and prepare
them for the engraver.

Mr. J. Edward Fickett of Portland, a sailmaker, and formerly of the
navy, has assisted in the chapter upon tents; and there are numbers of
my young friends who will recognize the results of their experience, as
they read these pages, and will please to receive my thanks for making
them known to me.

PORTLAND, ME., January, 1877.




HOW TO CAMP OUT.




CHAPTER I.

GETTING READY.


The hope of camping out that comes over one in early spring, the laying
of plans and arranging of details, is, I sometimes think, even more
enjoyable than reality itself. As there is pleasure in this, let me
advise you to give a practical turn to your anticipations.

Think over and decide whether you will walk, go horseback, sail, camp
out in one place, or what you will do; then learn what you can of the
route you propose to go over, or the ground where you intend to camp for
the season. If you think of moving through or camping in places unknown
to you, it is important to learn whether you can buy provisions and get
lodgings along your route. See some one, if you can, who has been where
you think of going, and put down in a note-book all he tells you that
is important.

Have your clothes made or mended as soon as you decide what you will
need: the earlier you begin, the less you will be hurried at the last.

You will find it is a good plan, as fast as you think of a thing that
you want to take, to note it on your memorandum; and, in order to avoid
delay or haste, to cast your eyes over the list occasionally to see that
the work of preparation is going on properly. It is a good plan to
collect all of your baggage into one place as fast as it is ready; for
if it is scattered you are apt to lose sight of some of it, and start
without it.

As fast as you get your things ready, mark your name on them: mark every
thing. You can easily cut a stencil-plate out of an old postal card, and
mark with a common shoe-blacking brush such articles as tents, poles,
boxes, firkins, barrels, coverings, and bags.

Some railroads will not check barrels, bags, or bundles, nor take them
on passenger trains. Inquire beforehand, and send your baggage ahead if
the road will not take it on your train.

Estimate the expenses of your trip, and take more money than your
estimate. Carry also an abundance of small change.

Do not be in a hurry to spend money on new inventions. Every year
there is put upon the market some patent knapsack, folding stove,
cooking-utensil, or camp trunk and cot combined; and there are always
for sale patent knives, forks, and spoons all in one, drinking-cups,
folding portfolios, and marvels of tools. Let them all alone: carry your
pocket-knife, and if you can take more let it be a sheath or butcher
knife and a common case-knife.

Take iron or cheap metal spoons.

Do not attempt to carry crockery or glassware upon a march.

A common tin cup is as good as any thing you can take to drink from; and
you will find it best to carry it so that it can be used easily.[1]

Take nothing nice into camp, expecting to keep it so: it is almost
impossible to keep things out of the dirt, dew, rain, dust, or sweat,
and from being broken or bruised.

Many young men, before starting on their summer vacation, think that the
barber must give their hair a "fighting-cut;" but it is not best to
shave the head so closely, as it is then too much exposed to the sun,
flies, and mosquitoes. A moderately short cut to the hair, however, is
advisable for comfort and cleanliness.

If you are going to travel where you have never been before, begin early
to study your map. It is of great importance, you will find, to learn
all you can of the neighborhood where you are going, and to fix it in
your mind.

So many things must be done at the last moment, that it is best to do
what you can beforehand; but try to do nothing that may have to be
undone.

Wear what you please if it be comfortable and durable: do not mind what
people say. When you are camping you have a right to be independent.

If you are going on a walking-party, one of the best things you can do
is to "train" a week or more before starting, by taking long walks in
the open air.

Finally, leave your business in such shape that it will not call you
back; and do not carry off keys, &c., which others must have; nor
neglect to see the dentist about the tooth that usually aches when you
most want it to keep quiet.

For convenience the following list is inserted here. It is condensed
from a number of notes made for trips of all sorts, except boating and
horseback-riding. It is by no means exhaustive, yet there are very many
more things named than you can possibly use to advantage upon any one
tour. Be careful not to be led astray by it into overloading yourself,
or filling your camp with useless luggage. Be sure to remember this.

          Ammon'd opodeldoc.
          Axe (in cover).
          Axle-grease.
          Bacon.
          Barometer (pocket).
          Bean-pot.
          Beans (in bag).
          Beef (dried).
          Beeswax.
          Bible.
          Blacking and brush.
          Blankets.
          Boxes.
          Bread for lunch.
          Brogans (oiled).
          Broom.
          Butter-dish and cover.
          Canned goods.
          Chalk.
          Cheese.
          Clothes-brush.
          Cod-line.
          Coffee and pot.
          Comb.
          Compass.
          Condensed milk.
          Cups.
          Currycomb.
          Dates.
          Dippers.
          Dishes.
          Dish-towels.
          Drawers.
          Dried fruits.
          Dutch oven.
          Envelopes.
          Figs.
          Firkin (see p. 48).
          Fishing-tackle.
          Flour (prepared).
          Frying-pan.
          Guide-book.
          Half-barrel.
          Halter.
          Hammer.
          Hard-bread.
          Harness (examine!).
          Hatchet.
          Haversack.
          Ink (portable bottle).
          Knives (sheath, table, pocket and butcher.)
          Lemons.
          Liniment.
          Lunch for day or two.
          Maps.
          Matches and safe.
          Marline.
          Meal (in bag).
          Meal-bag (see p. 32).
          Medicines.
          Milk-can.
          Molasses.
          Money ("change").
          Monkey-wrench.
          Mosquito-bar.
          Mustard and pot.
          Nails.
          Neat's-foot oil.
          Night-shirt.
          Oatmeal.
          Oil-can.
          Opera-glass.
          Overcoat.
          Padlock and key.
          Pails.
          Paper.
            " collars.
          Pens.
          Pepper.
          Pickles.
          Pins.
          Portfolio.
          Postage stamps.
          Postal cards.
          Rope.
          Rubber blanket.
             "   coat.
             "   boots.
          Sail-needle.
          Salt.
           "  fish.
           "  pork.
          Salve.
          Saw.
          Shingles (for plates).
          Shirts.
          Shoes and strings.
          Slippers.
          Soap.
          Song-book.
          Spade.
          Spoons.
          Stove (utensils in bags).
          Sugar.
          Tea.
          Tents.
            "   poles.
            "   pins.
          Tooth-brush.
          Towels.
          Twine.
          Vinegar.
          Watch and key.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] If your haversack-flap has a strap which buckles down upon the
front, you can run the strap through the cup-handle before buckling; or
you can buy a rein-hitch at the saddlery-hardware shop, and fasten it
wherever most convenient to carry the cup.




CHAPTER II.

SMALL PARTIES TRAVELLING AFOOT AND CAMPING.


We will consider separately the many ways in which a party can spend a
summer vacation; and first we will start into wild and uninhabited
regions, afoot, carrying on our backs blankets, a tent, frying-pan,
food, and even a shot-gun and fishing-tackle. This is _very_ hard work
for a young man to follow daily for any length of time; and, although it
sounds romantic, yet let no party of young people think they can find
pleasure in it many days; for if they meet with a reverse, have much
rainy weather, or lose their way, some one will almost surely be taken
sick, and all sport will end.

If you have a mountain to climb, or a short trip of only a day or two,
I would not discourage you from going in this way; but for any extended
tour it is too severe a strain upon the physical powers of one not
accustomed to similar hard work.


AFOOT.--CAMPING OUT.

A second and more rational way, especially for small parties, is that of
travelling afoot in the roads of a settled country, carrying a blanket,
tent, food, and cooking-utensils; cooking your meals, and doing all the
work yourselves. If you do not care to travel fast, to go far, or to
spend much money, this is a fine way. But let me caution you first of
all about overloading, for this is the most natural thing to do. It is
the tendency of human nature to accumulate, and you will continually
pick up things on your route that you will wish to take along; and it
will require your best judgment to start with the least amount of
luggage, and to keep from adding to it.

You have probably read that a soldier carries a musket, cartridges,
blanket, overcoat, rations, and other things, weighing forty or fifty
pounds. You will therefore say to yourself, "I can carry twenty." Take
twenty pounds, then, and carry it around for an hour, and see how you
like it. Very few young men who read this book will find it possible to
_enjoy_ themselves, and carry more than twenty pounds a greater distance
than ten miles a day, for a week. To carry even the twenty pounds ten
miles a day is hard work to many, although every summer there are
parties who do their fifteen, twenty, and more miles daily, with big
knapsacks on their backs; but it is neither wise, pleasant, nor
healthful, to the average young man, to do this.

Let us cut down our burden to the minimum, and see how much it will be.
First of all, you must take a rubber blanket or a light rubber
coat,--something that will surely shed water, and keep out the dampness
of the earth when slept on. You must have something of this sort,
whether afoot, horseback, with a wagon, or in permanent camp.[2]

For carrying your baggage you will perhaps prefer a knapsack, though
many old soldiers are not partial to that article. There are also for
sale broad straps and other devices as substitutes for the knapsack.
Whatever you take, be sure it has broad straps to go over your
shoulders: otherwise you will be constantly annoyed from their cutting
and chafing you.

You can dispense with the knapsack altogether in the same way that
soldiers do,--by rolling up in your blanket whatever you have to carry.
You will need to take some pains in this, and perhaps call a comrade to
assist you. Lay out the blanket flat, and roll it as tightly as possible
without folding it, enclosing the other baggage[3] as you roll; then tie
it in a number of places to prevent unrolling, and the shifting about of
things inside; and finally tie or strap together the two ends, and throw
the ring thus made over the shoulder, and wear it as you do the strap of
the haversack,--diagonally across the body.

[Illustration]

The advantages of the roll over the knapsack are important. You save the
two and a half pounds weight; the roll is very much easier to the
shoulder, and is easier shifted from one shoulder to the other, or taken
off; and you can ease the burden a little with your hands. It feels
bulky at first, but you soon become used to it. On the whole, you will
probably prefer the roll to the knapsack; but if you carry much weight
you will very soon condemn whatever way you carry it, and wish for a
change.

A haversack is almost indispensable in all pedestrian tours. Even if you
have your baggage in a wagon, it is best to wear one, or some sort of a
small bag furnished with shoulder straps, so that you can carry a lunch,
writing materials, guide-book, and such other small articles as you
constantly need. You can buy a haversack at the stores where sportsmen's
outfits are sold; or you can make one of enamel-cloth or rubber
drilling, say eleven inches deep by nine wide, with a strap of the same
material neatly doubled and sewed together, forty to forty-five inches
long, and one and three-quarters inches wide. Cut the back piece about
nineteen inches long, so as to allow for a flap eight inches long to
fold over the top and down the front. Sew the strap on the upper corners
of the back piece, having first sewed a facing inside, to prevent its
tearing out the back.


WOOLLEN BLANKET.

Next in the order of necessities is a woollen blanket,--a good stout
one, rather than the light or flimsy one that you may think of taking.
In almost all of the Northern States the summer nights are apt to be
chilly; while in the mountainous regions, and at the seaside, they are
often fairly cold. A lining of cotton drilling will perhaps make a thin
blanket serviceable. This lining does not need to be quite as long nor
as wide as the blanket, since the ends and edges of the blanket are used
to tuck under the sleeper. One side of the lining should be sewed to the
blanket, and the other side and the ends buttoned; or you may leave off
the end buttons. You can thus dry it, when wet, better than if it were
sewed all around. You can lay what spare clothing you have, and your
day-clothes, between the lining and blanket, when the night is very
cold.

In almost any event, you will want to carry a spare shirt; and in cold
weather you can put this on, when you will find that a pound of shirt is
as warm as two pounds of overcoat.

If you take all I advise, you will not absolutely need an overcoat, and
can thus save carrying a number of pounds.

The tent question we will discuss elsewhere; but you can hardly do with
less than a piece of shelter-tent. If you have a larger kind, the man
who carries it must have some one to assist him in carrying his own
stuff, so that the burden may be equalized.

If you take tent-poles, they will vex you sorely, and tempt you to throw
them away: if you do not carry them, you will wonder when night comes
why you did not take them. If your tent is not large, so that you can
use light ash poles, I would at least start with them, unless the tent
is a "shelter," as poles for this can be easily cut.

You will have to carry a hatchet; and the kind known as the axe-pattern
hatchet is better than the shingling-hatchet for driving tent-pins. I
may as well caution you here not to try to drive tent-pins with the flat
side of the axe or hatchet, for it generally ends in breaking the
handle,--quite an accident when away from home.

For cooking-utensils on a trip like that we are now proposing, you will
do well to content yourself with a frying-pan, coffee-pot, and perhaps a
tin pail; you can do wonders at cooking with these.

We will consider the matter of cooking and food elsewhere; but the main
thing now is to know beforehand where you are going, and to learn if
there are houses and shops on the route. Of course you must have food;
but, if you have to carry three or four days' rations in your haversack,
I fear that many of my young friends will fail to see the pleasure of
their trip. Yet carry them if you must: do not risk starvation,
whatever you do. Also remember to always have something in your
haversack, no matter how easy it is to buy what you want.

I have now enumerated the principal articles of weight that a party must
take on a walking-tour when they camp out, and cook as they go. If the
trip is made early or late in the season, you must take more clothing.
If you are gunning, your gun, &c., add still more weight. Every one will
carry towel, soap, comb, and toothbrush.

Then there is a match-safe (which should be air-tight, or the matches
will soon spoil), a box of salve, the knives, fork, spoon, dipper,
portfolio, paper, Testament, &c. Every man also has something in
particular that "he wouldn't be without for any thing."[4]

There should also be in every party a clothes brush, mosquito-netting,
strings, compass, song-book, guide-book, and maps, which should be
company property.

I have supposed every one to be dressed about as usual, and have made
allowance only for extra weight; viz.,--

          Rubber blanket                                2-1/2 pounds.
          Stout woollen blanket and lining              4-1/2   "
          Knapsack, haversack, and canteen              4       "
          Drawers, spare shirt, socks, and collars      2       "
          Half a shelter-tent, and ropes                2       "
          Toilet articles, stationery, and small wares  2       "
          Food for one day                              3       "
                                                        ----
                Total                                   20 pounds.

You may be able to reduce the weight here given by taking a lighter
blanket, and no knapsack or canteen; but most likely the food that you
actually put in your haversack will weigh more than three pounds. You
must also carry your share of the following things:--

          Frying-pan, coffee-pot, and pail        3 pounds.
          Hatchet, sheath-knife, case, and belt   3   "
          Company property named on last page     3   "

Then if you carry a heavier kind of tent than the "shelter," or carry
tent-poles, you must add still more. Allow also nearly three pounds a
day per man for food, if you carry more than enough for one day; and
remember, that when tents, blankets, and clothes get wet, it adds about
a quarter to their weight.

You see, therefore, that you have the prospect of hard work. I do not
wish to discourage you from going in this way: on the contrary, there is
a great deal of pleasure to be had by doing so. But the majority of men
under twenty years of age will find no pleasure in carrying so much
weight more than ten miles a day; and if a party of them succeed in
doing so, and in attending to all of the necessary work, without being
worse for it, they will be fortunate.

In conclusion, then, if you walk, and carry all your stuff, camping, and
doing all your work, and cooking as you go, you should travel but few
miles a day, or, better still, should have many days when you do not
move your camp at all.


OTHER WAYS OF GOING AFOOT.

It is not necessary to say much about the other ways of going afoot. If
you can safely dispense with cooking and carrying food, much will be
gained for travel and observation. The expenses, however, will be
largely increased. If you can also dispense with camping, you ought then
to be able to walk fifteen or twenty miles daily, and do a good deal of
sight-seeing besides. You should be in practice, however, to do this.

You must know beforehand about your route, and whether the country is
settled where you are going.

Keep in mind, when you are making plans, that it is easier for one or
two to get accommodation at the farmhouses than for a larger party.

I heard once of two fellows, who, to avoid buying and carrying a tent,
slept on hay-mows, usually without permission. It looks to me as if
those young men were candidates for the penitentiary. If you cannot
travel honorably, and without begging, I should advise you to stay at
home.

FOOTNOTES:

[2] A German officer tells me that his comrades in the Franco-Prussian
war of 1870-1 had no rubber blankets; nor had they any shelter-tents
such as our Union soldiers used in 1861-5 as a make-shift when their
rubbers were lost. But this is nothing to you: German discipline
compelled the soldiers to carry a big cloak which sheds water quite
well, and is useful to a soldier for other purposes: but the weight and
bulk condemn it for pleasure-seekers.

[3] In general it is better to put the shelter-tent in the roll, and to
keep out the rubber blanket, for you may need the last before you camp.
You can roll the rubber blanket tightly around the other roll (the cloth
side out, as the rubber side is too slippery), and thus be able to take
it off readily without disturbing the other things. You can also roll
the rubber blanket separately, and link it to the large roll after the
manner of two links of a chain.

[4] I knew an officer in the army, who carried a rubber air-pillow
through thick and thin, esteeming it, after his life and his rations,
the greatest necessity of his existence. Another officer, when
transportation was cut down, held to his camp-chair. Almost every one
has his whim.




CHAPTER III.

LARGE PARTY TRAVELLING AFOOT WITH BAGGAGE-WAGON.


With a horse and wagon to haul your baggage you can of course carry
more. First of all take another blanket or two, a light overcoat, more
spare clothing, an axe, and try to have a larger tent than the
"shelter."

If the body of the wagon has high sides, it will not be a very difficult
task to make a cloth cover that will shed water, and you will then have
what is almost as good as a tent: you can also put things under the
wagon. You must have a cover of some sort for your wagon-load while on
the march, to prevent injury from showers that overtake you, and to keep
out dust and mud. A tent-fly will answer for this purpose.

You want also to carry a few carriage-bolts, some nails, tacks, straps,
a hand-saw, and axle-wrench or monkey-wrench. I have always found use
for a sail-needle and twine; and I carry them now, even when I go for a
few days, and carry all on my person.

The first drawback that appears, when you begin to plan for a horse and
wagon, is the expense. You can overcome this in part by adding members
to your company; but then you meet what is perhaps a still more serious
difficulty,--the management of a large party.

Another inconvenience of large numbers is that each member must limit
his baggage. You are apt to accumulate too great bulk for the wagon,
rather than too great weight for the horse.

Where there are many there must be a captain,--some one that the others
are responsible to, and who commands their respect. It is necessary that
those who join such a party should understand that they ought to yield
to him, whether they like it or not.

The captain should always consult the wishes of the others, and should
never let selfish considerations influence him. Every day his decisions
as to what the party shall do will tend to make some one dissatisfied;
and although it is the duty of the dissatisfied ones to yield, yet,
since submission to another's will is so hard, the captain must try to
prevent any "feeling," and above all to avoid even the appearance of
tyranny.

System and order become quite essential as our numbers increase, and it
is well to have the members take daily turns at the several duties; and
during that day the captain must hold each man to a strict performance
of his special trust, and allow no shirking.

After a few days some of the party will show a willingness to accept
particular burdens all of the time; and, if these burdens are the more
disagreeable ones, the captain will do well to make the detail
permanent.

Nothing tends to make ill feeling more than having to do another's work;
and, where there are many in a party, each one is apt to leave something
for others to do. The captain must be on the watch for these things, and
try to prevent them. It is well for him, and for all, to know that he
who has been a "good fellow" and genial companion at home may prove
quite otherwise during a tour of camping. Besides this, it is hardly
possible for a dozen young men to be gone a fortnight on a trip of this
kind without some quarrelling; and, as this mars the sport so much, all
should be careful not to give or take offence. If you are starting out
on your first tour, keep this fact constantly in mind.

Perhaps I can illustrate this division of labor.

We will suppose a party of twelve with one horse and an open wagon, four
tents, a stove, and other baggage. First, number the party, and assign
to each the duties for the first day.

          1. Captain. Care of horse and wagon; loading and unloading wagon.
          2. Jack. Loading and unloading wagon.
          3. Joe. Captain's assistant and errand-boy; currying horse.
          4. Mr. Smith. Cooking and purchasing.
          5. Sam. Wood, water, fire, setting of table.
          6. Tom.  "     "       "       "       "
          7. Mr. Jones.
          8. Henry.
          9. Bob.
          10. Senior.
          11. William.
          12. Jake.

The party is thus arranged in four squads of three men each, the oldest
at the heads. One half of the party is actively engaged for to-day,
while the other half has little to do of a general nature, except that
all must take turns in leading the horse, and marching behind the wagon.
It is essential that this be done, and it is best that only the stronger
members lead the horse.

To-morrow No. 7 takes No. 1's place, No. 8 takes No. 2's, and so on; and
the first six have their semi-holiday.

In a few days each man will have shown a special willingness for
some duty, which by common consent and the captain's approval he is
permitted to take. The party then is re-organized as follows:--

          1. Captain. General oversight; provider of food and provender.
          2. Jack. Washing and the care of dishes.
          3. Joe. (Worthless.)
          4. Mr. Smith. Getting breakfast daily, and doing all of the
                  cooking on Sunday.
          5. Sam. (Gone home, sick of camping.)
          6. Tom. Wood, water, fire, setting and clearing table.
          7. Mr. Jones. Getting supper all alone.
          8. Henry. Jack's partner. Care of food.
          9. Bob. Currying horse, oiling axles, care of harness and wagon.
          10. Senior. Packing wagon. Marching behind.
          11. William.  "      "        "       "
          12. Jake. Running errands.

The daily detail for leading the horse will have to be made, as before,
from the stronger members of the party; and if any special duty arises
it must still be done by volunteering, or by the captain's suggestion.

In this arrangement there is nothing to prevent one member from aiding
another; in fact, where all are employed, a better feeling prevails,
and, the work being done more quickly, there is more time for rest and
enjoyment.

To get a horse will perhaps tax your judgment and capability as much as
any thing in all your preparation; and on this point, where you need so
much good advice, I can only give you that of a general nature.

The time for camping out is when horses are in greatest demand for
farming purposes; and you will find it difficult to hire of any one
except livery-stable men, whose charges are so high that you cannot
afford to deal with them. You will have to hunt a long time, and in many
places, before you will find your animal. It is not prudent to take a
valuable horse, and I advise you not to do so unless the owner or a man
_thoroughly_ acquainted with horses is in the party. You may perhaps be
able to hire horse, wagon, and driver; but a hired man is an
objectionable feature, for, besides the expense, such a man is usually
disagreeable company.

My own experience is, that it is cheaper to buy a horse outright, and to
hire a harness and wagon; and, since I am not a judge of horse-flesh, I
get some friend who is, to go with me and advise. I find that I can
almost always buy a horse, even when I cannot hire. Twenty to fifty
dollars will bring as good an animal as I need. He may be old, broken
down, spavined, wind-broken, or lame; but if he is not sickly, or if his
lameness is not from recent injury, it is not hard for him to haul a
fair load ten or fifteen miles a day, when he is helped over the hard
places.

So now, if you pay fifty dollars for a horse, you can expect to sell him
for about twenty or twenty-five dollars, unless you were greatly
cheated, or have abused your brute while on the trip, both of which
errors you must be careful to avoid. It is a simple matter of arithmetic
to calculate what is best for you to do; but I hope on this horse
question you may have the benefit of advice from some one who has had
experience with the ways of the world. You will need it very much.


WAGONS.

If you have the choice of wagons, take one that is made for carrying
light, bulky goods, for your baggage will be of that order. One with a
large body and high sides, or a covered wagon, will answer. In districts
where the roads are mountainous, rough, and rocky, wagons hung on
thoroughbraces appear to suit the people the best; but you will have no
serious difficulty with good steel springs if you put in rubber bumpers,
and also strap the body to the axles, thus preventing the violent
shutting and opening of the springs; for you must bear in mind that the
main leaf of a steel spring is apt to break by the sudden pitching
upward of the wagon-body.

It has been my fortune twice to have to carry large loads in small
low-sided wagons; and it proved very convenient to have two or three
half-barrels to keep food and small articles in, and to roll the bedding
in rolls three or four feet wide, which were packed in the wagon upon
their ends. The private baggage was carried in meal-bags, and the tents
in bags made expressly to hold them; we could thus load the wagon
securely with but little tying.

For wagons with small and low bodies, it would be well to put a light
rail fourteen to eighteen inches above the sides, and hold it there by
six or eight posts resting on the floor, and confined to the sides of
the body.

Drive carefully and slowly over bad places. It makes a great deal of
difference whether a wheel strikes a rock with the horse going at a
trot, or at a walk.


HARNESS.

If your load is heavy, and the roads very hard, or the daily distance
long, you had better have a collar for the horse: otherwise a
breastplate-harness will do. In your kit of tools it is well to have a
few straps, an awl, and waxed ends, against the time that something
breaks. Oil the harness before you start, and carry about a pint of
neat's-foot oil, which you can also use upon the men's boots. At night
look out that the harness and all of your baggage are sheltered from dew
and rain, rats and mice.


ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF THIS MODE OF TRAVEL.

This way of travelling is peculiarly adapted to a party of different
ages, rather than for one exclusively of young men. It is especially
suitable where there are ladies who wish to walk and camp, or for an
entire family, or for a school with its teachers. The necessity of a
head to a party will hardly be recognized by young men; and, even if it
is, they are still unwilling, as a general rule, to submit to
unaccustomed restraint.

The way out of this difficulty is for one man to invite his comrades to
join his party, and to make all the others understand, from first to
last, that they are indebted to him for the privilege of going. It is
then somewhat natural for the invited guests to look to their leader,
and to be content with his decisions.

The best of men get into foolish dissensions when off on a jaunt, unless
there is one, whose voice has authority in it, to direct the movements.

I knew a party of twenty or more that travelled in this way, and were
directed by a trio composed of two gentlemen and one lady. This
arrangement proved satisfactory to all concerned.[5]

It has been assumed in all cases that some one will lead the horse,--not
ride in the loaded wagon,--and that two others will go behind and not
far off, to help the horse over the very difficult places, as well as to
have an eye on the load, that none of it is lost off, or scrapes against
the wheels. Whoever leads must be careful not to fall under the horse or
wagon, nor to fall under the horse's feet, should he stumble. These are
daily and hourly risks: hence no small boy should take this duty.[6]

FOOTNOTES:

[5] I never heard of a party exclusively of young men going on a tour of
this kind, and consequently I cannot write their experiences; but I can
easily imagine their troubles, quarrels, and separation into cliques. I
once went as captain of a party of ten, composed of ladies, gentlemen,
and schoolboys. We walked around the White Mountains from North Conway
to Jefferson and back, by way of Jackson. It cost each of us a dollar
and thirty-two cents a day for sixteen days, including railroad fares to
and from Portland, but excluding the cost of clothes, tents, and
cooking-utensils. Another time a similar party of twelve walked from
Centre Harbor, N.H., to Bethel, Me., in seventeen days, at a daily cost
of a dollar and two cents, reckoning as before. In both cases, "my right
there was none to dispute;" and by borrowing a horse the first time, and
selling at a loss of only five dollars the second, our expenses for the
horse were small.

[6] In one of my tours around the mountains, a lad of sixteen, in
attempting to hold up the horse's head as they were running down hill,
was hit by the horse's fore-leg, knocked down, and run over by both
wheels.




CHAPTER IV.

CLOTHING.


If your means allow it, have a suit especially for the summer tour, and
sufficiently in fashion to indicate that you are a traveller or camper.


SHIRTS.

Loose woollen shirts, of dark colors and with flowing collars, will
probably always be the proper thing. Avoid gaudiness and too much
trimming. Large pockets, one over each breast, are "handy;" but they
spoil the fit of the shirt, and are always wet from perspiration. I
advise you to have the collar-binding of silesia, and fitted the same as
on a cotton shirt, only looser; then have a number of woollen collars
(of different styles if you choose), to button on in the same manner as
a linen collar. You can thus keep your neck cool or warm, and can wash
the collars, which soil so easily, without washing the whole shirt. The
shirt should reach nearly to the knees, to prevent disorders in the
stomach and bowels. There are many who will prefer cotton-and-wool
goods to all-wool for shirts. The former do not shrink as much, nor are
they as expensive, as the latter.


DRAWERS.

If you wear drawers, better turn them inside out, so that the seams may
not chafe you. They _must_ be loose.


SHOES.

You need to exercise more care in the selection of shoes than of any
other article of your outfit. Tight boots put an end to all pleasure, if
worn on the march; heavy boots or shoes, with enormously thick soles,
will weary you; thin boots will not protect the feet sufficiently, and
are liable to burst or wear out; Congress boots are apt to bind the
cords of the leg, and thus make one lame; short-toed boots or shoes hurt
the toes; loose ones do the same by allowing the foot to slide into the
toe of the boot or shoe; low-cut shoes continually fill with dust, sand,
or mud.

For summer travel, I think you can find nothing better than brogans
reaching above the ankles, and fastening by laces or buttons as you
prefer, but not so tight as to bind the cords of the foot. See that they
bind nowhere except upon the instep. The soles should be wide, and the
heels wide and low (about two and three-quarter inches wide by one inch
high); have soles and heels well filled with iron nails. Be particular
not to have steel nails, which slip so badly on the rocks.

Common brogans, such as are sold in every country-store, are the next
best things to walk in; but it is hard to find a pair that will fit a
difficult foot, and they readily let in dust and earth.

Whatever you wear, break them in well, and oil the tops thoroughly with
neat's-foot oil before you start; and see that there are no nails,
either in sight or partly covered, to cut your feet.

False soles are a good thing to have if your shoes will admit them: they
help in keeping the feet dry, and in drying the shoes when they are wet.

Woollen or merino stockings are usually preferable to cotton, though for
some feet cotton ones are by far the best. Any darning should be done
smoothly, since a bunch in the stocking is apt to bruise the skin.


PANTALOONS.

Be sure to have the trousers loose, and made of rather heavier cloth
than is usually worn at home in summer. They should be cut high in the
waist to cover the stomach well, and thus prevent sickness.

The question of wearing "hip-pants," or using suspenders, is worth some
attention. The yachting-shirt by custom is worn with hip-pantaloons, and
often with a belt around the waist; and this tightening appears to do no
mischief to the majority of people. Some, however, find it very
uncomfortable, and others are speedily attacked by pains and indigestion
in consequence of having a tight waist. If you are in the habit of
wearing suspenders, do not change now. If you do not like to wear them
over the shirt, you can wear them over a light under-shirt, and have the
suspender straps come through small holes in the dress-shirt. In that
case cut the holes low enough so that the dress-shirt will fold over the
top of the trousers, and give the appearance of hip-pantaloons. If you
undertake to wear the suspenders next to the skin, they will gall you. A
fortnight's tramping and camping will about ruin a pair of trousers:
therefore it is not well to have them made of any thing very expensive.

Camping offers a fine opportunity to wear out old clothes, and to throw
them away when you have done with them. You can send home by mail or
express your soiled underclothes that are too good to lose or to be
washed by your unskilled hands.




CHAPTER V.

STOVES AND COOKING-UTENSILS.


If you have a permanent camp, or if moving you have wagon-room enough,
you will find a stove to be most valuable property. If your party is
large it is almost a necessity.

For a permanent camp you can generally get something second-hand at a
stove-dealer's or the junk-shop. For the march you will need a stove of
sheet iron. About the simplest, smallest, and cheapest thing is a
round-cornered box made of sheet iron, eighteen to twenty-four inches
long and nine to twelve inches high. It needs no bottom: the ground will
answer for that. The top, which is fixed, is a flat piece of sheet iron,
with a hole near one end large enough for a pot or pan, and a hole
(collar) for the funnel near the other end. It is well also to have a
small hole, with a slide to open and close it with, in the end of the
box near the bottom, so as to put in wood, and regulate the draught; but
you can dispense with the slide by raising the stove from the ground
when you want to admit fuel or air.

[Illustration]

I have used a more elaborate article than this. It is an old sheet-iron
stove that came home from the army, and has since been taken down the
coast and around the mountains with parties of ten to twenty. It was
almost an indispensable article with such large companies. It is a
round-cornered box, twenty-one inches long by twenty wide, and thirteen
inches high, with a slide in the front end to admit air and fuel. The
bottom is fixed to the body; the top removes, and is fitted loosely to
the body after the style of a firkin-cover, i.e., the flange, which is
deep and strong, goes _outside_ the stove. There are two holes on the
top 5-1/2 inches in diameter, and two 7-1/2 inches, besides the collar
for the funnel; and these holes have covers neatly fitted. All of the
cooking-utensils and the funnel can be packed inside the stove; and, if
you fear it may upset on the march, you can tie the handles of the stove
to those of the top piece.

A stove like this will cost about ten dollars; but it is a treasure for
a large party or one where there are ladies, or those who object to
having their eyes filled with smoke. The coffee-pot and tea-pot for this
stove have "sunk bottoms," and hence will boil quicker by presenting
more surface to the fire. You should cover the bottom of the stove with
four inches or more of earth before making a fire in it.

To prevent the pots and kettles from smutting every thing they touch,
each has a separate bag in which it is packed and carried.

The funnel was in five joints, each eighteen inches long, and made upon
the "telescope" principle, which is objectionable on account of the smut
and the jams the funnel is sure to receive. In practice we have found
three lengths sufficient, but have had two elbows made; and with these
we can use the stove in an old house, shed, or tent, and secure good
draught.

If you have ladies in your party, or those to whom the rough side of
camping-out offers few attractions, it is well to consider this stove
question. Either of these here described must be handled and transported
with care.

A more substantial article is the Dutch oven, now almost unknown in many
of the States. It is simply a deep, bailed frying-pan with a heavy
cast-iron cover that fits on and overhangs the top. By putting the oven
on the coals, and making a fire on the cover, you can bake in it very
well. Thousands of these were used by the army during the war, and they
are still very extensively used in the South. If their weight is no
objection to your plans, I should advise you to have a Dutch oven. They
are not expensive if you can find one to buy. If you cannot find one for
sale, see if you cannot improvise one in some way by getting a heavy
cover for a deep frying-pan. It would be well to try such an
improvisation at home before starting, and learn if it will bake or
burn, before taking it with you.

Another substitute for a stove is one much used nowadays by
camping-parties, and is suited for permanent camps. It is the top of an
old cooking-stove, with a length or two of funnel. If you build a good
tight fireplace underneath, it answers pretty well. The objection to it
is the difficulty of making and keeping the fireplace tight, and it
smokes badly when the wind is not favorable for draught. I have seen a
great many of these in use, but never knew but one that did well in all
weathers, and this had a fireplace nicely built of brick and mortar, and
a tight iron door.

Still another article that can be used in permanent camps, or if you
have a wagon, is the old-fashioned "Yankee baker," now almost unknown.
You can easily find a tinman who has seen and can make one. There is
not, however, very often an occasion for baking in camp, or at least
most people prefer to fry, boil, or broil.

Camp-stoves are now a regular article of trade; many of them are good,
and many are worthless. I cannot undertake to state here the merits or
demerits of any particular kind; but before putting money into any I
should try to get the advice of some practical man, and not buy any
thing with hinged joints or complicated mechanism.




CHAPTER VI.

COOKING, AND THE CARE OF FOOD.


When living in the open air the appetite is so good, and the pleasure of
getting your own meals is so great, that, whatever may be cooked, it is
excellent.

[Illustration]

You will need a frying-pan and a coffee-pot, even if you are carrying
all your baggage upon your back. You can do a great deal of good cooking
with these two utensils, after having had experience; and it is
experience, rather than recipes and instructions, that you need.
Soldiers in the field used to unsolder their tin canteens, and make two
frying-pans of them; and I have seen a deep pressed-tin plate used by
having two loops riveted on the edges opposite each other to run a
handle through. Food fried in such plates needs careful attention and a
low fire; and, as the plates themselves are somewhat delicate, they
cannot be used roughly.

[Illustration]

It is far better to carry a real frying-pan, especially if there are
three or more in your party. If you have transportation, or are going
into a permanent camp, do not think of the tin article.

A coffee-pot with a bail and handle is better than one with a handle
only, and a lip is better than a spout; since handles and spouts are apt
to unsolder.

Young people are apt to put their pot or frying-pan on the burning wood,
and it soon tips over. Also they let the pot boil over, and presently it
unsolders for want of water. Few think to keep the handle so that it
can be touched without burning or smutting; and hardly any young person
knows that pitchy wood will give a bad flavor to any thing cooked over
it on an open fire. Live coals are rather better, therefore, than the
blaze of a new fire.

If your frying-pan catches fire inside, do not get frightened, but take
it off instantly, and blow out the fire, or smother it with the cover or
a board if you cannot blow it out.

You will do well to consult a cook-book if you wish for variety in your
cooking; but some things not found in cook-books I will give you here.

Stale bread, pilot-bread, dried corn-cakes, and crumbs, soaked a few
minutes in water, or better still in milk, and fried, are all quite
palatable.

In frying bread, or any thing else, have the fat boiling hot before you
put in the food: this prevents it from soaking fat.


BAKED BEANS, BEEF, AND FISH.

Lumbermen bake beans deliciously in an iron pot that has a cover with a
projecting rim to prevent the ashes from getting in the pot. The beans
are first parboiled in one or two waters until the outside skin begins
to crack. They are then put into the baking-pot, and salt pork at the
rate of a pound to a quart and a half of dry beans is placed just under
the surface of the beans. The rind of the pork should be gashed so that
it will cut easily after baking. Two or three tablespoonfuls of molasses
are put in, and a little salt, unless the pork is considerably lean.
Water enough is added to cover the beans.

A hole three feet or more deep is dug in the ground, and heated for an
hour by a good hot fire. The coals are then shovelled out, and the pot
put in the hole, and immediately buried by throwing back the coals, and
covering all with dry earth. In this condition they are left to bake all
night.

On the same principle very tough beef was cooked in the army, and made
tender and juicy. Alternate layers of beef, salt pork, and hard bread
were put in the pot, covered with water, and baked all night in a hole
full of coals.

Fish may also be cooked in the same way. It is not advisable, however,
for parties less than six in number to trouble themselves to cook in
this manner.


CARE OF FOOD.

You had better _carry_ butter in a tight tin or wooden box. In permanent
camp you can sink it in strong brine, and it will keep some weeks.
Ordinary butter will not keep sweet a long time in hot weather unless in
a cool place or in brine. Hence it is better to replenish your stock
often, if it is possible for you to do so.

You perhaps do not need to be told that when camping or marching it is
more difficult to prevent loss of food from accidents, and from want of
care, than when at home. It is almost daily in danger from rain, fog, or
dew, cats and dogs, and from flies or insects. If it is necessary for
you to take a large quantity of any thing, instead of supplying yourself
frequently, you must pay particular attention to packing, so that it
shall neither be spoiled, nor spoil any thing else.

You cannot keep meats and fish fresh for many hours on a summer day; but
you may preserve either over night, if you will sprinkle a little salt
upon it, and place it in a wet bag of thin cloth which flies cannot go
through; hang the bag in a current of air, and out of the reach of
animals.

In permanent camp it is well to sink a barrel in the earth in some dry,
shaded place; it will answer for a cellar in which to keep your food
cool. Look out that your cellar is not flooded in a heavy shower, and
that ants and other insects do not get into your food.

The lumbermen's way of carrying salt pork is good. They take a clean
butter-tub with four or five gimlet-holes bored in the bottom near the
chimbs. Then they pack the pork in, and cover it with coarse salt; the
holes let out what little brine makes, and thus they have a dry tub.
Upon the pork they place a neatly fitting "follower," with a cleat or
knob for a handle, and then put in such other eatables as they choose.
Pork can be kept sweet for a few weeks in this way, even in the warmest
weather; and by it you avoid the continual risk of upsetting and losing
the brine. Before you start, see that the cover of the firkin is neither
too tight nor too loose, so that wet or dry weather may not affect it
too much.

I beg you to clean and wash your dishes as soon as you have done using
them, instead of leaving them till the next meal. Remember to take
dishcloths and towels, unless your all is a frying-pan and coffee-pot
that you are carrying upon your back, when leaves and grass must be made
to do dishcloth duty.




CHAPTER VII.

MARCHING.[7]


It is generally advised by medical men to avoid violent exercise
immediately after eating. They are right; but I cannot advise you to
rest long, or at all, after breakfast, but rather to finish what you
could not do before the meal, and get off at once while it is early and
cool. Do not hurry or work hard at first if you can avoid it.

On the march, rest often whether you feel tired or not; and, when
resting, see that you do rest.

The most successful marching that I witnessed in the army was done by
marching an hour, and resting ten minutes. You need not adhere strictly
to this rule: still I would advise you to halt frequently for
sight-seeing, but not to lie perfectly still more than five or ten
minutes, as a reaction is apt to set in, and you will feel fatigued upon
rising.

Experience has shown that a man travelling with a light load, or none,
will walk about three miles an hour; but you must not expect from this
that you can easily walk twelve miles in four heats of three miles each
with ten minutes rest between, doing it all in four and a half hours.
Although it is by no means difficult, my advice is for you not to expect
to walk at that rate, even through a country that you do not care to
see. You may get so used to walking after a while that these long and
rapid walks will not weary you; but in general you require more time,
and should take it.

Do not be afraid to drink good water as often as you feel thirsty; but
avoid large draughts of _cold_ water when you are heated or are
perspiring, and never drink enough to make yourself logy. You are apt to
break these rules on the first day in the open air, and after eating
highly salted food. You can often satisfy your thirst with simply
rinsing the mouth. You may have read quite different advice[8] from
this, which applies to those who travel far from home, and whose daily
changes bring them to water materially different from that of the day
before.

It is well to have a lemon in the haversack or pocket: a drop or two of
lemon-juice is a great help at times; but there is really nothing which
will quench the thirst that comes the first few days of living in the
open air. Until you become accustomed to the change, and the fever has
gone down, you should try to avoid drinking in a way that may prove
injurious. Base-ball players stir a little oatmeal in the water they
drink while playing, and it is said they receive a healthy stimulus
thereby.

Bathing is not recommended while upon the march, if one is fatigued or
has much farther to go. This seems to be good counsel, but I do advise a
good scrubbing near the close of the day; and most people will get
relief by frequently washing the face, hands, neck, arms, and breast,
when dusty or heated, although this is one of the things we used to hear
cried down in the army as hurtful. It probably is so to some people: if
it hurts you, quit it.


FOOT-SORENESS AND CHAFING.

After you have marched one day in the sun, your face, neck, and hands
will be sunburnt, your feet sore, perhaps blistered, your limbs may be
chafed; and when you wake up on the morning of the second day, after an
almost sleepless night, you will feel as if you had been "dragged
through seven cities."

I am not aware that there is any preventive of sunburn for skins that
are tender. A hat is better to wear than a cap, but you will burn under
either. Oil or salve on the exposed parts, applied before marching, will
prevent some of the fire; and in a few days, if you keep in the open air
all the time, it will cease to be annoying.

To prevent foot-soreness, which is really the greatest bodily trouble
you will have to contend with, you must have good shoes as already
advised. You must wash your feet at least once a day, and oftener if
they feel the need of it. The great preventive of foot-soreness is to
have the feet, toes, and ankles covered with oil, or, better still,
salve or mutton-tallow; these seem to act as lubricators. Soap is better
than nothing. You ask if these do not soil the stockings. Most certainly
they do. Hence wash your stockings often, or the insides of the shoes
will become foul. Whenever you discover the slightest tendency of the
feet to grow sore or to heat, put on oil, salve, or soap, immediately.

People differ as to these things. To some a salve acts as an irritant:
to others soap acts in the same way. You must know before starting--your
mother can tell you if you don't know yourself--how oil, glycerine,
salve, and soap will affect your skin. Remember, the main thing is to
keep the feet clean and lubricated. Wet feet chafe and blister more
quickly than dry.

The same rule applies to chafing upon any part of the body. Wash and
anoint as tenderly as possible. If you have chafed in any part on
previous marches, anoint it before you begin this.

When the soldiers found their pantaloons were chafing them, they would
tie their handkerchiefs around their pantaloons, over the place
affected, thus preventing friction, and stopping the evil; but this is
not advisable for a permanent preventive. A bandage of cotton or linen
over the injured part will serve the purpose better.

Another habit of the soldiers was that of tucking the bottom of the
pantaloons into their stocking-legs when it was dusty or muddy, or when
they were cold. This is something worth remembering. You will hardly
walk a week without having occasion to try it.

Leather leggins, such as we read about in connection with Alpine travel,
are recommended by those who have used them as good for all sorts of
pedestrianism. They have not come into use much as yet in America.

The second day is usually the most fatiguing. As before stated, you
suffer from loss of sleep (for few people can sleep much the first night
in camp), you ache from unaccustomed work, smart from sunburn, and
perhaps your stomach has gotten out of order. For these reasons, when
one can choose his time, it is well to start on Friday, and so have
Sunday come as a day of rest and healing; but this is not at all a
necessity. If you do not try to do too much the first few days, it is
likely that you will feel better on the third night than at any previous
time.

I have just said that your stomach is liable to become disordered. You
will be apt to have a great thirst and not much appetite the first and
second days, followed by costiveness, lame stomach, and a feeling of
weakness or exhaustion. As a preventive, eat laxative foods on those
days,--figs are especially good,--and try not to work too hard. You
should lay your plans so as not to have much to do nor far to go at
first. Do not dose with medicines, nor take alcoholic stimulants. Physic
and alcohol may give a temporary relief, but they will leave you in bad
condition. And here let me say that there is little or no need of
spirits in your party. You will find coffee or tea far better than
alcohol.

Avoid all nonsensical waste of strength, and gymnastic feats, before and
during the march; play no jokes upon your comrades, that will make their
day's work more burdensome. Young people are very apt to forget these
things.

Let each comrade finish his morning nap. A man cannot dispense with
sleep, and it is cruel to rob a friend of what is almost his life and
health. But, if any one of your party requires more sleep than the
others, he ought to contrive to "turn in" earlier, and so rise with the
company.

You have already been advised to take all the rest you can at the halts.
Unsling the knapsack, or take off your pack (unless you lie down upon
it), and make yourself as comfortable as you can. Avoid sitting in a
draught of air, or wherever it chills you.

If you feel on the second morning as if you could never reach your
journey's end, start off easily, and you will limber up after a while.

The great trouble with young people is, that they are ashamed to own
their fatigue, and will not do any thing that looks like a confession.
But these rules about resting, and "taking it easy," are the same in
principle as those by which a horse is driven on a long journey; and it
seems reasonable that young men should be favored as much as horses.

Try to be civil and gentlemanly to every one. You will find many who
wish to make money out of you, especially around the summer hotels and
boarding-houses. Avoid them if you can. Make your prices, where
possible, before you engage.

Do not be saucy to the farmers, nor treat them as "country greenhorns."
There is not a class of people in the country of more importance to you
in your travels; and you are in honor bound to be respectful to them.
Avoid stealing their apples, or disturbing any thing; and when you wish
to camp near a house, or on cultivated land, obtain permission from the
owner, and do not make any unreasonable request, such as asking to camp
in a man's front-yard, or to make a fire in dry grass or within a
hundred yards of his buildings. Do not ask him to wait on you without
offering to pay him. Most farmers object to having people sleep on their
hay-mows; and all who permit it will insist upon the rule, "No smoking
allowed here." When you break camp in the morning, be sure to put out
the fires wherever you are; and, if you have camped on cleared land, see
that the fences and gates are as you found them, and do not leave a mass
of rubbish behind for the farmer to clear up.


MOUNTAIN CLIMBING.

When you climb a mountain, make up your mind for hard work, unless there
is a carriage-road, or the mountain is low and of gentle ascent. If
possible, make your plans so that you will not have to carry much up and
down the steep parts. It is best to camp at the foot of the mountain, or
a part way up, and, leaving the most of your baggage there, to take an
early start next morning so as to go up and down the same day. This is
not a necessity, however; but if you camp on the mountain-top you run
more risk from cold, fog, (clouds), and showers, and you need a warmer
camp and more clothing than down below.

Often there is no water near the top: therefore, to be on the safe side,
it is best to carry a canteen. After wet weather, and early in the
summer, you can often squeeze a little water from the moss that grows on
mountain-tops.

It is so apt to be chilly, cloudy, or showery at the summit, that you
should take a rubber blanket and some other article of clothing to put
on if needed. Although a man may sometimes ascend a mountain, and stay
on the top for hours, in his shirt-sleeves, it is never advisable to go
so thinly clad; oftener there is need of an overcoat, while the air in
the valley is uncomfortably warm.

Do not wear the extra clothing in ascending, but keep it to put on when
you need it. This rule is general for all extra clothing: you will find
it much better to carry than to wear it.

Remember that mountain-climbing is excessively fatiguing: hence go
slowly, make short rests _very_ often, eat nothing between meals, and
drink sparingly.

There are few mountains that it is advisable for ladies to try to climb.
Where there is a road, or the way is open and not too steep, they may
attempt it; but to climb over loose rocks and through scrub-spruce for
miles, is too difficult for them.

FOOTNOTES:

[7] Some of the questions which properly belong under this heading are
discussed elsewhere, and can be found by referring to the index.

[8] This advice also differs from that generally given to soldiers; the
army rule is as follows: "Drink well in the morning before starting, and
nothing till the halt; keep the mouth shut; chew a straw or leaf, or
keep the mouth covered with a cloth: all these prevent suffering from
extreme thirst. Tying a handkerchief well wetted with salt water around
the neck, allays thirst for a considerable time."--CRAGHILL'S _Pocket
Companion_: Van Nostrand, N.Y.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE CAMP.


It pays well to take some time to find a good spot for a camp. If you
are only to stop one night, it matters not so much; but even then you
should camp on a dry spot near wood and water, and where your horse, if
you have one, can be well cared for. Look out for rotten trees that may
fall; see that a sudden rain will not drown you out; and do not put your
tent near the road, as it frightens horses.

For a permanent camp a good prospect is very desirable; yet I would not
sacrifice all other things to this.

If you have to carry your baggage any distance by hand, you will find it
convenient to use two poles (tent-poles will serve) as a hand-barrow
upon which to pile and carry your stuff.

A floor to the tent is a luxury in which some indulge when in permanent
camp. It is not a necessity, of course; but, in a tent occupied by
ladies or children, it adds much to their comfort to have a few boards,
an old door, or something of that sort, to step on when dressing. Boards
or stepping-stones at the door of the tent partly prevent your bringing
mud inside.

If you are on a hillside, pitch your tent so that when you sleep, if you
are to sleep on the ground, your feet will be lower than your head: you
will roll all night, and perhaps roll out of the tent if you lie across
the line running down hill.

As soon as you have pitched your tent, stretch a stout line from the
front pole to the back one, near the top, upon which to hang your
clothes. You can tighten this line by pulling inwards the foot of one
pole before tying the line, and then lifting it back.

Do not put your clothes and bedding upon the bare ground: they grow damp
very quickly. See, too, that the food is where ants will not get at it.

Do not forget to take two or three candles, and replenish your stock if
you burn them: they sometimes are a prime necessity. Also do not pack
them where you cannot easily find them in the dark. In a permanent camp
you may be tempted to use a lantern with oil, and perhaps you will like
it better than candles; but, when moving about, the lantern-lamp and
oil-can will give you trouble. If you have no candlestick handy, you can
use your pocket-knife, putting one blade in the bottom or side of the
candle, and another blade into the ground or tent-pole. You can quickly
cut a candlestick out of a potato, or can drive four nails in a block of
wood.

If your candles get crushed, or if you have no candles, but have grease
without salt in it, you can easily make a "slut" by putting the grease
in a small shallow pan or saucer with a piece of wicking or cotton rag,
one end of which shall be in the grease, and the other, which you light,
held out of it. This is a poor substitute for daylight, and I advise you
to rise and retire early (or "_turn in_" and "_turn out_" if you
prefer): you will then have more daylight than you need.


BEDS.

Time used in making a bed is well spent. Never let yourself be persuaded
that humps and hollows are good enough for a tired man. If you cut
boughs, do not let large sticks go into the bed: only put in the smaller
twigs and leaves. Try your bed before you "turn in," and see if it is
comfortable. In a permanent camp you ought to take time enough to keep
the bed soft; and I like best for this purpose to carry a mattress when
I can, or to take a sack and fill it with straw, shavings, boughs, or
what not. This makes a much better bed, and can be taken out daily to
the air and sun. By this I avoid the clutter there always is inside a
tent filled with boughs; and, more than all, the ground or floor does
not mould in damp weather, from the accumulation of rubbish on it.

It is better to sleep off the ground if you can, especially if you are
rheumatic. For this purpose build some sort of a platform ten inches or
more high, that will do for a seat in daytime. You can make a sort of
spring bottom affair if you can find the poles for it, and have a little
ingenuity and patience; or you can more quickly drive four large stakes,
and nail a framework to them, to which you can nail boards or
barrel-staves.[9] All this kind of work must be strong, or you can have
no rough-and-tumble sport on it. We used to see in the army sometimes, a
mattress with a bottom of rubber cloth, and a top of heavy drilling,
with rather more cotton quilted[10] between them than is put into a
thick comforter. Such a mattress is a fine thing to carry in a wagon
when you are on the march; but you can make a softer bed than this if
you are in a permanent camp.


SLEEPING.

"Turn in" early, so as to be up with the sun. You may be tempted to
sleep in your clothes; but if you wish to know what luxury is, take them
off as you do at home, and sleep in a sheet, having first taken a bath,
or at least washed the feet and limbs. Not many care to do this,
particularly if the evening air is chilly; but it is a comfort of no
mean order.

If you are short of bedclothes, as when on the march, you can place over
you the clothes you take off (see p. 19); but in that case it is still
more necessary to have a good bed underneath.

You will always do well to cover the clothes you have taken off, or they
will be quite damp in the morning.

See that you have plenty of air to breathe. It is not best to have a
draught of air sweeping through the tent, but let a plenty of it come in
at the feet of the sleeper or top of the tent.

A hammock is a good thing to have in a permanent camp, but do not try to
swing it between two tent-poles: it needs a firmer support.

Stretch a clothes-line somewhere on your camp-ground, where neither you
nor your visitors will run into it in the dark.

If your camp is where many visitors will come by carriage, you will find
that it will pay you for your trouble to provide a hitching-post where
the horses can stand safely. Fastening to guy-lines and tent-poles is
dangerous.


SINKS.

In a permanent camp you must be careful to deposit all refuse from the
kitchen and table in a hole in the ground: otherwise your camp will be
infested with flies, and the air will become polluted. These sink-holes
may be small, and dug every day; or large, and partly filled every day
or oftener by throwing earth over the deposits. If you wish for health
and comfort, do not suffer a place to exist in your camp that will toll
flies to it. The sinks should be some distance from your tents, and a
dry spot of land is better than a wet one. Observe the same rule in
regard to all excrementitious and urinary matter. On the march you can
hardly do better than follow the Mosaic law (see Deuteronomy xxiii. 12,
13).

In permanent camp, or if you propose to stay anywhere more than three
days, the crumbs from the table and the kitchen refuse should be
carefully looked after: to this end it is well to avoid eating in the
tents where you live. Swarms of flies will be attracted by a very little
food.

A spade is better, all things considered, than a shovel, either in
permanent camp or on the march.


HOW TO KEEP WARM.

When a cold and wet spell of weather overtakes you, you will inquire,
"How can we keep warm?" If you are where wood is very abundant, you can
build a big fire ten or fifteen feet from the tent, and the heat will
strike through the cloth. This is the poorest way, and if you have only
shelter-tents your case is still more forlorn. But keep the fire
a-going: you _can_ make green wood burn through a pelting storm, but you
must have a quantity of it--say six or eight large logs on at one time.
You must look out for storms, and have some wood cut beforehand. If you
have a stove with you, a little ingenuity will enable you to set it up
inside a tent, and run the funnel through the door. But, unless your
funnel is quite long, you will have to improvise one to carry the smoke
away, for the eddies around the tent will make the stove smoke
occasionally beyond all endurance. Since you will need but little fire
to keep you warm, you can use a funnel made of boards, barrel-staves,
old spout, and the like. Old tin cans, boot-legs, birch-bark, and stout
paper can be made to do service as elbows, with the assistance of turf,
grass-ropes, and large leaves. But I forewarn you there is not much fun,
either in rigging your stove and funnel, or in sitting by it and waiting
for the storm to blow it down. Still it is best to be busy.

Another way to keep warm is to dig a trench twelve to eighteen inches
wide, and about two feet deep, running from inside to the outside of the
tent. The inside end of the trench should be larger and deeper; here you
build your fire. You cover the trench with flat rocks, and fill up the
chinks with stones and turf; boards can be used after you have gone a
few feet from the fireplace. Over the outer end, build some kind of a
chimney of stones, boxes, boards, or barrels. The fireplace should not
be near enough to the side of the tent to endanger it; and, the taller
the chimney is, the better it will draw if you have made the trench of
good width and air-tight. If you can find a sheet-iron covering for the
fireplace, you will be fortunate; for the main difficulty in this
heating-arrangement is to give it draught enough without letting out
smoke, and this you cannot easily arrange with rocks. In digging your
trench and fireplace, make them so that the rain shall not flood them.


FIREPLACE.

If flat rocks and mud are plenty, you can perhaps build a fireplace at
the door of your tent (outside, of course), and you will then have
something both substantial and valuable. Fold one flap of the door as
far back as you can, and build one side of the fireplace against the
pole,[11] and the other side against, or nearly over to, the corner of
the tent. Use large rocks for the lower tiers, and try to have all three
walls perpendicular and smooth inside. When up about three feet, or as
high as the flap of the tent will allow without its being scorched, put
on a large log of green wood for a mantle, or use an iron bar if you
have one, and go on building the chimney. Do not narrow it much: the
chimney should be as high as the top of the tent, or eddies of wind will
blow down occasionally, and smoke you out. Barrels or boxes will do for
the top, or you can make a cob-work of split sticks well daubed with
mud. All the work of the fireplace and chimney must be made air-tight by
filling the chinks with stones or chips and mud. When done, fold and
confine the flap of the tent against the stonework and the mantle;
better tie than nail, as iron rusts the cloth. Do not cut the tent
either for this or any other purpose: you will regret it if you do. Keep
water handy if there is much woodwork; and do not leave your tent for a
long time, nor go to sleep with a big fire blazing.

If you have to bring much water into camp, remember that two pails carry
about as easily as a single one, provided you have a hoop between to
keep them away from your legs. To prevent the water from splashing, put
something inside the pail, that will float, nearly as large as the top
of the pail.


HUNTERS' CAMP.

[Illustration]

It is not worth while to say much about those hunters' camps which are
built in the woods of stout poles, and covered with brush or the bark of
trees: they are exceedingly simple in theory, and difficult in practice
unless you are accustomed to using the axe. If you go into the woods
without an axeman, you had better rely upon your tents, and not try to
build a camp; for when done, unless there is much labor put in it, it is
not so good as a shelter-tent. You can, however, cut a few poles for
rafters, and throw the shelter-tent instead of the bark or brush over
the poles. You have a much larger shelter by this arrangement of the
tent than when it is pitched in the regular way, and there is the
additional advantage of having a large front exposed to the fire which
you will probably build; at the same time also the under side of the
roof catches and reflects the heat downward. When you put up your tent
in this way, however, you must look out not to scorch it, and to take
especial care to prevent sparks from burning small holes in it. In fact,
whenever you have a roaring fire you must guard against mischief from
it.

[Illustration]

Do not leave your clothes or blanket hanging near a brisk fire to dry,
without confining them so that sudden gusts of wind shall not take them
into the flame.

[Illustration]

You may some time have occasion to make a shelter on a ledge or floor
where you cannot drive a pin or nail. If you can get rails, poles,
joists, or boards, you can make a frame in some one of the ways figured
here, and throw your tents over it.

These frames will be found useful for other purposes, and it is well to
remember how to make them.

FOOTNOTES:

[9] Barrel-staves will not do for a double bed.

[10] It will roll up easier if the quilting runs from side to side only.

[11] This applies, as will be seen, only to tents having two uprights,
as the wall, "A," and shelter.




CHAPTER IX.

TENTS.--ARMY SHELTER-TENT (_tente d'abri_).


The shelter-tent used by the Union soldiers during the Rebellion was
made of light duck[12] about 31-1/2 inches wide. A tent was made in two
pieces both precisely alike, and each of them five feet long and five
feet and two inches wide; i.e., two widths of duck. One of these pieces
or half-tents was given to every soldier. That edge of the piece which
was the bottom of the tent was faced at the corners with a piece of
stouter duck three or four inches square. The seam in the middle of the
piece was also faced at the bottom, and eyelets were worked at these
three places, through which stout cords or ropes could be run to tie
this side of the tent down to the tent-pin, or to fasten it to whatever
else was handy. Along the other three edges of each piece of tent, at
intervals of about eight inches, were button-holes and buttons; the
holes an inch, and the buttons four inches, from the selvage or hem.[13]

Two men could button their pieces at the tops, and thus make a tent
entirely open at both ends, five feet and two inches long, by six to
seven feet wide according to the angle of the roof. A third man could
button his piece across one of the open ends so as to close it, although
it did not make a very neat fit, and half of the cloth was not used;
four men could unite their two tents by buttoning the ends together,
thus doubling the length of the tent; and a fifth man could put in an
end-piece.

Light poles made in two pieces, and fastened together with ferrules so
as to resemble a piece of fishing-rod, were given to some of the troops
when the tents were first introduced into the army; but, nice as they
were at the end of the march, few soldiers would carry them, nor will
you many days.

The tents were also pitched by throwing them over a tightened rope; but
it was easier to _cut_ a stiff pole than to _carry_ either the pole or
rope.

You need not confine yourself exactly to the dimensions of the army
shelter-tent, but for a pedestrian something of the sort is necessary
if he will camp out. I have never seen a "shelter" made of _three_
breadths of drilling (seven feet three inches long), but I should think
it would be a good thing for four or five men to take.[14] And I should
recommend that they make three-sided end-pieces instead of taking
additional half-tents complete, for in the latter case one-half of the
cloth is useless.

Five feet is _long_ enough for a tent made on the "shelter" principle;
when pitched with the roof at a right angle it is 3-1/2 feet high, and
nearly seven feet wide on the ground.

Although a shelter-tent is a poor substitute for a house, it is as good
a protection as you can well carry if you propose to walk any distance.
It should be pitched neatly, or it will leak. In heavy, pelting rains a
fine spray will come through on the windward side. The sides should set
at right angles to each other, or at a sharper angle if rain is
expected.

There are rubber blankets made with eyelets along the edges so that two
can be tied together to make a tent; but they are heavier, more
expensive, and not much if any better; and you will need other rubber
blankets to lie upon.

If you wish for a larger and more substantial covering than a "shelter,"
and propose to do the work yourself, you will do well to have a
sailmaker or a tent-maker cut the cloth, and show you how the work is to
be done. If you cannot have their help, you must at least have the
assistance of one used to planning and cutting needle-work, to whom the
following hints may not be lost. We will suppose heavy drilling 29-1/2
inches wide to be used in all instances.


THE A-TENT.

To make an A-tent,[15] draw upon the floor a straight line seven feet
long, to represent the upright pole or height of the tent; then draw a
line at right angles to and across the end of the first one, to
represent the ground or bottom of the tent. Complete the plan by finding
where the corners will be on the ground line, and drawing the two sides
(roof) from the corners[16] to the top of the pole-line. This triangle
is a trifle larger than the front and back of the tent will be.

The cloth should be cut so that the twilled side shall be the outside of
the tent, as it sheds the rain better.

Place the cloth on the floor against the ground-line, and tack it (to
hold it fast) to the pole-line, which it should overlap 3/8 of an inch;
then cut by the roof-line. Turn the cloth over, and cut another piece
exactly like the first; this second piece will go on the back of the
tent. Now place the cloth against the ground-line as before, but upon
the other side of the pole, and tack it to the floor after you have
overlapped the selvage of the piece first cut 3/4 of an inch. Cut by the
roof-line, and turn and cut again for the back of the tent.

In cutting the four small gores for the corners, you can get all the
cloth from one piece, and thus save waste, by turning and tearing it in
two; these gore-pieces also overlap the longer breadths 3/4 of an inch.

The three breadths that make the sides or roof are cut all alike; their
length is found by measuring the plan from corner to corner over the
top; in the plan now under consideration, the distance will be nearly
sixteen feet. When you sew them, overlap the breadths 3/4 of an inch the
same as you do the end-breadths.

In sewing you can do no better than to run, with a machine, a row of
stitching as near each selvage as possible; you will thus have two rows
to each seam, which makes it strong enough. Use the coarsest cotton, No.
10 or 12.

The sides and two ends are made separately; when you sew them together
care must be taken, for the edges of the ends are cut cross-grained, and
will stretch very much more than the cloth of the sides (roof). About as
good a seam as you can make, in sewing together the sides and ends, is
to place the two edges together, and fold them outwards (or what will be
downwards when the tent is pitched) twice, a quarter of an inch each
time, and put two rows of stitching through if done on a machine, or one
if with sail-needle and twine. This folding the cloth six-ply, besides
making a good seam, strengthens the tent where the greatest strain
comes. It is also advisable to put facings in the two ends of the top of
the tent, to prevent the poles from pushing through and chafing.

The bottom of the tent is completed next by folding upwards and inwards
two inches of cloth to make what is called a "tabling," and again
folding in the raw edge about a quarter of an inch, as is usual to make
a neat job. Some makers enclose a marline or other small tarred rope to
strengthen the foot of the tent, and it is well to do so. One edge of
what is called the "sod-cloth" is folded in with the raw edge, and
stitched at the same time. This cloth, which is six to eight inches
wide, runs entirely around the bottom of the tent, excepting the
door-flap, and prevents a current of air from sweeping under the tent,
and saves the bottom from rotting; the sod-cloth, however, will rot or
wear out instead, but you can replace it much more easily than you can
repair the bottom of the tent; consequently it is best to put one on.

One door is enough in an A-tent; but, if you prefer two, be sure that
one at least is nicely fitted and well provided with tapes or buttons,
or both: otherwise you will have a cheerless tent in windy and rainy
weather. The door-flap is usually made of a strip of cloth six to nine
inches wide, sewed to the selvage of the breadth that laps inside; the
top of it is sewed across the inside of the other breadth, and reaches
to the corner seam. Tent-makers usually determine the height of the door
by having the top of the flap reach from selvage to seam as just
described; the narrower the flap is, the higher the door will be. Some
make the door-flap considerably wider at the bottom than at the top, and
thus provide against the many annoyances that arise from one too narrow.

The loops (or "beckets" as they are called) that fasten to the tent-pins
are put in one at each side of the door and at every seam. Some makers
work an eyelet or put a grommet in the seam; but, in the army-tents
which are made of duck, there are two eyelets worked, one on each side
of the seam, and a six-thread manilla rope is run through and held in by
knotting the ends.

The door is tied together by two double rows of stout tapes[17] sewed on
at intervals of about eighteen inches; one inside the tent ties the
door-flap to the opposite breadth, and a second set outside pulls
together the two selvages of the centre breadths. Do not slight this
work: a half-closed door, short tapes, and a door-flap that is slapping
all the time, are things that will annoy you beyond endurance.

The upright poles of a tent such as has been described should be an inch
or two more than seven feet, for the cloth will stretch. If you have a
sod-cloth, the poles should be longer still.[18]


THE WALL-TENT.

The wall-tent is shaped like a house: the walls or sides, which are
perpendicular, are four feet high. A continuous piece of cloth runs from
the ground to the eaves, thence on toward the ridgepole, and down the
other side to the ground. The tent is made on the same general
principles as the one last described. It is four breadths square, but
the width is usually diminished about one foot by cutting six inches
from each corner breadth. If the cloth is drilling or light duck, you
can overlap the centre breadths a foot, and thus have the doors
ready-made.

Draw a plan upon the floor as in the other case; the pole nine feet and
two inches high, the corners four breadths apart less the overlappings
and the narrowing; draw the wall (in the plan only) four feet and two
inches high. The roof-line runs of course from the top of the pole to
the top of the wall.

Cut the cloth, as before, so as to have the twilled side out. Add six
inches to the distance measured on the plan, for the length of the walls
and roof, so as to get cloth for the eaves.

The wall is to be four feet high; consequently, when you have sewed
together the four breadths that make the roof and walls, measure four
feet 3-1/2 inches from the ends (bottoms), double the cloth, and sew
two rows of stitching by hand across from side to side, 1-1/2 inches
from the doubling; this makes the tabling for the eaves, and you have
two inches left for the bottom tabling. Use stout twine for these seams
at the eaves, and take only three to four stitches to the inch.

Take the same care as before in sewing together the ends and sides; the
larger the tent, the more this difficulty increases.

The sod-cloth becomes more of a necessity as we increase the size of the
tent, and add to the difficulty of making it fit snugly to the ground.

Facings should be put in where the ends of the poles bear, as before
explained; and also in the four upper corners of the wall, to prevent
the strain of the corner guy-lines from ripping apart the eaves and
wall.

Beckets must be put in the bottom of each seam and the door, the same as
in the A-tent, and strong tapes sewed to the door.

Guy-lines made of six-thread manilla rope are put in at the four corners
of the eaves, and at every seam along that tabling, making five upon
each side. Work an eyelet, or put a grommet, in the doubled cloth of the
seam; knot the end of the guy-line to prevent its pulling through: tying
the rope makes too bungling a job, and splicing it is too much work.
The six guy-lines in the body of the tent should be about nine feet
long, the four corner ones about a foot longer. The fiddles[19] should
be made of some firm wood: pine and spruce will not last long enough to
pay for the trouble of making them.

The poles should be nine feet and four or five inches long. If they are
too long at first, sink the ends in the ground, and do not cut them off
until the tent has stretched all that it will.

In permanent camp a "fly" over the tent is almost indispensable for
protection from the heat and pelting rains. It should be as long as the
roof of the tent, and project at least a foot beyond the eaves. The
guy-lines should be a foot or more longer than those of the tent, so
that the pins for the fly may be driven some distance outside those of
the tent, and thus lift the fly well off the roof.


CLOTH FOR TENTS.

For convenience we have supposed all of the tents to be made of heavy
drilling. Many tent-makers consider this material sufficiently strong,
and some even use it to make tents larger than the United States army
wall-tent. My own experience leads me to recommend for a wall-tent a
heavier cloth, known to the trade as "eight-ounce Raven's" duck,[20]
because drilling becomes so thin after it has been used two or three
seasons that a high wind is apt to tear it.

The cost of the cloth is about the same as the value of the labor of
making the tent; but the difference between the cost of drilling and
eight-ounce duck for a wall-tent of four breadths with a fly is only
three to four dollars, and the duck tent will last nearly twice as long
as the one of drilling. For these reasons it seems best not to put your
labor into the inferior cloth.

Before you use the tent, or expose to the weather any thing made of
cotton cloth, you should wash it thoroughly in strong soap-suds, and
then soak it in strong brine; this takes the sizing and oil out of the
cloth, and if repeated from year to year will prevent mildew, which soon
spoils the cloth. There are mixtures that are said to be better still,
but a tent-maker assures me that the yearly washing is better than any
thing applied only once. Some fishermen preserve their sails by soaking
them in a solution of lime and water considerably thinner than
whitewash. Others soak them in a tanner's vat; but the leather-like
color imparted is not pleasing to the eye. Weak lime-water they say does
not injure cotton; but it ruins rope and leather, and some complain that
it rots the thread.

It will save strain upon any tent, to stay it in windy weather with
ropes running from the iron pins of the upright poles (which should
project through the ridgepole and top of the tent) to the ground in
front and rear of the tent. A still better way is to run four ropes from
the top--two from each pole-pin--down to the ground near the tent-pins
of the four corner guy-lines. The two stays from the rear pole should
run toward the front of the tent; and the two front stays toward the
rear, crossing the other two. The tent is then stayed against a wind
from any quarter, and the stays and guy-lines are all together on the
sides of the tent.

Loosen the stays and guy-lines a little at night or when rain is
approaching, so as to prevent them from straining the tent by shrinking.

Around the bottom of any tent you should dig a small trench to catch and
convey away the water when it rains; and I caution you against the
error which even old campers sometimes make,--do not try to have the
water run up hill.


HOW TO PITCH A WALL-TENT QUICKLY.

After you have once pitched the tent, and have put the poles and pins in
their exact places, note the distance from one of the upright poles to
the pin holding one of the nearest corner guy-lines, and then mark one
of the poles in such a way that you can tell by it what that distance
is. When you next wish to pitch the tent, drive two small pins in the
ground where the two upright poles are to rest,--the ridgepole will tell
you how far apart they must be,--then, by measuring with your marked
pole, you can drive the four pins for the corner guys in their proper
places.

Next spread the tent on the ground, and put the ridgepole in its place
in the top of the tent, and the two upright poles in their places. Then
raise the tent. It will take two persons, or, if the tent is large, four
or more, having first moved it bodily, to bring the feet of the upright
poles to touch the two small pins that you drove at the beginning. You
can now catch and tighten the corner guy-lines on the four pins
previously driven. In driving the other pins, it looks well to have them
on a line, if possible; also try to have the wall of the tent set
square: to do this you must tie the door just right before you tighten a
guy-line.

You will find this way of pitching a tent convenient when a wind is
blowing, or when your assistant is not a strong person. If the wind is
very high, spread your tent to windward, and catch the windward
guy-lines before raising the tent. You will thus avoid having it blown
over.


TENT-POLES.

As tent-poles are not expensive, you may find it convenient to have two
sets for each tent; one stout set for common use, and a lighter set to
take when transportation is limited. Sound spruce, free from large knots
and tolerably straight-grained, makes good poles; pine answers as well,
but is more expensive.

The upright poles of a stout set for a wall-tent of the United States
Army pattern should be round or eight-sided, and about two inches in
diameter.[21] If you prefer to have them square, round off the edges, or
they will be badly bruised upon handling. Drive a stout iron pin[22]
seven or eight inches long into the centre of the top until it projects
only about three and a half or four inches, or enough to go through the
ridgepole and an inch beyond. It will be necessary to bore a hole in the
pole before driving in the pin, to prevent splitting. A ferrule is also
serviceable on this end of the pole.

The ridgepole should be well rounded on the edges, and be about two and
a half inches wide and two inches thick. If made of stuff thinner than
an inch and a half, it should be wider in the middle than above stated,
or the pole will sag. Bore the holes to receive the pins of the uprights
with an auger a size larger than the pins, so that they may go in and
out easily: these holes should be an inch and a half from the ends.
Ferrules or broad bands are desirable on the ends of the ridgepole; but
if you cannot afford these you may perhaps be able to put a rivet or two
through the pole between the ends and the holes, or, if not rivets, then
screws, which are better than nothing to prevent the pin of the upright
from splitting the ridgepole.


TENT-PINS.

Tent-pins should be made of sound hard wood; old wheel-spokes are
excellent. Make them pointed at the bottom, so that they will drive
easily; and notch them about two inches from the top, so that they will
hold the rope. Cut away the wood from just above the notch towards the
back of the head; this will prevent the notch of the pin from splitting
off when it is driven. It is well to have pins differ in length and
size: those for the corners and the stays should be the largest, say
fifteen to eighteen inches long; and those for the wall and door may be
eight or ten inches. But pins of these sizes are apt to pull out in a
heavy storm; and so when you are to camp in one spot for some time, or
when you see a storm brewing, it is well to make pins very stout, and
two feet or more long, for the stays and four corner guy-lines, out of
such stuff as you find at hand.

[Illustration]

Loosen the pins by striking them on all four sides before you try to
pull them up. A spade is a fine thing to use to pry out a pin that is
deep in the ground, and a wooden mallet is better than an axe or hatchet
to drive them in with; but, unless you have a large number of pins to
drive, it will hardly pay you to get a mallet especially for this
business.

Make a stout canvas bag to hold the tent-pins; and do not fold them
loose with the tent, as it soils and wears out the cloth.


BEST SIZE OF TENTS.

The majority of people who go into permanent camp prefer tents
considerably larger than the army wall-tent; but, unless your camp is
well sheltered from the wind, you will have constant and serious
troubles during every gale and thunder-storm, if you are in a large or
high tent. A large tent is certainly more comfortable in fine weather;
but you can make a small one sufficiently cheerful, and have a sense of
security in it that you cannot feel in one larger. But, if you will have
a large tent, make it of something heavier than drilling.

If you have two tents of the same height, you can connect the tops with
a pole, and throw a fly, blanket, or sheet over it on pleasant days.

Do not pack away a tent when it is damp if you can possibly avoid it, as
it will mildew and decay in a few days of warm weather. If you are
compelled to pack it when very damp, you can prevent decay by salting it
liberally inside and out.

Before you put away your tent for the season be sure that it is
perfectly dry, and that the dead flies and grasshoppers are swept out of
the inside. You should have a stout bag to keep it in, and to prevent
its being chafed and soiled when it is handled and carried. You will
find a hundred good uses for the bag in camp.

FOOTNOTES:

[12] You cannot find this sort of duck in the market now, but "heavy
drilling" 29-1/2 inches wide is nearly as strong, and will make a good
tent.

[13] Tents made of heavy drilling were also furnished to the troops, the
dimensions of which varied a trifle from those here given: they had the
disadvantage of two seams instead of one.

[14] If the party is of four, or even five, a shelter-tent made of three
breadths of heavy drilling will accommodate all. _Sew_ one end-piece to
each half-tent, since sewing is better than buttoning, and the last is
not necessary when your party will always camp together. Along the loose
border of the end-piece work the button-holes, and sew the corresponding
buttons upon the main tent an inch or more from the edge of the border.
Sew on facings at the corners and seams as in the army shelter, and also
on the middle of the bottom of the end-pieces; and put loops of small
rope or a foot or two of stout cord through all of these facings, for
the tent-pins. You will then have a tent with the least amount of labor
and material in it. The top edges, like those of the army shelter, are
to have buttons and button-holes; the tent can then be taken apart into
two pieces, each of which will weigh about two pounds and a quarter.
Nearly all of the work can be done on a sewing-machine; run two rows of
stitching at each seam as near the selvage as you can.

[15] Called also wedge-tent.

[16] To find the distance of the corners, multiply the width of the
cloth (29-1/2 inches) by 3 (three breadths), and subtract 2-1/4 inches
(or three overlappings of 3/4 inch each, as will be explained).

[17] What is known by shoemakers as "webbing" is good for this purpose,
or you can double together and sew strips of sheeting or drilling.
Cod-lines and small ropes are objectionable, as they are not easily
untied when in hard knots.

[18] The poles for army A-tents are seven feet six inches.

[19] This name is given to the piece of wood that tightens the guy-line.
The United States army tent has a fiddle 5-1/4 inches long, 1-3/4 wide,
and 1 inch thick; the holes are 3-1/2 inches apart from centre to
centre. If you make a fiddle shorter, or of thinner stock, it does not
hold its grip so well. One hole should be just large enough to admit the
rope, and the other a size larger so that the rope may slide through
easily.

[20] Seven-ounce duck is made, but it is not much heavier than drilling,
and since it is little used it is not easily found for sale. United
States army wall-tents are made from a superior quality of ten-ounce
duck, but they are much stouter than is necessary for summer camping.
There are also "sail-ducks," known as "No. 8," "No. 9," &c., which are
very much too heavy for tents.

[21] The length of tent-poles, as has been previously stated, depends
upon the size of the tent.

[22] What are known as "bolt-ends" can be bought at the hardware stores
for this purpose.




CHAPTER X.

MISCELLANEOUS.--GENERAL ADVICE.


If you travel horseback, singly or in parties, a previous experience in
riding and in the care of your animal are necessary for pleasure. What
is said about overloading applies here: you must go light; let your
saddlebags be small, and packed so as not to chafe the horse. If you
have the choice of a saddle, take a "McClellan" or a similar one, so
that you can easily strap on your blankets and bags. If you have time
before starting, try to teach your horse, what so few horses in the
Northern States know, to be guided by the pressure of reins against the
neck instead of a pull at the bit.


BOATING.

I do not propose to say much about boating, as the subject can hardly
have justice done to it in a book of this sort. Parties of young men
spend their summer vacation every year in camping and boating. It is a
most delightful way,--superior in many respects to any other,--but it
requires both experience and caution, neither of which is usually found
in young men. So I hope that, if you will go in a boat, you may be an
exception to the general rule, and will, for your parents' and friends'
sake, take a small boat without ballast rather than a large one
ballasted so heavily that it will sink when it fills.

When you belay the sheets of your sail, make a knot that can be untied
by a single pull at the loose end: any boatman will show you how to do
this. _Never make fast the sheets in any other way._ Hold the sheets in
your hands if the wind is at all squally or strong. Do not venture out
in a heavy wind. Stow your baggage snugly before you start: tubs made by
sawing a flour-barrel in two are excellent to throw loose stuff into.
Remember to be careful; keep your eyes open, and know what you are going
to do before you try it. The saying of an old sea-captain comes to me
here: "I would rather sail a ship around the world, than to go down the
bay in a boat sailed by a boy."


RECKONING LOST.

It often happens in travelling, that the sun rises in what appears the
north, west, or south, and we seem to be moving in the wrong direction,
so that when we return home our remembrance of the journey is confused.
Perhaps a few hints on this subject may help the reader. Supposing your
day's journey ends at Blanktown, where you find your compass-points
apparently reversed. It then becomes natural for you to make matters
worse by trying to lay out in your mind a new map, with Blanktown for
the "hub," and east in the west, and so on. You can often prevent these
mishaps, and can always make them less annoying, by studying your map
well both before and during your journey; and by keeping in your mind
continually, with all the vividness you can, what you are really doing.
As far as Blanktown is concerned, you will have two impressions, just as
we all have two impressions with regard to the revolution of the earth
on its axis: apparently the sun rises, goes over and down; but in our
minds we can see the sun standing still, and the earth turning from west
to east.

Upon leaving Blanktown you are likely to carry the error along with you,
and to find yourself moving in what appears to be the wrong way. Keep in
mind with all the vividness possible, the picture of what you are really
doing, and keep out of mind as much as you can the ugly appearance of
going the wrong way. Every important change you make, be sure to "see
it" in the mind's eye, and let the natural eye be blind to all that is
deceiving. After a while things will grow real, and you must try to keep
them so. The more perfectly you know the route and all its details, the
less you will be troubled in this way.

If you are travelling in the cars, and if you have a strong power of
imagination, you can very easily right errors of this kind by learning
from the map exactly what you are doing, and then by sitting next to the
window, shut your eyes as you go around a curve that tends to aggravate
the difficulty, and hold fast what you get on curves that help you. If
you sit on the left side of the car, and look ahead, the cars seem to
sweep continually a little to the right, and _vice versa_, when really
moving straight ahead,--provided your imagination is good.

When you are travelling on an unknown road, you should always inquire
all about it, to avoid taking the wrong one, which you are likely to do,
even if you have a good map with you.


LADIES AS PEDESTRIANS.

I have once or twice alluded to ladies walking and camping. It is
thoroughly practicable for them to do so. They must have a wagon, and do
none of the heavy work; their gowns must not reach quite to the ground,
and all of their clothing must be loose and easy.[23] Of course there
must be gentlemen in the party; and it may save annoyance to have at
least one of the ladies well-nigh "middle-aged." Ladies must be cared
for more tenderly than men. If they are not well, the wagon should go
back for them at the end of the day's march; shelter-tents are not to be
recommended for them, nor are two blankets sufficient bedclothing. They
ought not to be compelled to go any definite distance, but after having
made their day's walk let the tents be pitched. Rainy weather is
particularly unpleasant to ladies in tents; deserted houses,
schoolhouses, saw-mills, or barns should be sought for them when a storm
is brewing.


LADIES AND CHILDREN IN CAMP.

In a permanent camp, however, ladies, and children as well, can make
themselves thoroughly at home.[24] They ought not to "rough it" so much
as young men expect to: consequently they should be better protected
from the wet and cold.

I have seen a man with his wife and two children enjoy themselves
through a week of rainy weather in an A-tent; but there are not many
such happy families, and it is not advisable to camp with such limited
accommodations.

Almost all women will find it trying to their backs to be kept all day
in an A-tent. If you have no other kind, you should build some sort of a
wall, and pitch the tent on top of it. It is not a difficult or
expensive task to put guy-lines and a wall of drilling on an A-tent, and
make new poles, or pitch the old ones upon posts. In either case you
should stay the tent with lines running from the top to the ground.

It has already been advised that women should have a stove; in general,
they ought not to depart so far from home ways as men do.

Rubber boots are almost a necessity for women and children during rainy
weather and while the dew is upon the grass.


SUMMER-HOUSES, SHEDS, AND BRUSH SCREENS.

There is little to be said of the summer-houses built at the seaside
near our large cities, since that is rather a matter of carpentry; nor
of portable houses; nor of lattice-work with painted paper; nor even of
a "schbang" such as I have often built of old doors, shutters, outer
windows, and tarred paper: any one who is ingenious can knock together
all the shelter his needs require or means allow. But, where you are
camping for a week or more, it pays you well to use all you have in
making yourself comfortable. A bush house, a canopy under which to eat,
and something better than plain "out-of-doors" to cook in, are among the
first things to attend to.

If you wish to plant firmly a tree that you have cut down, you may
perhaps be able to drive a stake larger than the trunk of the tree; then
loosen the stake by hitting it on the sides, and pull it out. You can do
this when you have no shovel, or when the soil is too hard to dig. Small
stakes wedged down the hole after putting in the tree will make it firm.


ETIQUETTE.

Some things considered essential at the home table have fallen into
disuse in camp. It is pardonable, and perhaps best, to bring on whatever
you have cooked in the dish that it is cooked in, so as to prevent its
cooling off.

You will also be allowed to help yourself first to whatever is nearest
you, before passing it to another; for passing things around in camp is
risky, and should be avoided as much as possible for that reason.

Eat with your hats on, as it is more comfortable, and the wind is not so
apt to blow your stray hairs into the next man's dish.

If you have no fork, do not mind eating with your knife and fingers.
But, however much liberty you take, do not be rude, coarse, or uncivil:
these bad habits grow rapidly in camp if you encourage them, and are
broken off with difficulty on return.

If there is no separate knife for the butter, cheese, and meat, nor
spoon for the gravy and soup, you can use your own by first wiping the
knife or spoon upon a piece of bread.

Be social and agreeable to all fellow-travellers you meet. It is a
received rule now, I believe, that you are under no obligations to
consider travelling-acquaintances as permanent: so you are in duty bound
to be friendly to all thrown in your way. However, it is not fair to
thrust your company upon others, nor compel a courtesy from any one. Try
to remember too, that it is nothing wonderful to camp out or walk; and
do not expect any one to think it is. We frequently meet parties of
young folks walking through the mountains, who do great things with
their tongues, but not much with their feet. If you will refrain from
bragging, you can speak of your short marches without exciting contempt.

Avoid as much as possible asking another member of the party to do your
work, or to wait upon you: it is surprising how easily you can make
yourself disliked by asking a few trifling favors of one who is tired
and hungry.


MOSQUITOES, BLACK FLIES, AND MIDGE.

These pests will annoy you exceedingly almost everywhere in the summer.
In the daytime motion and perspiration keep them off to some extent. At
night, or when lying down, you can do no better than to cover yourself
so that they cannot reach your body, and have a mosquito-bar of some
sort over your head. The simplest thing is a square yard of
mosquito-netting thrown over the head, and tucked in well. You will need
to have your hat first thrown over the head, and your shirt-collar
turned up, to prevent the mosquitoes reaching through the mesh to your
face and neck.

A better way than this is to make a box-shaped mosquito-bar, large
enough to stretch across the head of the bed, and cover the heads and
shoulders of all that sleep in the tent. It should be six or eight feet
long, twenty to twenty-six inches wide, and one yard or more high. It
will be more durable, but not quite so well ventilated, if the top is
made of light cloth instead of netting. The seams should be bound with
stout tape, and the sides and ends "gathered" considerably in sewing
them to the top. Even then the side that falls over the shoulders of the
sleepers may not be loose enough to fill the hollows between them; the
netting will then have to be tucked under the blanket, or have something
thrown over its lower edge.

Sew loops or strings on the four upper corners, and corresponding loops
or strings on the tent, so that you can tie up the bar.

Bobbinet lace is better than the common netting for all of these
purposes. It comes in pieces twelve to fourteen yards long, and two
yards wide. You cannot often find it for sale; but the large shops in
the principal cities that do a great business by correspondence can send
it to you.

Oil of cedar and oil of pennyroyal are recommended as serviceable in
driving off mosquitoes, and there are patented compounds whose labels
pretend great things: you will try them only once, I think.

Ammoniated opodeldoc rubbed upon the bites will in a great measure stop
the itching, and hasten the cure.

They say that a little gunpowder flashed in the tent will drive out
flies and mosquitoes. I saw a man try it once, but noticed that he
himself went out in a great hurry, while the flies, if they went at all,
were back again before he was.

A better thing, really the best, is a smudge made by building a small
fire to the windward of your tent, and nearly smothering it with chips,
moss, bark, or rotten wood. If you make the smudge in an old pan or pot,
you can move it about as often as the wind changes.


HOW TO SKIN FISH.

When you camp by the seaside, you will catch cunners and other fish that
need skinning. Let no one persuade you to slash the back fins out with a
single stroke, as you would whittle a stick; but take a sharp knife, cut
on both sides of the fin, and then pull out the whole of it from head to
tail, and thus save the trouble that a hundred little bones will make if
left in. After cutting the skin on the under side from head to tail, and
taking out the entrails and small fins, start the skin where the head
joins the body, and pull it off one side at a time. Some men stick an
awl through a cunner's head, or catch it fast in a stout iron hook, to
hold it while skinning.

Cunners and lobsters are sometimes caught off bold rocks in a net. You
can make one easily out of a hogshead-hoop, and twine stretched across
so as to make a three-inch mesh.[25] Tie a lot of bait securely in the
middle, sink it for a few minutes, and draw up rapidly. The rush of
water through the net prevents the fish from escaping.


EXPENSES.

The expenses of camping or walking vary greatly, of course, according to
the route, manner of going, and other things. The principal items are
railroad-tickets, horse and wagon hire, trucking, land-rent (if you camp
where rent is charged), and the cost of the outfit. You ought to be able
to reckon very nearly what you will have to pay on account of these
before you spend a cent. After this will come the calculation whether to
travel at all by rail, supposing you wish to go a hundred miles to reach
the seaside where you propose to camp, or the mountains you want to
climb. If you have a horse and wagon, or are going horseback, it will
doubtless be cheaper to march than to ride and pay freight. If time is
plenty and money is scarce, you may perhaps be able to walk the
distance cheaper than to go by rail; but, if you lodge at hotels, you
will find it considerably more expensive. The question then is apt to
turn on whether the hundred miles is worth seeing, and whether it is so
thickly settled as to prevent your camping.

To walk a hundred miles, carrying your kit all the way, will take from
one to two weeks, according to your age, strength, and the weather. We
have already stated that there is little _pleasure_ in walking more than
sixty miles a week. But if you wish to go as fast as you can, and have
taken pains to practise walking before starting, and can buy your food
in small quantities daily, and can otherwise reduce your baggage, you
can make the hundred miles in a week without difficulty, and more if it
is necessary, unless there is much bad weather.

The expense for food will also vary according to one's will; but it need
not be heavy if you can content yourself with simple fare. You can
hardly live at a cheaper rate than the following:--


ONE WEEK'S SUPPLY FOR TWO MEN.

Ten pounds of pilot-bread; eight pounds of salt pork; one pound of
coffee (roasted and ground); one to two pounds of sugar (granulated);
thirty pounds of potatoes (half a bushel).[26] A little beef and butter,
and a few ginger-snaps, will be good investments.

Supposing you and I were to start from home in the morning after
breakfast; when noon comes, we eat the lunch we have taken with us, and
press on. As the end of the day's march approaches, we look out to buy
two quarts of potatoes at a farmhouse or store; and we boil or fry, or
boil and mash in milk, enough of these for our supper. The breakfast
next morning is much the same. We cook potatoes in every way we know,
and eat the whole of our stock remaining, thus saving so much weight to
carry. We also soak some pilot-bread, and fry that for a dessert, eating
a little sugar on it if we can spare it. When dinner-time approaches, we
keep a lookout for a chance to buy ten or twelve cents' worth of bread
or biscuits. These are more palatable than the pilot-bread or crackers
in our haversack. If we have a potato left from breakfast, we cook and
eat it now. We cut off a slice of the corned beef, and take a nibble at
the ginger-snaps. If we think we can afford three or four cents more, we
buy a pint of milk, and make a little dip-toast. And so we go;
sometimes we catch a fish, or pass an orchard whose owner gives us all
the windfalls we want. We pick berries too; and keep a sharp lookout
that we supply ourselves in season when our pilot-bread, sugar, pork,
and butter run low. Some days we overtake farmers driving ox-carts or
wagons; we throw our kits aboard, and walk slowly along, willing to lose
a little time to save our aching shoulders. And in due time, if no
accident befalls, nor rainy weather detains us, we arrive at our
seashore or mountain.

You may like to know that this is almost an exact history, at least as
far as eating is concerned, of a twelve days' tramp I once went on in
company with two other boys. There was about five dollars in the party,
and nearly two dollars of this was spent in paying toll on a boat that
we took through a canal a part of the way. We carried coffee, sugar,
pork, and beef from home, and ate potatoes three times a day. We had a
delightful time, and came home fattened up somewhat; but I will admit
that I did not call for potatoes when I got back to my father's table,
for some days.

In general, however, it will be noticed that those who camp out for the
season, or go on walking-tours, do so at a moderate expense because
they start with the determination to make it cheap. For this purpose
they content themselves with old clothes, which they fit over or repair,
take cooking-utensils from their own kitchen, and, excepting in the
matter of canned foods, do not live very differently from what they do
at home.

Nearly all the parties of boys that I have questioned spend all the
money they have, be it little or much. Generally those I have met
walking or camping seem to be impressed with the magnitude of their
operations, and to be carrying constantly with them the determination to
spend their funds sparingly enough to reach home without begging. It is
not bad practice for a young man.

Here I wish to say a word to parents--having been a boy myself, and
being now a father. Let your boys go when summer comes; put them to
their wits; do not let them be extravagant, nor have money to pay other
men for working for them. It is far better for them to move about than
to remain in one place all the time. The last, especially if the camp is
near some place of public resort, tends to encourage idleness and
dissipation.

When you return home again from a tour of camping, and go back to a
sedentary life, remember that you do not need to eat all that your
appetite calls for. You may make yourself sick if you go on eating such
meals as you have been digesting in camp. You are apt also upon your
return to feel as you did on the first and second days of your tour;
this is especially liable to be the case if you have overworked
yourself, or have not had enough sleep.

FOOTNOTES:

[23] A flannel dress, the skirt coming to the top of the boots, and
having a blouse waist, will be found most comfortable.

[24] It is no novelty for women and children to camp out: we see them
every summer at the seaside and on the blueberry-plains. A great many
families besides live in rude cabins, which are preferable on many
accounts, but are expensive. Sickness sometimes results, but usually all
are much benefited. I know a family that numbered with its guests nine
ladies, five children ("one at the breast"), and the _paterfamilias_,
which camped several weeks through some of the best and some of the
worst of weather. The whooping-cough broke out the second or third day;
shortly after, the tent of the mother and children blew down in the
night, and turned them all out into the pelting rain in their
night-clothes. Excepting the misery of that night and day, nothing
serious came of it; and in the fall all returned home better every way
for having spent their summer in camp.

[25] The mesh of a net is measured by pulling it diagonally as far as
possible, and finding the distance from knot to knot; consequently a
three-inch mesh will open so as to make a square of about an inch and a
half.

[26] The field allowance in the United States army is nearly 1-1/8
pounds of coffee and 2-1/8 pounds of sugar (damp brown) for two men
seven days; the bread and pork ration is also larger than that above
given; but the allowance of potatoes is almost nothing.




CHAPTER XI.

DIARY.


By all means keep a diary: the act of writing will help you to remember
these good times, and the diary will prove the pleasantest of reading in
after-years. It is not an easy thing to write in camp or on the march,
but if it costs you an effort you will prize it all the more. I beg you
to persevere, and, if you fail, to "try, try again." I cannot overcome
the desire to tell you the results of my experience in diary-writing;
for I have tried it long, and under many different circumstances. They
are as follows:--

First, Any thing written at the time is far better than no record at
all; so, if you can only write a pocket diary with lead pencil, do that.

Second, All such small diaries, scraps, letters, and every thing written
illegibly or with lead pencil, are difficult to preserve or to read, and
are very unhandy for reference.

Third, It is great folly to persuade yourself that after taking notes
for a week or two, or writing a hurried sketch, you can extend or copy
and illuminate at your leisure.

Consequently, write what you can, and let it stand with all its blots,
errors, and nonsense. And be careful, when you are five years older, not
to go through the diary with eraser and scissors; for, if you live still
another five years, nothing will interest you more than this diary with
all its defects.

I find after having written many diaries of many forms, that I have now
to regret I did not at first choose some particular size, say
"letter-size," and so have had all my diaries uniform. I will never
again use "onion-skin," which is too thin, nor any odd-shaped, figured,
cheap, or colored paper. I do not like those large printed diaries which
give you just a page or half-page a day, nor a paper whose ruling shows
conspicuously.

I like best when at home to write in a blank book; and when I go off on
a summer vacation I leave that diary safely at home, and take a
portfolio with some sheets of blank paper upon which to write the diary,
and mail them as fast as written. These answer for letters to the
friends at home, and save writing any more to them. They also, when
bound, form a diary exclusively of travels. When I return I write an
epitome in the home-diary, and thus prevent a break of dates in that
book. The paper for the diary of travels is strong, but rather thin and
white. I buy enough of it at once to make a volume, and thus have the
diary sheets uniform.

I am quite sure that you will do well to write a diary of your summer
vacation, upon the plan just named, whether you keep one at home or not.
Try to do it well, but do not undertake too much. Write facts such as
what you saw, heard, did, and failed to do; but do not try to write
poetry or fine writing of any kind. Mention what kind of weather; but do
not attempt a meteorological record unless you have a special liking for
that science. If you camp in Jacob Sawyer's pasture, and he gives you a
quart of milk, say so, instead of "a good old man showed us a favor;"
for in after-years the memory of it will be sweeter than the milk was,
and it will puzzle you to recall the "good old man's" name and what the
favor was. If you have time, try to draw: never mind if it is a poor
picture. I have some of the strangest-looking portraits and most
surprising perspectives in my diaries written when fifteen to twenty
years old; but I would not exchange them now for one of the "old
masters." Do not neglect the narrative, however, for sake of drawing.

I have noticed that when my paper is down in the bottom of a valise, and
the pen in a wallet, and the penholder in a coat-pocket, and portfolio
somewhere else, it is not so easy to "find time to write" as when I have
penholder, pen, and paper in the portfolio, and the portfolio and ink in
my haversack. Under these favorable conditions it is easy to snatch a
few moments from any halt; and a diary written on the spur of the moment
is a diary that will be worth reading in after-life. If it is
impossible, however, as it so often is, to write oftener than once a
day, you will do well to make a note of events as fast as they happen,
so that you shall not forget them, nor have to stop to recall them when
your time is precious.

I have heard of diaries with side-notes on each page, and even an index
at the end of the book; but not many men, and but few boys, can do all
this; and my advice to the average boy is, not to undertake it, nor any
thing else that will use the time, patience, and perseverance, needed to
write the narrative.

You will find it convenient for reference if you make a paragraph of
every subject. Date every day distinctly, with a much bolder handwriting
than the body of the diary; and write the date on the right margin of
the right page, and left margin of the left page, with the year at the
top of the page only. Skip a line or two instead of ruling between the
days. Thus:--

                                                    =1876.=

                                                  =JANUARY 1,
                                                   SATURDAY.=

          _Pleasant and mild._

          _Vacation ends to-day._

          _Jo. Harding is full of going on a walk to the
          White Mountains next summer, and he wants me to go
          too._

          _Made New-Year calls on Susie Smith, Mary Lyman,
          Ellen Jenkins, Christie Jameson, and Martha
          Buzzell._

                                                  =JANUARY 2,
                                                     SUNDAY.=

          _Warm again and misty._

          _Went to church. Mr. Simpson's pup followed him
          in; and it took Simpson, Jenks the sexton, and two
          small boys, to put him out._

          _Accompanied Susie Smith to the Baptist's this
          evening, and went home by way of Centre Street to
          avoid the crowd. Crowds are not so bad sometimes._


                                                  =JANUARY 3,
                                                     MONDAY.=

          _Still mild and pleasant, but cooler._

          _Went to school, and failed in algebra. This X
          business is too much for me._

          _Abel's shoe-factory, next to our schoolhouse,
          caught fire this afternoon while we were at
          recess, and Mr. Nason dismissed the school. We all
          hurrahed for Nason, and went to the fire. Steamer
          No. 1 put it out in less than ten minutes after
          she got there._

          _Home all the evening, studying._

If you are like me, you will be glad by and by if you note in your diary
of the summer vacation a few dry statistics, such as distances walked,
names of people you meet, steamers you take passage on, and, in general,
every thing that interested you at the time, even to the songs you sing;
for usually some few songs run in your head all through the tour, and
it is pleasant to recall them in after-years.

Do not write so near the margins of the paper that the binder will cut
off the writing when he comes to trim them.




CHAPTER XII.

"HOW TO DO IT."


The following advice by Rev. Edward Everett Hale is so good that I have
appropriated it. You will find more good advice in the same book.[27]

          "First, never walk before breakfast. If you like
          you may make two breakfasts, and take a mile or
          two between; but be sure to eat something before
          you are on the road.

          "Second, do not walk much in the middle of the
          day. It is dusty and hot then; and the landscape
          has lost its special glory. By ten o'clock you
          ought to have found some camping-ground for the
          day,--a nice brook running through a grove; a
          place to draw, or paint, or tell stories, or read
          them or write them; a place to make waterfalls and
          dams, to sail chips, or build boats; a place to
          make a fire and a cup of tea for the oldsters.
          Stay here till four in the afternoon, and then
          push on in the two or three hours which are left
          to the sleeping-place agreed upon. Four or five
          hours on the road is all you want in each day.
          Even resolute idlers, as it is to be hoped you all
          are on such occasions, can get eight miles a day
          out of that; and that is enough for a true
          walking-party. Remember all along that you are not
          running a race with the railway-train. If you
          were, you would be beaten certainly; and the less
          you think you are, the better. You are travelling
          in a method of which the merit is that it is not
          fast, and that you see every separate detail of
          the glory of the world. What a fool you are, then,
          if you tire yourself to death, merely that you may
          say that you did in ten hours what the locomotive
          would gladly have finished in one, if by that
          effort you have lost exactly the enjoyment of
          nature and society that you started for!"

The advice to rest in the heat of the day is good for very hot weather;
young people, however, are too impatient to follow it unless there is an
apparent necessity. The feeling at twelve o'clock that you have yet to
walk as far as you have come is not so pleasant as that of knowing you
have all the afternoon for rest. For this reason nearly every one will
finish the walk as soon as possible; still Mr. Hale's plan is a good
one--the best for very hot weather.


STILL ANOTHER WAY TO TRAVEL.

Mr. Hale also tells an amusing story of his desire when young to sail
down the Connecticut River; but he was dissuaded from doing so when the
chance finally came, by people who thought the road was the only place
to travel in. And now he is sorry he did not sail.

The reading of his story brings to mind a similar experience that I had
when young, and it is now one of the keen regrets of my manhood, that I
likewise was laughed out of a boyish plan that would have given me
untold pleasure and profit had it been carried out. I loved to walk, and
I wanted to see the towns within a circuit of twenty or thirty miles of
home; but I could not afford to pay hotel-bills, and I was not strong
enough to carry a camping-outfit. But I had an old cart, strong and
large enough to hold all I should need. I could load it with the same
food that I should eat if I staid at home; could wear my old clothes,
take my oilcloth overcoat, an axe, frying-pan, pail, and a borrowed tent
and poles; and I would learn the county by heart before vacation was
over, and not cost my father a cent more than if I staid at home. Oh,
why didn't I go! Simply because I was laughed out of it. I was told that
people did not travel in that way; I should be arrested; the boys would
hoot at and stone me; the men would set their dogs on me; I should be
driven out of my camping-place; thieves would steal my seventy-five cent
cart; dogs would eat up my stock of food; and the first man who overtook
me would tell the people that a crazy boy from Portland was coming along
the road dragging a baby-wagon, whereupon every woman would leave her
kitchen, and every man his field, to see and laugh at me. But, above
all, the thing would be known in our neighborhood, and the boys and
girls would join in their abuse of the county explorer.

That was the end of it; the being made sport of by _my own friends_, and
hearing the _small boys in our street_ sing out "How's your cart?" and
to be known all through life perhaps as "_one-horse John_"--the
punishment would be too severe.

But, my young friends, I made a great mistake; and I want to caution you
_not_ to surrender to any such nonsense as I did. If you wish to go to
sea in a skiff, it is well to give in to a fisherman's advice to stay at
home, for he can assure you that winds and waves will be the death of
you; but if you have a good hand-wagon, and are willing to stand a few
taunts, by all means go on your walk, and pull your wagon after you. You
will learn a lesson in independence that will be of value to you, if you
learn nothing else.

FOOTNOTES:

[27] How to Do It. Published by Roberts Brothers, Boston.




CHAPTER XIII.

HYGIENIC NOTES.

          [This chapter is taken in full from a work on
          ornithology, written by Dr. Coues of the
          Smithsonian Institution. It is the advice of an
          accomplished naturalist and sportsman to his
          fellow-naturalists, but is equally adapted to the
          young camper. Hardly any one can write more
          understandingly on the subjects here presented
          than the doctor, who has had long experience with
          the army, both in the field and garrison, and is
          an enthusiastic student of natural history
          besides. The remarks upon alcoholic stimulants are
          especially recommended to the reader, coming as
          they do from an army officer, and not a temperance
          reformer.

          Those who wish to become familiar with the details
          of bird-collecting will find a treasure in the
          doctor's book, "Field Ornithology, comprising a
          Manual of Instruction for procuring, preparing,
          and preserving Birds; and a check list of North
          American Birds. By Dr. Elliott Coues, U.S.A.
          Salem: Naturalists' Agency."]


ACCIDENTS.

The secret of safe _climbing_ is never to relax one hold until another
is secured; it is in spirit equally applicable to scrambling over rocks,
a particularly difficult thing to do safely with a loaded gun. Test
rotten, slippery, or otherwise suspicious holds, before trusting them.
In lifting the body up anywhere, keep the mouth shut, breathe through
the nostrils, and go slowly.

In _swimming_ waste no strength unnecessarily in trying to stem a
current; yield partly, and land obliquely lower down; if exhausted,
float: the slightest motion of the hands will ordinarily keep the face
above water; in any event keep your wits collected. In fording deeply, a
heavy stone [in the hands, above water] will strengthen your position.

Never sail a boat experimentally: if you are no sailor, take one with
you, or stay on land.

In crossing a high narrow foot-path, never look lower than your feet;
the muscles will work true if not confused with faltering instructions
from a giddy brain. On soft ground see what, if any thing, has preceded
you; large hoof-marks generally mean that the way is safe: if none are
found, inquire for yourself before going on. Quicksand is the most
treacherous because far more dangerous than it looks; but I have seen a
mule's ears finally disappear in genuine mud.

Cattle-paths, however erratic, commonly prove the surest way out of a
difficult place, whether of uncertain footing or dense undergrowth.


"TAKING COLD."

This vague "household word" indicates one or more of a long varied train
of unpleasant affections nearly always traceable to one or the other of
only two causes,--_sudden change_ of temperature, and _unequal
distribution_ of temperature. No extremes of heat or cold can alone
affect this result: persons frozen to death do not "take cold" during
the process. But if a part of the body be rapidly cooled, as by
evaporation from a wet article of clothing, or by sitting in a draught
of air, the rest of the body remaining at an ordinary temperature; or if
the temperature of the whole be suddenly changed by going out into the
cold, or especially by coming into a warm room,--there is much liability
of trouble.

There is an old saying,--

          "When the air comes through a hole,
           Say your prayers to save your soul."

And I should think almost any one could get a "cold" with a spoonful of
water on the wrist held to a key-hole. Singular as it may seem, sudden
warming when cold is more dangerous than the reverse: every one has
noticed how soon the handkerchief is required on entering a heated room
on a cold day. Frost-bite is an extreme illustration of this. As the
Irishman said on picking himself up, it was not the fall, but stopping
so quickly, that hurt him: it is not the lowering of the temperature to
freezing point, but its subsequent elevation, that devitalizes the
tissue. This is why rubbing with snow, or bathing in cold water, is
required to restore safely a frozen part: the arrested circulation must
be very gradually re-established, or inflammation, perhaps
mortification, ensues.

General precautions against taking cold are almost self-evident in this
light. There is ordinarily little if any danger to be apprehended from
wet clothes, so long as exercise is kept up; for the "glow" about
compensates for the extra cooling by evaporation. Nor is a complete
drenching more likely to be injurious than wetting of one part. But
never sit still wet, and in changing rub the body dry. There is a
general tendency, springing from fatigue, indolence, or indifference, to
neglect damp feet,--that is to say, to dry them by the fire; but this
process is tedious and uncertain. I would say especially, "Off with
muddy boots and sodden socks at once:" dry stockings and slippers after
a hunt may make just the difference of your being able to go out again,
or never. Take care never to check perspiration: during this process the
body is in a somewhat critical condition, and the sudden arrest of the
function may result disastrously, even fatally. One part of the business
of perspiration is to equalize bodily temperature, and it must not be
interfered with. The secret of much that is said about _bathing_ when
heated lies here. A person overheated, panting it may be, with
throbbing temples and a _dry_ skin, is in danger partly because the
natural cooling by evaporation from the skin is denied; and this
condition is sometimes not far from a "sunstroke." Under these
circumstances, a person of fairly good constitution may plunge into the
water with impunity, even with benefit. But, if the body be already
cooling by sweating, rapid abstraction of heat from the surface may
cause internal congestion, never unattended with danger.

Drinking ice-water offers a somewhat parallel case; even on stopping to
drink at the brook, when flushed with heat, it is well to bathe the face
and hands first, and to taste the water before a full draught. It is a
well-known excellent rule, not to bathe immediately after a full meal;
because during digestion the organs concerned are comparatively engorged
and any sudden disturbance of the circulation may be disastrous.

The imperative necessity of resisting drowsiness under extreme cold
requires no comment.

In walking under a hot sun, the head may be sensibly protected by green
leaves or grass in the hat; they may be advantageously moistened, but
not enough to drip about the ears. Under such circumstances the
slightest giddiness, dimness of sight, or confusion of ideas, should be
taken as a warning of possible sunstroke, instantly demanding rest, and
shelter if practicable.


HUNGER AND FATIGUE

are more closely related than they might seem to be: one is a sign that
the fuel is out, and the other asks for it. Extreme fatigue, indeed,
destroys appetite: this simply means temporary incapacity for digestion.
But, even far short of this, food is more easily digested and better
relished after a little preparation of the furnace. On coming home tired
it is much better to make a leisurely and reasonably nice toilet, than
to eat at once, or to lie still thinking how tired you are; after a
change and a wash you feel like a "new man," and go to the table in
capital state. Whatever dietetic irregularities a high state of
civilization may demand or render practicable, a normally healthy person
is inconvenienced almost as soon as his regular mealtime passes without
food; and few can work comfortably or profitably fasting over six or
eight hours. Eat before starting; if for a day's tramp, take a lunch;
the most frugal meal will appease if it do not satisfy hunger, and so
postpone its urgency. As a small scrap of practical wisdom, I would add,
Keep the remnants of the lunch if there be any; for you cannot always be
sure of getting in to supper.


STIMULATION.

When cold, fatigued, depressed in mind, and on other occasions, you may
feel inclined to resort to artificial stimulus. Respecting this
many-sided theme I have a few words to offer--of direct bearing on the
collector's case. It should be clearly understood, in the first place,
that a stimulant confers no strength whatever: it simply calls the
powers that be into increased action, at their own expense. Seeking real
strength in stimulus is as wise as an attempt to lift yourself up by
your boot-straps. You may gather yourself to leap the ditch, and you
clear it; but no such muscular energy can be sustained: exhaustion
speedily renders further expenditure impossible. But now suppose a very
powerful mental impression be made, say the circumstance of a succession
of ditches in front, and a mad dog behind: if the stimulus of terror be
sufficiently strong, you may leap on till you drop senseless. Alcoholic
stimulus is a parallel case, and is not seldom pushed to the same
extreme. Under its influence you never can tell when you _are_ tired;
the expenditure goes on, indeed, with unnatural rapidity, only it is not
felt at the time; but the upshot is, you have all the original fatigue
to endure and to recover from, _plus_ the fatigue resulting from
over-excitation of the system. Taken as a fortification against cold,
alcohol is as unsatisfactory as a remedy for fatigue. Insensibility to
cold does not imply protection. The fact is, the exposure is greater
than before; the circulation and respiration being hurried, the waste is
greater; and, as sound fuel cannot be immediately supplied, the
temperature of the body is soon lowered. The transient warmth and glow
over the system has both cold _and_ depression to endure. There is no
use in borrowing from yourself, and fancying you are richer.

Secondly, the value of any stimulus (except in a few exigencies of
disease or injury) is in proportion, not to the intensity, but to the
equableness and durability, of its effect. This is one reason why tea,
coffee, and articles of corresponding qualities, are preferable to
alcoholic drinks: they work so smoothly that their effect is often
unnoticed, and they "stay by" well. The friction of alcohol is
tremendous in comparison. A glass of grog may help a veteran over the
fence; but no one, young or old, can shoot all day on whiskey.

I have had so much experience in the use of tobacco as a mild stimulant,
that I am probably no impartial judge of its merits. I will simply say,
I do not use it in the field, because it indisposes to muscular
activity, and favors reflection when observation is required; and
because temporary abstinence provokes the morbid appetite, and renders
the weed more grateful afterwards.

Thirdly, undue excitation of any physical function is followed by a
corresponding depression, on the simple principle that action and
reaction are equal; and the balance of health turns too easily to be
wilfully disturbed. Stimulation is a draft upon vital capital, when
interest alone should suffice: it may be needed at times to bridge a
chasm; but habitual living beyond vital income infallibly entails
bankruptcy in health. The use of alcohol in health seems practically
restricted to purposes of sensuous gratification on the part of those
prepared to pay a round price for this luxury. The three golden rules
here are,--Never drink before breakfast; never drink alone; and never
drink bad liquor. Their observance may make even the abuse of alcohol
tolerable. Serious objections, for a naturalist at least, are that
science, viewed through a glass, seems distant and uncertain, while the
joys of rum are immediate and unquestionable; and that intemperance,
being an attempt to defy certain physical laws, is therefore eminently
unscientific.

       *       *       *       *       *

Besides the above good advice by Dr. Coues, the following may prove
useful to the camper:--

Diarrhoea may result from overwork and gluttony combined, and from
eating indigestible or uncooked food, and from imperfect protection of
the stomach. "Remove the cause, and the effect will cease." A flannel
bandage six to twelve inches wide, worn around the stomach, is good as a
preventive and cure.

The same causes may produce cholera morbus; symptoms, violent vomiting
and purging, faintness, and spasms in the arms and limbs. Unless
accompanied with cramp (which is not usual), nature will work its own
cure. Give warm drinks if you have them. Do not get frightened, but keep
the patient warm, and well protected from a draught of air.

The liability to costiveness, and the remedies therefor, are noted on
p. 55 of this book.

A very rare occurrence, but a constant dread with some people, is an
insect crawling into the ear. If you have oil, spirits of turpentine, or
alcoholic liquor at hand, fill the ear at once. If you have not these,
use coffee, tea, warm water (not too hot), or almost any liquid which is
not hurtful to the skin.


MARSHALL HALL'S READY METHOD IN SUFFOCATION, DROWNING, ETC.

1st, Treat the patient _instantly on the spot_, in the _open air_,
freely exposing the face, neck, and chest to the breeze, except in
severe weather.

2d, In order _to clear the throat_, place the patient gently on the
face, with one wrist under the forehead, that all fluid, and the tongue
itself, may fall forward, and leave the entrance into the windpipe free.

3d, _To excite respiration_, turn the patient slightly on his side, and
apply some irritating or stimulating agent to the nostrils, as
_veratrine_, _dilute ammonia_, &c.

4th, Make the face warm by brisk friction; then dash cold water upon it.

5th, If not successful, lose no time; but, _to imitate respiration_,
place the patient on his face, and turn the body gently but completely
_on the side and a little beyond_, then again on the face, and so on
alternately. Repeat these movements deliberately and perseveringly,
_fifteen times only_ in a minute. (When the patient lies on the thorax,
this cavity is _compressed_ by the weight of the body, and _ex_piration
takes place. When he is turned on the side, this pressure is removed,
and _in_spiration occurs.)

6th, When the prone position is resumed, make a uniform and efficient
pressure _along the spine_, removing the pressure immediately, before
rotation on the side. (The pressure augments the _ex_piration, the
rotation commences _in_spiration.) Continue these measures.

7th, Rub the limbs _upward_, with _firm pressure_ and with _energy_.
(The object being to aid the return of venous blood to the heart.)

8th, Substitute for the patient's wet clothing, if possible, such other
covering as can be instantly procured, each bystander supplying a coat
or cloak, &c. Meantime, and from time to time, _to excite inspiration_,
let the surface of the body be _slapped_ briskly with the hand.

9th, Rub the body briskly till it is dry and warm, then dash _cold_
water upon it, and repeat the rubbing.

Avoid the immediate removal of the patient, as it involves a _dangerous
loss of time_; also the use of bellows or any _forcing_ instrument; also
the _warm bath_ and _all rough treatment_.


POISONS.

In all cases of poisoning, the first step is to evacuate the stomach.
This should be effected by an emetic which is _quickly_ obtained, and
most powerful and speedy in its operation. Such are, powdered mustard
(a large tablespoonful in a tumblerful of warm water), powdered alum
(in half-ounce doses), sulphate of zinc (ten to thirty grains), tartar
emetic (one to two grains) combined with powdered ipecacuanha (twenty
grains), and sulphate of copper (two to five grains). When vomiting has
already taken place, copious draughts of warm water or warm mucilaginous
drinks should be given, to keep up the effect till the poisoning
substance has been thoroughly evacuated.


PARTING ADVICE.

Be independent, but not impudent. See all you can, and make the most of
your time; "time is money;" and, when you grow older, you may find it
even more difficult to command time than money.

[Illustration]




INDEX.


  Accidents, boy run over, 34.
    how to avoid, 117.

  Advice to parents, 105.

  Afoot, ways to travel, 9-24.

  Alcoholic stimulants, 55, 123.

  Ammoniated opodeldoc for bites, 99.

  Appetite, none first days, 55.
    on return home, 105.

  A-tents, 75-79, 95.
    too small for ladies, 95.


  Babies in camp, 94.

  Baggage:--
    Barrel, 32.
    Blanket, 16-19.
    Candles and lamps, 61.
    Clothing, 35-38.
    Cooking utensils, 42-46.
    Cover for wagon, 25.
    Food, 20, 47-49.
    Haversack, 18.
    Knapsack, 16.
    Ladies' outfits, 94.
    Mattress, 63.
    Overcoat, 19, 58.
    Overloading, 15, 90.
    Packing a wagon, 26, 32.
    Poles, 60, 73.
    Pork, how carried, 48.
    Shirts, 19.
    Stove, 39-41.
    Tents, 72-80.
    Tub, 91.
    Wagon, 31-33.

  Baked beans, beef, and fish, 46.

  Baker, Yankee, 43.

  Barrel, on march for baggage, 32.
    sunk for cellar, 48.
    cut in two for tubs, 91.

  Bathing, 52, 53, 64, 120.

  Beans and pork, how baked, 46.

  Beckets for tents, 79, 81.

  Beds, 62-64.

  Black flies, protection from, 98.

  Blanket, woollen, 19, 22, 25, 94.
    instead of knapsack, 16.
    lining, 19.
    rubber, 16, 22, 75.

  Board floor for tent, 60.

  Boat, don't sail experimentally, 118.

  Boating, general advice, 90.

  Bobbinet lace mosquito-bar, 99.

  Boots and brogans, 36, 37.

  Brush or bush houses, 69, 96.

  Bug in ear, 126.

  Bumpers for wagon-springs, 31.

  Butter, how to keep, 47.


  Camp, 60-71.
    Beds, 62-64.
    Brush-houses, 69, 96.
    Candles and sluts, 62.
    Care of food, 47-49.
    Cellar, 48.
    Children, 94.
    Clothes-line, 61, 64.
    Cold weather, 66.
    Cooking, 44, 47.
    Etiquette, 96.
    Expenses, 83, 101.
    Fire, 46, 66-69.
    Flies and mosquitoes, 98.
    Hammock, 64.
    Hitching-post, 64, 96.
    Independence, 12, 97.
    Ladies, 41, 93-95.
    Lamp and lantern, 61.
    Mattress, 63.
    Mosquito-bar, 98.
    Outfit, 10-13, 20-22.
    Shelters, 69-71, 96.
    Sleeping, 55, 62.
    Stoves, 39-43.
    Tents, 72-89.

  Camp-stoves, 39-43.

  Candles and candlesticks, 61.

  Captain for large party, 25-34.

  Care of food, 47-49.

  Cart, pulling a, 115.

  Catching fish in nets, 101.

  Cattle-paths the safest, 118.

  Cellar, sunk barrel, 48.

  Chafing the skin, 16, 52-54.

  Cheap living, 102.

  Children in camp, 94.

  Chimneys, 67, 68.

  Cholera morbus, 126.

  Cloth for tent, 82.
    how to preserve, 83.

  Clothes-line in tent, 61.
    on camp-ground, 64.

  Clothing, 35-38.
    made early, 10.
    for mountain climbing, 58.
    at night, 19, 64.

  Climbing mountains, 14, 57.
    with safety, 117.

  Coffee better than alcohol, 55, 124.
    pot, 41, 45.

  Cold weather, what to do in, 66.
    "taking cold," 118.

  Collars to shirts, 35.

  Compass points not known, 91.

  Cooking, 44-47.
    utensils, 20, 42-46.
    stoves, 39-41.

  Costiveness, 55.

  Cover for wagon, 25.

  Cunners, how skinned, 100.
    how caught in net, 101.


  Daily tour of duty, 26-29.

  Diary, how to keep, 107-112.

  Diarrhoea, 126.

  Dishes, 11.
    to be brought on table, 97.

  Dish-cloths, 49.

  Drawers, 36.

  Drawing sketches advised, 109.

  Drinking water, 51, 121.
    coffee and tea, 55, 124.
    oatmeal, 52.
    liquors, 55, 123.

  Driving a wagon, 32, 34.
    a stake into ground, 96.

  Drowning, to revive from, 126-128.

  Dutch oven, 42.


  Eat sparingly on return home, 105.
    before walking, 113.

  Etiquette of camp, 96.

  Exercise not good after meals, 50.

  Expenses, 10, 15, 23, 26, 83.
    of trips to White Mts., 34.
    of a supposed trip, 101-105.


  Farmers, how to treat, 56.

  Fatigue, 54, 56, 122.

  Fiddles of a tent, 82.

  "Fighting cut" to hair, 11.

  Fire, danger from, 68-70.
    kind of to cook upon, 46.
    for cold weather, 66, 69.

  First day's march, 51, 52, 55.

  Fish, how preserved, 48.
    how to skin, 100.
    how to catch in nets, 101.

  Fishermen's treatment of cloth, 84.

  Flies and mosquitoes, 98.
    short hair no protection, 12.
    mosquito-bars, 99.

  Fly for tent, 82.

  Floor for tent, 60.

  Food, 20.
    care of, 47-49.
    expense of, 102.

  Foot-soreness, 52-54.
    (_see_ shoes), 36.

  Frying, 44-46.

  Frying-pan, tin plate, or canteen, 44.
    bring it on the table, 97.


  Getting ready, 9-13.

  Glycerine for sunburn, &c., 53.

  Guy-lines of tent, 81.


  Hair, how cut, 11.

  Hammock, 64.

  Hand-barrow, 60.

  Harness, 30, 32.

  Hatchet, 20.

  Haversack, how made, 18.

  Hip-pantaloons, 37.

  Hitching-post, 64, 96.

  Horse and wagon for baggage, 25-34.

  Horseback tour, 90.

  Hotels to be avoided, 56, 105.

  "How to do it," 113-116.

  Hunger, none first day, 55.
    and fatigue, 122.

  Hunter's camp, 69.

  Hygienic notes, 117-129.


  Independence in camp, 12, 97.
    in modes of travel, 115.

  Insect in ear, 126.


  Knapsack, 11, 16.
    the roll a substitute, 16-17.


  Ladies need a stove, 41.
    climbing mountains, 58.
    as pedestrians, 93.
    outfits for, 94, 95.
    and children in camp, 94.

  Lamp and lantern, 61.

  Leggings for foot-travellers, 54.

  Lime-water on tent-cloth, 84.

  Liquors not needed, 55, 123.

  Lobsters caught in net, 101.

  Lost, whereabouts, and direction, 91.

  Lumbermen's way to carry pork, 48.

  Lumbermen's way to cook beans, 46.


  Map, study before travel, 92.

  Management of party, 25-29, 33, 34.

  Marching, 50-59.
    in army, 50.
    first day's troubles, 51.
    second day's fatigue, 54.
    how fast, 23, 50, 102, 114.
    hundred miles a week, 102.
    "How to do it," 113, 114.

  Mark name on baggage, 10.

  Mattress, 63.

  Medicines, 55.

  Mildew, how to prevent, 83.

  Mosaic law, 65.

  Mosquitoes and flies, 11, 98.

  Mountain climbing, 14, 57.
    for ladies, 58.

  Mutton tallow for chafing, &c., 53.


  Nails in shoes, 37.

  Net, mosquito, 98.
    to catch fish, 101.

  Note-book, 10, 110.


  Oatmeal in water, 52.

  Offal to be buried, 65.

  Oil of cedar and pennyroyal, 99.
    for sunburn, chafing, &c., 53.
    for harness and boots, 32.

  Opodeldoc for mosquito-bites, 99.

  Outfit, 10-13, 19-22, 102.

  Overcoat not needed, 19.
    needed on mountains, 58.

  Overloading, 15, 90, 102.


  Packing a wagon, 26, 32.
    away tents, 89.

  Pantaloons, 37.
    in stockings, 54.

  Parents, advice to, 105.

  Perspiration, nature of, 120.

  Pillow carried by officer, 21.

  Poisons, treatment for, 128.

  Poles for tent, 60, 73, 79, 82.
    how made, 86.

  Politeness, 56, 97.

  Pork and beans baked, 47.
    how carried, 48.

  Postal cards as stencil-plates, 10.

  Potatoes for food, 103.
    candlesticks, 61.

  Preparations, 9.

  Privies, 65.

  Public resorts to be avoided, 56, 105.


  Racing with locomotives, 114.

  Rations, 22, 102-104.

  Recipes for cooking, 46-47.

  Reckoning lost, 91.

  Rests frequent advised, 50, 113, 114.
    should not be long, 50.
    at halts, 50, 56.
    to prevent sunstroke, 121.

  Roll better than knapsack, 17.

  Rotten trees dangerous, 60.

  Route should be known, 9, 23, 92.

  Rubber blanket, 16, 22, 58.
    for tents, 75.
    boots for dew, 95.


  Sail-boat, 90, 118.

  Salve for sunburn, chafing, &c., 53.

  Screens of bushes, 69, 96.

  Second day's march fatiguing, 54.

  Shaving the head not advised, 11.

  Shelters, 69-71, 96.

  Shelter-tent, 17, 19, 70, 72-75.
    how to pitch, 70, 73-75.
    how made, 72-74.
    not good for ladies, 94.
    illustration of, 129.

  Shirts instead of overcoat, 19.
    how made, 35.
    undershirts, 38.

  Shoes, 36.
    slippers, 120.

  Sickness:--
    Liability to, 14, 23, 55, 106.
    Remedies, 120, 121, 126.
    Insect in ear, 126.
    Cholera morbus, 126.
    Drowning, to restore from, 126-128.
    Poisons, treatment for, 128.

  Sinks, 65.

  Sketching advised, 109.

  Skinning fish, 100.

  Sleep on a hay-mow, 23.
    difficult first night, 54.
    for your comrades, 55.
    (_see_ beds), 62.
    general advice about, 63, 64.

  Slippers, 120.

  Sluts for light, 62.

  Smudge for mosquitoes, &c., 100.

  Soap for foot-soreness, &c., 53.
    tents, 83.

  Socks, 37.

  Sod-cloth of tents, 78, 81.

  Soldier's weight of outfit, 15.
    German, 16.
    rule for drinking, 51.
    trousers in socks, 54.
    preventive for chafing, 54.
    mattress, 63.
    shelter-tents, 72.
    rations, 103.

  Spade, uses of, 47, 65, 88.

  Speed proper to walk, 23, 51, 102, 114.

  Spirits not needed, 55.

  Stake, how driven, 96.

  Starvation, do not risk, 21.

  Stays to tent, 84.

  Stencil-plate of postal card, 11.

  Stimulation, nature and effects, 123.

  Stockings, best kind on march, 37.
    pantaloons tucked into, 54.
    take off when wet, 120.

  Stoves, &c., 11, 39-43.
    portable, 39-41.
    inside tent when cold, 66.
    top, 42.

  Summer-houses, screens, &c., 96.

  Sunburn, 53.

  Sunstroke, 121.

  Suspenders, 38.

  Supplies for camping enumerated, 13.

  Swimming, 118.


  Table manners in camp, 96.

  Taking cold, 118.

  Tanning tent-cloth, 84.

  Tea better than alcohol, 55, 124.

  Tents, 72-89.
    best kind to use, 19, 88.
    made in wagon, 25.
    how to make "shelter," 72.
    how to make "A," 75.
    how to make "wall," 80.
    how to pitch "wall," 85.
    cloth for, 82.
    cloth, how preserved, 83, 89.
    fly, 82.

  Tent-poles, whether to carry, 20.
    how made, 73, 79, 86.
    hand-barrow, 60.

  Tent-pins, 20, 87.

  Thirst, 51, 52, 121.

  Tobacco, when to use, 124.

  Tools, 25.

  Training before journey, 12, 102.

  Travelling acquaintances, 97.

  Travelling afoot, 12, 14-34.
    horseback, 90.
    boating, 90, 118.
    expenses, 15, 23, 26, 34, 102.
    how fast, 23, 50, 102, 114.
    with hand-cart, 115.

  Trench for offal, 65.
    around tent, 84.
    for fireplace, 67.

  Trousers, 37-38.

  Tub in boat, 91.


  Ventilation, 64.


  Wagon, general advice, 25, 31-33.
    made into tent, 25.
    man to walk behind, 34.

  Walking, 50-59.
    how fast, 23, 50, 102, 114.
    at noon, 114.
    parties in White Mts., 34.
    one hundred miles, 102.
    eat before, 113.

  Wall-tent, how made, &c., 80.
    to pitch quickly, 85.

  Warm, how to keep, 66-70.

  Water for drinking, 51.
    how to carry in pails, 68.
    none on mountains, 58.

  Weekly supply for two men, 102.

  Weight of outfit, 15, 21-23.

  Wet and taking cold, 120.
    clothes, weight, 22.

  Whims of soldiers, 21.

  Woodman's camp, 69.

  Woollen blanket, 19, 23.
    shirt, 19.


  Yankee baker, 43.



       *       *       *       *       *



Transcriber's Note:

   Punctuation normalized.

   Hyphenation changed to conform to majority of text.

   Capitalization corrected.

   Page 13, "usuually" changed to "usually" (tooth that usually)

   Page 90, "gripe" changed to "grip" (hold its grip so)

   Page 121, "comparativey" changed to "comparatively"
   (comparatively engorged)

   Page 131, "opoldeldoc" changed to "opodeldoc" to conform to
   rest of text (ammoniate opodeldoc)

   Page 132, added word "how" to conform to rest of text (how to
   catch in nets)



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO CAMP OUT***


******* This file should be named 17575.txt or 17575.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/7/5/7/17575



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

