The Project Gutenberg EBook of Christmas Stories And Legends, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Christmas Stories And Legends

Author: Various

Release Date: February 16, 2006 [EBook #17770]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTMAS STORIES AND LEGENDS ***




Produced by Stacy Brown Thellend, Barbara Tozier, Bill
Tozier and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net







CHRISTMAS STORIES
AND LEGENDS


COMPILED BY
PHEBE A. CURTISS

Author of "White Gifts
for the King"




MEIGS PUBLISHING CO.
INDIANAPOLIS, IND.


Copyright 1916

BY

MEIGS PUBLISHING CO.
Indianapolis, Indiana




FOREWORD


No greater teaching force has ever been discovered than the story and
no one has ever lived who used that force so skillfully as did our
Great Teacher.

It is not strange, then, that among all the stories that have ever
been written or told none are so dear to us as the stories and legends
which center in His birth.

Young and old alike delight in them and never tire of hearing them.

Unusual care has been taken in compiling this little volume and each
story has its own sweet lesson. Each one is from the pen of one who
has imbibed the real spirit of Christmas. They were chosen as being
particularly well adapted to use in connection with the Christmas
Service "White Gifts for the King," but they will prove attractive and
helpful at any time during the year.

It is our earnest wish that this little book may find its way into
many homes and schools and Sunday Schools and that its contents may
help to give a deeper appreciation of the true Christmas spirit.




CONTENTS

                                                              Page
    I. The Legend of the "White Gifts"--Phebe A. Curtiss         9

   II. Her Birthday Dream--Nellie C. King                       13

  III. The Fir Tree--Hans Andersen--adapted by J. H. Stickney   25

   IV. The Little Match Girl--Hans Andersen                     37

    V. Little Piccola--Nora A. Smith                            41

   VI. The Shepherd's Story--Dr. Washington                     47

  VII. The Story of Christmas--Nora A. Smith                    63

 VIII. The Legend of the Christmas Tree--Lucy Wheelock          69

   IX. Little Jean--French of Francois Coppe. Translated by
       Nannie Lee Frayser                                       71

    X. How the Fir Tree Became the Christmas Tree--Aunt Hede
       in Kindergarten Magazine                                 77

   XI. The Magi in the West and Their Search for the
       Christ--Frederick E. Dewhurst                            79

  XII. Little Gretchen and the Wooden Shoe--Elizabeth
       Harrison                                                 93

 XIII. The Little Shepherd--Maud Lindsay                       105

  XIV. Babouscka--Carolyn S. Bailey                            109

   XV. The Boy with the Box--May Griggs Van Voorhis            113

  XVI. The Worker in Sandal wood--Marjorie L. C. Pickthall     125

 XVII. The Shepherd Who Didn't Go--Jay T. Stocking             135

XVIII. Paulina's Christmas--Adapted from Anna Robinson's
       "Little Paulina"                                        145

  XIX. Unto Us a Child Is Born--Phebe A. Curtiss               153

   XX. The Star--Florence M. Kingsley                          159




THE LEGEND OF THE "WHITE GIFTS"

As Told by Phebe A. Curtiss


A great many years ago in a land far away from us there was a certain
king who was dearly beloved by all of his people. Men admired him
because he was strong and just. In all of his dealings they knew they
could depend upon him. Every matter that came to his consideration was
carefully weighed in his mind and his decisions were always wise.
Women trusted him because he was pure and true, with lofty thoughts
and high ambitions, and the children loved him because of his
gentleness and tenderness toward them. He was never so burdened with
affairs of state that he could not stop to speak a pleasant word of
greeting to the tiniest child, and the very poorest of his subjects
knew they could count upon his interest in them.

This deep-seated love and reverence for their king made the people of
this country wish very much for a way in which to give expression to
it so that he would understand it. Many consultations were held and
one after another the plans suggested were rejected, but at last a
most happy solution was found. It was rapidly circulated here and
there and it met with the most hearty approval everywhere.

It was a plan for celebrating the King's birthday.

Of course, that had been done in many lands before, but there were
certain features about this celebration which differed materially from
anything that had ever been tried. They decided that on the King's
birthday the people should all bring him gifts, but they wanted in
some way to let him know that these gifts were the expression of a
love on the part of the giver which was pure and true and unselfish,
and in order to show that, it was decided that each gift should be a
"White Gift."

The King heard about this beautiful plan, and it touched his heart in
a wonderful way. He decided that he would do his part to carry out the
idea and let his loving subjects know how much he appreciated their
thoughtfulness.

You can just imagine the excitement there was all over the land as the
King's birthday drew near. All sorts of loving sacrifices had been
made and everyone was anxious to make his gift the very best he had to
offer. At last the day dawned, and eagerly the people came dressed in
white and carrying their white gifts. To their surprise they were
ushered into a great, big room--the largest one in the palace. They
stood in silence when they first entered it, for it was beautiful
beyond all expression. It was a _white_ room;--the floor was white
marble; the ceiling looked like a mass of soft, white fluffy clouds;
the walls were hung with beautiful white silken draperies, and all the
furnishings were white. In one end of the room stood a stately white
throne, and seated upon it was their beloved ruler and he was clad in
shining white robes, and his attendants--all dressed in white--were
grouped around him.

Then came the presentation of the gifts. What a wealth of them there
was--and how different they were in value. In those days it was just
as it is now--there were many people who had great wealth, and they
brought gifts which were generous in proportion to their wealth.

One brought a handful of pearls, another a number of carved ivories.
There were beautiful laces and silks and embroideries, all in pure
white, and even splendid white chargers were brought to his majesty.

But many of the people were poor--some of them very poor--and their
gifts were quite different from those I have been telling about. Some
of the women brought handfuls of white rice, some of the boys brought
their favorite white pigeons, and one dear little girl smilingly gave
him a pure white rose.

It was wonderful to watch the King as each one came and kneeled before
him as he presented his gift. He never seemed to notice whether the
gift was great or small; he regarded not one gift above another so
long as all were white. Never had the King been so happy as he was
that day and never had such real joy filled the hearts of the people.
They decided to use the same plan every year, and so it came to pass
that year after year on the King's birthday the people came from here
and there and everywhere and brought their white gifts--the gifts
which showed that their love was pure, strong, true and without stain,
and year after year the King sat in his white robes on the white
throne in the great white room and it was always the same--he regarded
not one gift above another so long as all were _white_.




HER BIRTHDAY DREAM[*]

By Nellie C. King


Marcia Brownlow came out of the church, and walked rapidly down the
street. She seemed perturbed; her gray eyes flashed, and on her cheeks
glowed two red spots. She was glad she was not going home, so she
wouldn't have to take a car, but could walk the short distance to Aunt
Sophy's, where she had been invited to dine and visit with her special
chum, Cousin Jack--who was home from college for the short
Thanksgiving vacation. She slowed up as she reached her destination,
and waited a little before going in--she wanted to get calmed down a
bit, for she didn't want her friend to see her when she felt so "riled
up." Back of it was a secret reluctance to meet Jack--he was so
different since the Gipsy Smith revival; of course, he was perfectly
lovely, and unchanged toward her, but--somehow, she felt uncomfortable
in his presence--and she didn't enjoy having her self-satisfaction
disturbed.

As she entered the dining-room, she was greeted with exclamations of
surprise and pleasure.

"Why, Marcia!" said Aunt Sophia; "we had given you up! I almost never
knew of your being late in keeping an appointment."

"You must excuse me, Auntie; and lay this offense to the charge of our
Sunday school superintendent," answered Marcia.

"I suppose Mr. Robinson is laying his plans for Christmas," remarked
Uncle John. "He believes in taking time by the forelock--and a very
commendable habit it is, too."

"Yes," answered Marcia laconically.

Jack glanced at her keenly. "Is there anything new in the Christmas
line?" he asked.

The gray eyes grew black, and the red spots burned again, as Marcia
replied: "Well, I should think so--he proposes to turn things
topsy-turvy!"

"My! What does he want to do?" inquired Cousin Augusta.

"Oh, he calls it the 'White Gift Christmas'; but the long and short of
the matter is, that he proposes to 'turn down' Santa Claus, and all
the old time-honored customs connected with Christmas that are so dear
to the hearts of the children, and have the school do the giving. He
has a big banner hung up in the Sunday school room bearing the words,
'Gifts for the Christ-Child'."

"An excellent idea," exclaimed Uncle John, "but I don't see much of an
innovation about that; you have always made the children's giving a
part of your Christmas celebration, have you not?"

"Certainly!" rejoined Marcia. "They have always brought their little
gifts for the poor, and that is all right; but this time there are no
gifts to the Sunday school at all."

"Not even to the Primary School?" asked Augusta.

"Well," admitted Marcia, "Mr. Robinson gave the children their choice
today, whether they would have the old Christmas or the 'White Gift
Christmas,' and they all voted for the new idea."

"Why then should the children be obliged to have gifts, if they don't
want them?" laughed Augusta.

"Oh, children are always taken with novelty, and Mr. Robinson told it
to them in such a way that fancy was captivated; but I don't think
they really understood what they were giving up."

"Marcia, it seems to me that your are emphasizing the wrong side of
the subject if I understand it aright," said Jack.

"Why, do you know about it?" asked Marcia, in surprise.

"Not much," replied Jack; "but I read the White Gift story in the
'Sunday School Times,' and the report of the Painesville experiment."

"Well, Jack, tell us what you know about this mysterious 'White
Gift'," commanded his father.

"I would rather Marcia should tell it, father; I know so little."

"Oh, go on, Jack," urged Marcia; "you can't possibly know less about
it than I do, for I confess I was so full of the disappointment of the
little ones that the other side of it didn't impress me very much."

"Well, as I remember it," said Jack, "the gist of the plan is
this--that Christmas is Christ's birthday, and we should make our
gifts to him, instead of to one another; and the idea of the White
Gift was suggested by the story of the Persian king named Kublah Khan,
who was a wise and good ruler, and greatly beloved. On his birthday
his subjects kept what they called the 'White Feast.' This was
celebrated in an immense great white banqueting-hall, and each one of
his subjects brought to their king a white gift to express that the
love and loyalty of their hearts was without stain. The rich brought
white chargers, ivory and alabaster; the poor brought white pigeons,
or even a measure of rice; and the great king regarded all gifts
alike, so long as they were white. Have I told it right, cousin?"
queried Jack.

"Yes, I think so. It is a beautiful thought, I must confess, and might
be all right in a large, rich Sunday school; but in a mission school
like ours I am sure it will be a failure. It will end in our losing
our scholars. I don't believe in taking up new ideas without
considering whether they are adapted to our needs or not. But please,
dear folkses, don't let us say anything more about it," pleaded
Marcia, and so the subject was dropped.

That evening as Jack Thornton bade his cousin good-bye, he placed in
her hand a little package, saying: "I am so sorry, Marcia, that I
can't be here for your birthday, but here is my remembrance. Now don't
you dare open it before Tuesday, and, dear, you may be sure it is a
'white gift,' and may you have a 'white birthday'." And before she
could say a word, he had opened the door, and was gone.

Touched by his thoughtful gift and his words, she said to herself: "A
'white birthday!' I always have perfectly beautiful birthdays." And so
she did; for she was always looking out for other people's birthdays,
and making much of them; and so she always got the gospel measure:
"Give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and
shaken together, and running over, shall man give into your bosom."

But these thoughts were crowded out by the pressure of things to be
done--father and mother had gone into the country to visit a sick
friend, and the younger brothers and sisters surrounded her and
clamored for songs and Bible stories, and as she was a good older
sister she devoted herself to them until their bedtime. Then, turning
out the lights, she sat down in an easy chair before the library
grate, and yielded herself to the spell of the quiet hour. The
strained, irritated nerves relaxed, and a strange, sweet peace stole
over her. As she gazed dreamily into the fire, a star seemed to rise
out of the glowing coals, and beam at her with a beautiful soft
radiance, and the words of the Evangel came into her mind: "And when
they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding joy; and when they
were come into the house they saw the young child, with Mary his
mother, and they fell down and worshipped him; and when they had
opened their treasures they presented unto him gifts, gold,
frankincense and myrrh." She repeated the words over and over to
herself. How simple and restful they were; how direct and genuine and
satisfying was this old-time giving! There it was--Gifts for the
Christ-Child--"They presented unto him gifts, gold, frankincense and
myrrh." She remembered reading somewhere that the gold represented our
earthly possessions, the frankincense typified our service and the
myrrh our suffering for his sake.

As she gazed into the fire, and mused, she fell asleep, and all these
thoughts were woven into the fabric of a dream--and who shall say that
God does not speak to his children still in dreams?

She dreamed that it was the morning of her birthday. She heard cheery
voices in the hall calling out to one another: "This is Marcia's
birthday. Wish you many returns of the day!" There was an excited
running to and fro between the different rooms, and gleeful
exclamations--but no one came near her! She sat up in bed listening,
and wondering what it could mean! Why, mother always came into her
room, and folded her to her heart, and said those precious things that
only a mother can say; and the children always scrambled to see who
should be the first to give sister a birthday kiss. Were they playing
some joke on her? She would be quiet and watch, and so not be taken
unawares.

Presently they went trooping happily downstairs into the dining-room,
and she heard father's voice say: "Good morning, children; I wish you
many happy returns of Marcia's birthday."

What did it all mean? Was she going crazy? Or were they just going to
surprise her by some novel way of celebrating her birthday? She arose,
and with trembling fingers dressed herself hastily, and stole softly
down the stairs, and looked into the dining-room. Hush!--father was
asking a blessing. He returned thanks for dear Marcia's birthday, and
asked that it should be a happy day for them all. Beside each plate
save her own, were various packages; and these were opened amid
ejaculations of surprise and pleasure, and sundry hugs and kisses.

After the first burst of happiness had subsided, Marcia braced herself
and entered the dining-room, saying with forced gayety: "Good morning,
dear ones all." They looked up with blank, unanswering faces, and
said: "Good morning, Marcia"--that was all. But Marcia's heart leaped
at the recognition of her presence, for she had begun to fear that she
was dead, and that it was her spirit that was wandering about.

She stooped and kissed her mother, who murmured abstractedly, "Yes,
dear," never once looking up from the presents she was examining. With
a sinking heart she turned away from her mother and went and stood
behind her father's chair, and leaning over whispered in his ear:
"Dear father, have you forgotten that this is my birthday?" He
answered kindly but absent-mindedly: "Why, daughter, am I likely to
forget it with all these tokens around me?"--and he waved his hand
toward the gifts piled around his plate. This was almost more than
Marcia could bear, for father was always specially tender and
attentive to her on her birthday. She always sat on his knee a while;
and he told her what a joy and comfort she was to him, and he always
paid her some pretty compliment that made her girlish heart swell with
innocent pride, for every girl knows that compliments from one's
father are a little sweeter than any others.

In vain she hung around waiting for some clue to this mysterious,
unnatural conduct of the family. They were all absorbed in plans for
spending this birthday--Marcia's birthday, but no reference whatever
was made to what she liked; no one consulted her as to what she wanted
to do, or to have done. The boys were going skating in the forenoon;
the little girls were to invite four of their friends to help serve
the first dinner in the new doll's house, and in the afternoon father
would take them all for an automobile ride into the country to a dear
friend's--all but Marcia, who couldn't bear to get into an auto since
a terrible accident she had been in a few weeks ago. A troop of her
girl friends came in, and in a conventional way wished her "many happy
returns" of the day; and then proceeded to ignore her, and gave gifts
to other members of the family. "It is a wonder," thought Marcia,
bitterly, "that they didn't have a birthday party for Marcia with
Marcia left out."

And so it went on all through that strange, miserable day; while they
were all busy celebrating her birthday, she herself was neglected and
ignored as she sat in the quiet house alone in the twilight--for she
had no heart to light the gas--just homesick for the personal love
which had characterized all her birthdays and all her home life
heretofore, there came a timid knock on the door, and as Marcia opened
it, there stood little crippled Joe, one of her scholars in the
Mission Sunday school. As he saw her, he gave a little exclamation of
surprise and delight, and said: "O Miss Marshay! I hearn last night
'twas yer berthday today, an' I wanted to guv yer suthin' white, like
Mr. Robinson he told us 'bout, don't yer know?--an' 'caus yer has
allers treated me so white--'n'--'n' I didn't hev nuthin', 'n so I
axed Him, ye know, what yer telled us 'bout in Sunday school--Jesus;
who died on the cross, and who's allers willin' to help a poor
feller--an' I axed Him to help me get suthin' real nice 'n' white fer
uer birthday; 'n I kep' me eyes peeled all day 'xpectin' it, 'n just
now a reel swell feller buyed a paper of me, 'n then he guv he this
here bunch uv white sweet smellin' posies, 'thout my sayin' a word.
Here they be, Miss Marshay fer yer. Giminy, teacher, ain't them purty?
An' O, teacher--He made 'm in the fust place 'n had the man guv them
to me, 'n so I reckon He 'n me's pardners in this here white gift
bizness." And he held up in his thin, grimy hand a bunch of white,
sweet-scented violets.

Marcia's first impulse was to catch up the little fellow and his gift
in her arms, and baptize them with a flood of tears from her own
overcharged heart! But she hadn't taught boys in a Mission Sunday
school class for nothing--Joe would have thought she had gone crazy,
or been struck silly, or was sick unto death; so she controlled
herself, and kneeling beside him took the violets reverently in both
her hands, saying in a choked voice: "Joe, they are just beautiful!
This is the only really truly white gift I have had today, and I don't
deserve it--but I thank Him and you."

The boy looked at her with shining face, drew his hand across his
eyes, and then answered brightly: "Oh, that's all right, Miss Marshay;
'tenny rate 'tis with me, 'n' I reckon 'tis with Him"--and seizing his
crutch, he hopped like a little sparrow through the door and onto the
street, and she heard his boyish voice calling out: "Evenin' papers,
last edishun--all 'bout the big graft 'sposure."

Just then the big white touring car discharged its merry load at the
door, and the house was filled with the chatter and laughter of the
children. In vain she tried to find a quiet corner where she could be
alone with her heart--it was impossible to escape from the hilarious
celebration of her birthday. She was so glad when the children said
good-night and went off to bed, and she could seek the quiet of her
own room.

As she bade her father good night, he said: "Well, daughter, I hope
you have enjoyed your birthday and all your gifts?"

At this all the honesty of her nature, all the hatred of sham, rose up
in one indignant outburst, and she exclaimed: "I have had no gifts,
neither has this been my birthday celebration."

"Why, Marcia!" said her father in an aggrieved tone, "this certainly
is your birthday, and we have been very happy in keeping it for love
of you."

"I have failed to see any manifestation of love to me," retorted
Marcia. "You may have had a happy time, but I have not been in it; you
have given gifts to one another, but I have had just one"--and she
held up the bunch of violets. "This is a gift of love from little lame
Joe, in answer to his prayer, and in pity for my hungry heart."

There was silence in the room for a moment, and then her father
answered: "It seems to me, daughter, that when you get right down to a
personal application, what you believe in after all is a 'white
birthday'."

The words went through her like an electric shock, and with a start
she awoke, and sat upright in her chair; and, lo, it was all a dream!

Marcia looked around the room, shook herself a little, stirred the
fire, and put on fresh coal. She laughed at the remembrance of her
dream, and its absurdity! How glad she was that it was only a dream!
But was it only a dream? Was it not a reality? Was not this the way
she had kept the Lord's birthday? When she had opened her Christmas
treasure, how much had been given Him and for love of Him? How large a
place had she given Him in the season's activity? Had she ever made
room for Him as the central figure of it all; or had he been crowded
out, and His rightful place given to Santa Claus and the world's
merry-making?

In the light of the Spirit she saw that the Star of Bethlehem always
leads to the cross of Calvary. She had never liked to think about the
cross before, but now it was all illumined with the glory of the love
which gave to us God's best, his only begotten Son. She remembered how
the Lord Jesus had said: "If I be lifted up, I will draw all men unto
Me." She saw that it is as we see Christ on the cross for us that we
are drawn to Him.

In that still hour, on her knees, at the foot of the cross, Marcia
with great gladness made her first "White Gift" unto her Lord--she
gave HERSELF to Him.

[*] By permission of the author and the publisher, Pittsburgh
Christian Advocate.




THE FIR TREE[*]

Adapted by J. H. Stickney


Far away in the forest, where the warm sun and the fresh air made a
sweet resting place, grew a pretty little fir tree. The situation was
all that could be desired; and yet it was not happy, it wished so
much to be like its tall companions, the pines and firs which grew
around it.

The sun shone, and the soft air fluttered its leaves, and the little
peasant children passed by, prattling merrily; but the fir tree did
not heed them.

Sometimes the children would bring a large basket of raspberries or
strawberries, wreathed in straws, and seat themselves near the fir
tree, and say, "Is it not a pretty little tree?" which made it feel
even more unhappy than before.

And yet all this while the tree grew a notch or joint taller every
year; for by the number of joints in the stem of a fir tree we can
discover its age.

Still, as it grew, it complained: "Oh! how I wish I were as tall as
the other trees; then I would spread out my branches on every side,
and my crown would overlook the wide world around. I should have the
birds building their nests on my boughs, and when the wind blew, I
should bow with stately dignity, like my tall companions."

So discontented was the tree, that it took no pleasure in the warm
sunshine, the birds, or the rosy clouds that floated over it morning
and evening.

Sometimes in winter, when the snow lay white and glittering on the
ground, there was a little hare that would come springing along,
and jump right over the little tree's head; then how mortified it
would feel.

Two winters passed; and when the third arrived, the tree had grown so
tall that the hare was obliged to run round it. Yet it remained
unsatisfied, and would exclaim, "Oh! to grow, to grow; if I could but
keep on growing tall and old! There is nothing else worth caring for
in the world."

In the autumn the woodcutters came, as usual, and cut down several of
the tallest trees; and the young fir, which was now grown to its full
height, shuddered as the noble trees fell to the earth with a crash.

After the branches were lopped off, the trunks looked so slender and
bare that they could scarcely be recognized. Then they were placed,
one upon another, upon wagons, and drawn by horses out of the forest.
"Where could they be going? What would become of them?" The young fir
tree wished very much to know.

So in the spring, when the swallows and the storks came, it asked, "Do
you know where those trees were taken? Did you meet them?"

The swallows knew nothing; but the stork, after a little reflection,
nodded his head, and said, "Yes, I think I do. As I flew from Egypt, I
saw several new ships, and they had fine masts that smelt like fir.
These must have been the trees; and I assure you they were stately;
they sailed right gloriously!"

"Oh, how I wish I were tall enough to go on the sea," said the fir
tree. "Tell me what is this sea, and what does it look like?"

"It would take too much time to explain, a great deal too much," said
the stork, flying quickly away.

"Rejoice in thy youth," said the sunbeam; "rejoice in thy fresh
growth, and in the young life that is in thee."

And the wind kissed the tree, and the dew watered it with tears; but
the fir tree regarded them not.

Christmas time drew near, and many young trees were cut down, some
that were even smaller and younger than the fir tree, who enjoyed
neither rest nor peace with longing to leave its forest home. These
young trees, which were chosen for their beauty, kept their branches,
and were also laid on wagons, and drawn by horses far away out of the
forest.

"Where are they going?" asked the fir tree. "They are not taller than
I am; indeed, one is not so tall. And why do they keep all their
branches? Where are they going?"

"We know, we know," sang the sparrows; "we have looked in at the
windows of the houses in the town, and we know what is done with them.
Oh! you cannot think what honor and glory they receive. They are
dressed up in the most splendid manner. We have seen them standing in
the middle of a warm room, and adorned with all sorts of beautiful
things;--honey cakes, gilded apples, playthings, and many hundreds of
wax tapers."

"And then," asked the fir tree, trembling in all its branches, "and
then what happens?"

"We did not see any more," said the sparrows; "but this was enough
for us."

"I wonder whether anything so brilliant will ever happen to me,"
thought the fir tree. "It would be better even than crossing the sea.
I long for it almost with pain. Oh, when will Christmas be here? I am
now as tall and well grown as those which were taken away last year.
Oh, that I were now laid on the wagon, or standing in the warm room,
with all that brightness and splendor around me! Something better and
more beautiful is to come after, or the trees would not be so decked
out. Yes, what follows will be grander and more splendid. What can it
be? I am weary with longing. I scarcely know what it is that I feel."

"Rejoice in our love," said the air and the sunlight. "Enjoy thine own
bright life in the fresh air."

But the tree would not rejoice, though it grew taller every day and,
winter and summer, its dark green foliage might be seen in the
forests, while passersby would say, "What a beautiful tree!"

A short time before Christmas the discontented fir tree was the first
to fall. As the axe cut sharply through the stem, and divided the
pith, the tree fell with a groan to the earth, conscious of pain and
faintness, and forgetting all its dreams of happiness, in sorrow at
leaving its home in the forest. It knew that it should never again see
its dear old companions, the trees, nor the little bushes and
many-colored flowers that had grown by its side; perhaps not even the
birds. Nor was the journey at all pleasant.

The tree first recovered itself while being unpacked in the courtyard
of a house, with several other trees; and it heard a man say, "We
only want one, and this is the prettiest. This is beautiful!"

Then came two servants in grand livery, and carried the fir tree into
a large and beautiful apartment. Pictures hung on the walls, and near
the great stove stood great china vases, with lions on the lids. There
were rocking chairs, silken sofas, large tables covered with pictures,
books, and playthings that had cost a hundred times a hundred dollars;
at least so said the children.

Then the fir tree was placed in a large tub, full of sand; but green
baize hung all around it, so that no one could know it was a tub; and
it stood on a very handsome carpet. Oh, how the fir tree trembled!
What was going to happen to him now? Some young ladies came in, and
the servants helped them to adorn the tree.

On one branch they hung little bags cut out of colored paper, and each
bag was filled with sweetmeats. From other branches hung gilded apples
and walnuts, and all around were hundreds of red, blue and white
tapers, which were fastened upon the branches. Dolls, exactly like
real men and women, were placed under the green leaves,--and the tree
had never seen such things before,--and at the top was fastened a
glittering star, made of gold tinsel. Oh, it was very beautiful. "This
evening," they all exclaimed, "how bright it will be!"

"Oh, that the evening were come," thought the tree, "and the tapers
lighted! Then I should know what else is going to happen. Will the
trees of the forest come to see me? Will the sparrows peep in at the
windows, I wonder, as they fly? Shall I grow faster here, and keep on
all these ornaments during summer and winter?" But guessing was of
very little use. His back ached with trying; and this pain is as bad
for a slender fir tree as headache is for us.

At last the tapers were lighted, and then what a glistening blaze of
splendor the tree presented! It trembled so with joy in all its
branches, that one of the candles fell among the green leaves and
burnt some of them. "Help! help!" exclaimed the young ladies; but
there was no danger, for they quickly extinguished the fire.

After this the tree tried not to tremble at all, though the fire
frightened him, he was so anxious not to hurt any of the beautiful
ornaments, even while their brilliancy dazzled him.

And now the folding doors were thrown open, and a troop of children
rushed in as if they intended to upset the tree, and were followed
more slowly by their elders. For a moment the little ones stood silent
with astonishment, and then they shouted for joy till the room rang;
and they danced merrily round the tree, while one present after
another was taken from it.

"What are they doing? What will happen next?" thought the tree. At
last the candles burned down to the branches, and were put out. Then
the children received permission to plunder the tree.

Oh, how they rushed upon it! There was such a riot that the branches
cracked, and had it not been fastened with the glistening star to the
ceiling, it must have been thrown down.

Then the children danced about with their pretty toys, and no one
noticed the tree, except the children's maid, who came and peeped
among the branches to see if an apple or a fig had been forgotten.

"A story, a story," cried the children, pulling a little fat man
toward the tree.

"Now we shall be in green shade," said the man, as he seated himself
under it, "and the tree will have the pleasure of hearing also; but I
shall only relate one story. What shall it be? Ivede-Avede, or
Humpty-Dumpty, who fell down stairs, but soon got up again, and at
last married a princess?"

"Ivede-Avede," cried some. "Humpty-Dumpty," cried others; and there
was a famous uproar. But the fir tree remained quite still, and
thought to himself, "Shall I have anything to do with all this? Ought
I to make a noise too?" but he had already amused them as much as they
wished.

Then the old man told them the story of Humpty-Dumpty;--how he fell
downstairs and was raised up again, and married a princess. And the
children clapped their hands and cried "Tell another, tell another,"
for they wanted to hear the story of Ivede-Avede; but this time they
had only Humpty-Dumpty. After this the fir tree became quite silent
and thoughtful. Never had the birds in the forest told such tales as
Humpty-Dumpty who fell down stairs, and yet married a princess.

"Ah, yes! so it happens in the world," thought the fir tree. He
believed it all, because it was related by such a pleasant man.

"Ah, well!" he thought, "who knows? Perhaps I may fall down too and
marry a princess;" and he looked forward joyfully to the next evening,
expecting to be again decked out with lights and playthings, gold and
fruit. "Tomorrow I will not tremble," thought he; "I will enjoy all my
splendor, and I shall hear the story of Humpty-Dumpty again, and
perhaps Ivede-Avede." And the tree remained quiet and thoughtful all
night.

In the morning the servants and the housemaid came in. "Now," thought
the fir tree, "all my splendor is going to begin again." But they
dragged him out of the room and upstairs to the garret and threw him
on the floor, in a dark corner where no daylight shone, and there they
left him. "What does this mean?" thought the tree. "What am I to do
here? I can hear nothing in a place like this;" and he leaned against
the wall and thought and thought.

And he had time enough to think, for days and nights passed, and no
one came near him; and when at last somebody did come, it was only to
push away some large boxes in a corner. So the tree was completely
hidden from sight as if it had never existed.

"It is winter now," thought the tree; "the ground is hard and covered
with snow, so that people cannot plant me. I shall be sheltered here,
I dare say, until spring comes. How thoughtful and kind everybody is
to me! Still, I wish this place were not so dark and so dreadfully
lonely, with not even a little hare to look at. How pleasant it was
out in the forest while the snow lay on the ground, when the hare
would run by, yes, and jump over me too, although I did not like it
then. Oh! it is terribly lonely here."

"Squeak, squeak," said a little mouse, creeping cautiously towards the
tree; then came another, and they both sniffed at the fir tree, and
crept in and out between the branches.

"Oh, it is very cold here," said the little mouse. "If it were not, we
would be very comfortable here, wouldn't we, old fir tree?"

"I am not old," said the fir tree. "There are many who are older than
I am."

"Where do you come from?" asked the mice, who were full of curiosity;
"and what do you know? Have you seen the most beautiful places in the
world, and can you tell us all about them? And have you been in the
storeroom, where cheeses lie on the shelf and hams hang from the
ceiling? One can run about on tallow candles there; one can go in thin
and come out fat."

"I know nothing of that," said the fir tree; "but I know the wood
where the sun shines and the birds sing." And then the tree told the
little mice all about its youth. They had never heard such an account
in their lives; and after they had listened to it attentively, they
said, "What a number of things you have seen! You must have been very
happy."

"Happy!" exclaimed the fir tree; and then, as he reflected on what he
had been telling them, he said, "Ah, yes! after all, those were happy
days." But when he went on and related all about Christmas eve, and
how he had been dressed up with cakes and lights, the mice said, "How
happy you must have been, you old fir tree."

"I am not old at all," replied the tree; "I only came from the forest
this winter. I am now checked in my growth."

"What splendid stories you can tell," said the little mice. And the
next night four other mice came with them to hear what the tree had to
tell. The more he talked, the more he remembered, and then he thought
to himself, "Yes, those were happy days; but they may come again.
Humpty-Dumpty fell downstairs, and yet he married a princess. Perhaps
I may marry a princess too." And the fir tree thought of the pretty
little birch tree that grew in the forest; a real princess, a
beautiful princess, she was to him.

"Who is Humpty-Dumpty?" asked the little mice. And then the tree
related the whole story; he could remember every single word. And the
little mice were so delighted with it, that they were ready to jump to
the top of the tree. The next night a great many more mice made their
appearance, and on Sunday two rats came with them; but they said it
was not a pretty story at all, and the little mice were very sorry,
for it made them also think less of it.

"Do you know only that one story?" asked the rats.

"Only that one," replied the fir tree. "I heard it on the happiest
evening of my life; but I did not know I was so happy at the time."

"We think it is a very miserable story," said the rats. "Don't you
know any story about bacon or tallow in the storeroom?"

"No," replied the tree.

"Many thanks to you, then," replied the rats, and they went their
ways.

The little mice also kept away after this, and the tree sighed and
said, "It was very pleasant when the merry little mice sat around me
and listened while I talked. Now that is all past too. However, I
shall consider myself happy when someone comes to take me out of this
place."

But would this ever happen? Yes; one morning people came to clear up
the garret; the boxes were packed away, and the tree was pulled out of
the corner and thrown roughly on the floor; then the servants dragged
it out upon the staircase where the daylight shone.

"Now life is beginning again," said the tree, rejoicing in the
sunshine and fresh air. Then it was carried downstairs and taken into
the courtyard so quickly that it forgot to think of itself, and could
only look about, there was so much to be seen.

The court was close to a garden, where everything looked blooming.
Fresh and fragrant roses hung over the little palings. The linden
trees were in blossom; while the swallows flew here and there crying,
"Twit, twit, twit, my mate is coming;" but it was not the fir tree
they meant.

"Now I shall live," cried the tree joyfully, spreading out its
branches; but alas! they were all withered and yellow, and it lay in a
corner amongst weeds and nettles. The star of gold paper still stuck
in the top of the tree, and glittered in the sunshine.

In the same courtyard two of the merry children were playing who had
danced round the tree at Christmas time and had been so happy. The
youngest saw the gilded star and ran and pulled it off the tree. "Look
what is sticking to the ugly old fir tree," said the child, treading
on the branches till they crackled under his boots.

And the tree saw all the fresh, bright flowers in the garden, and
then looked at itself, and wished it had remained in the dark corner
of the garret. It thought of its fresh youth in the forest, of the
merry Christmas evening, and of the little mice who had listened to
the story of Humpty-Dumpty.

"Past! past!" said the poor tree. "Oh, had I but enjoyed myself while
I could have done so! but now it is too late."

Then a lad came and chopped the tree into small pieces, till a large
bundle lay in a heap on the ground. The pieces were placed in the
fire, and they blazed up brightly, while the tree sighed so deeply
that each sigh was like a little pistol shot. Then the children, who
were at play, came and seated themselves in front of the fire and
looked at it, and cried, "Pop, pop." But at each "pop," which was a
deep sigh, the tree was thinking of a summer day in the forest, or of
some winter night there when the stars shone brightly, and of
Christmas evening and of Humpty-Dumpty, the only story it had ever
heard, or knew how to relate,--till at last it was consumed.

The boys still played in the garden, and the youngest wore the golden
star on his breast with which the tree had been adorned during the
happiest evening of its existence. Now all was past; the tree's life
was past, and the story also past! for all stories must come to an end
some time or other.

[*] From "Hans Andersen's Fairy Tales," adapted by J. H. Stickney. By
permission of the publishers--Ginn and Company.




THE LITTLE MATCH GIRL[*]

Hans Andersen


It was dreadfully cold; it was snowing fast, and was almost dark, as
evening came on--the last evening of the year. In the cold and the
darkness, there went along the street a poor little girl, bareheaded
and with naked feet. When she left home she had slippers on, it is
true; but they were much too large for her feet,--slippers that her
mother had used until then, and the poor little girl lost them in
running across the street when two carriages were passing terribly
fast. When she looked for them, one was not to be found, and a boy
seized the other and ran away with it, saying he would use it for a
cradle some day, when he had children of his own.

So on the little girl went with her bare feet, that were red and blue
with cold. In an old apron that she wore were bundles of matches, and
she carried a bundle also in her hand. No one had bought so much as a
bunch all the long day, and no one had given her even a penny.

Poor little girl! Shivering with cold and hunger she crept along, a
perfect picture of misery!

The snowflakes fell on her long flaxen hair, which hung in pretty
curls about her throat; but she thought not of her beauty nor of the
cold. Lights gleamed in every window, and there came to her the savory
smell of roast goose, for it was New Year's Eve. And it was of this
which she thought.

In a corner formed by two houses, one of which projected beyond the
other, she sat cowering down. She had drawn under her little feet, but
still she grew colder and colder; yet she dared not go home, for she
had sold no matches, and could not bring a penny of money. Her father
would certainly beat her; and, besides, it was cold enough at home,
for they had only the houseroof above them; and, though the largest
holes had been stopped with straw and rags, there were left many
through which the cold wind whistled.

And now her little hands were nearly frozen with cold. Alas! a single
match might do her good if she might only draw it from the bundle, rub
it against the wall, and warm her fingers by it. So at last she drew
one out. Whischt! How it blazed and burned! It gave out a warm, bright
flame like a little candle, as she held her hands over it. A wonderful
little light it was. It really seemed to the little girl as if she sat
before a great iron stove, with polished brass feet and brass shovel
and tongs. So blessedly it burned that the little maiden stretched out
her feet to warm them also. How comfortable she was! But lo! the flame
went out, the stove vanished, and nothing remained but the little
burned match in her hand.

She rubbed another match against the wall. It burned brightly, and
where the light fell upon the wall it became transparent like a veil,
so that she could see through it into the room. A snow-white cloth was
spread upon the table, on which was a beautiful china dinner service,
while a roast goose, stuffed with apples and prunes, steamed famously,
and sent forth a most savory smell. And what was more delightful
still, and wonderful, the goose jumped from the dish, with knife and
fork still in its breast, and waddled along the floor straight to the
little girl.

But the match went out then, and nothing was left to her but the
thick, damp wall.

She lighted another match. And now she was under a most beautiful
Christmas tree, larger and far more prettily trimmed than the one she
had seen through the glass doors at the rich merchant's. Hundreds of
wax tapers were burning on the green branches, and gay figures, such
as she had seen in the shop windows, looked down upon her. The child
stretched out her hands to them; then the match went out.

Still the lights of the Christmas tree rose higher and higher. She saw
them as stars in heaven, and one of them fell, forming a long trail of
fire.

"Now some one is dying," murmured the child softly; for her
grandmother, the only person who had loved her and who was now dead,
had told her that whenever a star falls a soul mounts up to God.

She struck yet another match against the wall, and again it was light;
and in the brightness there appeared before her the dear old
grandmother, bright and radiant, yet sweet and mild, and happy as she
had never looked on earth.

"Oh, grandmother," cried the child, "take me with you. I know you will
go away when the match burns out. You, too, will vanish, like the warm
stove, the splendid New Year's feast, the beautiful Christmas Tree."
And lest her grandmother should disappear, she rubbed the whole bundle
of matches against the wall.

And the matches burned with such a brilliant light that it became
brighter than noonday. Her grandmother had never looked so grand and
beautiful. She took the little girl in her arms, and both flew
together, joyously and gloriously, mounting higher and higher, far
above the earth; and for them there was neither hunger, nor cold, nor
care;--they were with God.

But in the corner, at the dawn of day, sat the poor girl, leaning
against the wall, with red cheeks and smiling mouth,--frozen to death
on the last evening of the old year. Stiff and cold she sat, with the
matches, one bundle of which was burned.

"She wanted to warm herself, poor little thing," people said. No one
imagined what sweet visions she had had, or how gloriously she had
gone with her grandmother to enter upon the joys of a new year.

[*] From "Hans Andersen's Fairy Tales." By permission of
publishers--Ginn & Company.




LITTLE PICCOLA[*]

Suggested by One of Mrs. Celia Thaxter's Poems

     "Story-telling is a real strengthening spirit-bath."--_Froebel._


Piccola lived in Italy, where the oranges grow, and where all the year
the sun shines warm and bright. I suppose you think Piccola a very
strange name for a little girl; but in her country it was not strange
at all, and her mother thought it the sweetest name a little girl ever
had.

Piccola had no kind father, no big brother or sister, and no sweet
baby to play with and love. She and her mother lived all alone in an
old stone house that looked on a dark, narrow street. They were very
poor, and the mother was away from home almost every day, washing
clothes and scrubbing floors, and working hard to earn money for her
little girl and herself. So you see Piccola was alone a great deal of
the time; and if she had not been a very happy, contented little
child, I hardly know what she would have done. She had no playthings
except a heap of stones in the back yard that she used for building
houses and a very old, very ragged doll that her mother had found in
the street one day.

But there was a small round hole in the stone wall at the back of her
yard, and her greatest pleasure was to look through that into her
neighbor's garden. When she stood on a stone, and put her eyes close
to the hole, she could see the green grass in the garden, and smell
the sweet flowers, and even hear the water splashing into the
fountain. She had never seen anyone walking in the garden, for it
belonged to an old gentleman who did not care about grass and flowers.

One day in the autumn her mother told her that the old gentleman had
gone away, and had rented his house to a family of little American
children, who had come with their sick mother to spend the winter in
Italy. After this, Piccola was never lonely, for all day long the
children ran and played and danced and sang in the garden. It was
several weeks before they saw her at all, and I am not sure they ever
would have done so but one day the kitten ran away, and in chasing her
they came close to the wall and saw Piccola's black eyes looking
through the hole in the stones. They were a little frightened at
first, and did not speak to her; but the next day she was there again,
and Rose, the oldest girl, went up to the wall and talked to her a
little while. When the children found that she had no one to play with
and was very lonely, they talked to her every day, and often brought
her fruits and candies, and passed them through the hole in the wall.

One day they even pushed the kitten through; but the hole was hardly
large enough for her, and she mewed and scratched and was very much
frightened. After that the little boy said he would ask his father if
the hole might not be made larger, and then Piccola could come in and
play with them. The father had found out that Piccola's mother was a
good woman, and that the little girl herself was sweet and kind, so
that he was very glad to have some of the stones broken away and an
opening made for Piccola to come in.

How excited she was, and how glad the children were when she first
stepped into the garden! She wore her best dress, a long,
bright-colored woolen skirt and a white waist. Round her neck was a
string of beads, and on her feet were little wooden shoes. It would
seem very strange to us--would it not?--to wear wooden shoes; but
Piccola and her mother had never worn anything else, and never had any
money to buy stockings. Piccola almost always ran about barefooted,
like the kittens and the chickens and the little ducks. What a good
time they had that day, and how glad Piccola's mother was that her
little girl could have such a pleasant, safe place to play in, while
she was away at work!

By and by December came, and the little Americans began to talk about
Christmas. One day, when Piccola's curly head and bright eyes came
peeping through the hole in the wall, and they ran to her and helped
her in; and as they did so, they all asked her at once what she
thought she would have for a Christmas present. "A Christmas present!"
said Piccola. "Why, what is that?"

All the children looked surprised at this, and Rose said, rather
gravely, "Dear Piccola, don't you know what Christmas is?"

Oh, yes, Piccola knew it was the happy day when the baby Christ was
born, and she had been to church on that day and heard the beautiful
singing, and had seen the picture of the Babe lying in the manger,
with cattle and sheep sleeping round about. Oh, yes, she knew all that
very well, but what was a Christmas present?

Then the children began to laugh and to answer her all together. There
was such a clatter of tongues that she could hear only a few of the
words now and then, such as "chimney," "Santa Claus," "stockings,"
"reindeer," "Christmas Eve," "candies and toys." Piccola put her hands
over her ears and said, "Oh, I can't understand one word. You tell me,
Rose." Then Rose told her all about jolly Santa Claus, with his red
cheeks and white beard and fur coat, and about his reindeer and sleigh
full of toys. "Every Christmas Eve," said Rose, "he comes down the
chimney, and fills the stockings of all the good children; so,
Piccola, you hang up your stocking, and who knows what a beautiful
Christmas present you will find when morning comes!" Of course Piccola
thought this was a delightful plan, and was very pleased to hear about
it. Then all the children told her of every Christmas Eve they could
remember, and of the presents they had had; so that she went home
thinking of nothing but dolls and hoops and balls and ribbons and
marbles and wagons and kites.

She told her mother about Santa Claus, and her mother seemed to think
that perhaps he did not know there was any little girl in that house,
and very likely he would not come at all. But Piccola felt very sure
Santa Claus would remember her, for her little friends had promised to
send a letter up the chimney to remind him.

Christmas Eve came at last. Piccola's mother hurried home from her
work; they had their little supper of soup and bread, and soon it was
bedtime,--time to get ready for Santa Claus. But oh! Piccola
remembered then for the first time that the children had told her she
must hang up her stocking, and she hadn't any, and neither had her
mother.

How sad, how sad it was! Now Santa Claus would come, and perhaps be
angry because he couldn't find any place to put the present.

The poor little girl stood by the fireplace, and the big tears began
to run down her cheeks. Just then her mother called to her, "Hurry,
Piccola; come to bed." What should she do? But she stopped crying, and
tried to think; and in a moment she remembered her wooden shoes, and
ran off to get one of them. She put it close to the chimney, and said
to herself, "Surely Santa Claus will know what it's there for. He will
know I haven't any stockings, so I gave him the shoe instead."

Then she went off happily to her bed, and was asleep almost as soon as
she had nestled close to her mother's side.

The sun had only just begun to shine, next morning, when Piccola
awoke. With one jump she was out on the floor and running toward the
chimney. The wooden shoe was lying where she had left it, but you
could never, never guess what was in it.

Piccola had not meant to wake her mother, but this surprise was more
than any little girl could bear and yet be quiet; so she danced to the
bed with the shoe in her hand, calling, "Mother, mother! look, look!
see the present Santa Claus brought me!"

Her mother raised her head and looked into the shoe. "Why, Piccola,"
she said, "a little chimney swallow nestling in your shoe? What a good
Santa Claus to bring you a bird!"

"Good Santa Claus, dear Santa Claus!" cried Piccola; and she kissed
her mother and kissed the bird and kissed the shoe, and even threw
kisses up the chimney, she was so happy.

When the birdling was taken out of the shoe, they found that he did
not try to fly, only to hop about the room; and as they looked closer,
they could see that one of his wings was hurt a little. But the mother
bound it up carefully, so that it did not seem to pain him, and he was
so gentle that he took a drink of water from a cup, and even ate
crumbs and seeds out of Piccola's hands. She was a proud little girl
when she took her Christmas present to show the children in the
garden. They had had a great many gifts,--dolls that could say
"mamma," bright picture books, trains of cars, toy pianos; but not one
of their playthings was alive, like Piccola's birdling. They were as
pleased as she, and Rose hunted about the house until she found a
large wicker cage that belonged to a blackbird she once had. She gave
the cage to Piccola, and the swallow seemed to make himself quite at
home in it at once, and sat on the perch winking his bright eyes at
the children. Rose had saved a bag of candies for Piccola, and when
she went home at last, with the cage and her dear swallow safely
inside it, I am sure there was not a happier little girl in the whole
country of Italy.

[*] From "The Story Hour," by Wiggins and Smith. Published by consent
of the authors and also the publishers--Houghton, Mifflin and Company.




THE SHEPHERD'S STORY[*]

Washington Gladden


"Bring hither that sheepskin, Joseph, and lay it down on this bank of
dry earth, under this shelving rock. The wind blows chilly from the
west, but the rock will shelter us. The sky is fair and the moon is
rising, and we can sit here and watch the flocks on the hillside
below. Your young blood and your father's coat of skins will keep you
warm for one watch, I am sure. At midnight, my son, your father,
Reuben, and his brother James will take our places; for the first
watch the old man and the boy will tend the sheep."

"Yes, grandfather; you shall sit in that snug corner of the rock,
where you can lean back and take your comfort. I will lie here at your
feet. Now and then I will run to see whether the sheep are wandering,
and that will warm me, if I grow cold."

"Have you never been out on the hills at night with your father?"

"Never, grandfather. I have often begged him to let me come; but he
kept saying that I must wait until I was twelve years old. On the last
full moon was my birthday and today, when he returned from Bethlehem
to the flocks, he brought me with him."

"So this is the lad's first night with the sheep in the fields, and
the old man's last night, I fear," said the aged shepherd, sadly. "It
is not often in these days that I venture out to keep the watches of
the flock; but this one night of the year I have spent upon these
hills these many years, and I always shall as long as I have strength
to walk so far."

"Was your father, too, a shepherd?"

"Yes, and all his fathers before him for many generations. On these
hills my ancestors have kept their sheep for I know not how long."

Joseph was still for a moment. His eyes wandered away over the silent
hills, lit by the rising moon. His face was troubled. At length, he
said gently:

"Grandfather, I heard Rabbi Eliezer saying, the other day, in the
synagogue, that a shepherd's life is not a noble life. He was reading
from one of the old doctors, who said: 'Let no one make his son a
camel-driver, a barber, a sailor, a shepherd, or a shopkeeper. They
are dishonest callings.' I was angry when he read it; but I held my
peace."

"You did well, my son, to hold your peace. I myself have often heard
such words, of late, from the doctors in the synagogues; but it is not
wise to answer them. Where they got their notions, I know not. From
the Egyptians, I think, more than from the prophets. All Egyptians
hate shepherds, and can never speak of them without sneering. Perhaps
they have not yet forgotten how the shepherds conquered and ruled them
for generations. Nevertheless, there is some reason why the calling of
the shepherds should be despised. Many of them are rude and fierce
men. Living out of doors so constantly makes their manners rough and
their temper harsh. They are often quarrelsome. Such bloody fights as
I used to see among them, at the wells in the south country, where
they brought their flocks to water and each one wanted the first
chance at the well, I hope you will never look upon."

"But all shepherds are not so," protested Joseph.

"No, indeed. Brave men they must be; fleet of foot and strong of limb
and stout of heart; but brave men are not always quarrelsome. Many a
shepherd whom I have known had a heart as pure and gentle as a
child's. And the godliest men that I have known have been among them.
If the shepherd has but learned to think, to commune with his own
soul, he has time for thought and time for prayer. More than one with
whom I have watched upon these hills knew all the Psalms of David by
heart and many of the books of the prophets. The doctors in the
synagogues teach only the law; the shepherds love best the Psalms and
the prophets. They do not forget that King David was himself a
shepherd's lad. It was upon these very hills that he kept his father's
sheep. It was in that ravine over yonder, on that hillside, that he, a
mere stripling, caught by the beard and killed the lion and the bear
that attacked the sheep. It was on that slope, just a little to the
south, that the messenger found him with his flocks when he was called
home to be anointed by Samuel the prophet. When the doctors talk so
contemptuously about the shepherds, I wonder if they do not remember
that the great king wrote: 'The Lord is my Shepherd.' How can our
calling be so mean as they say, when David, who was called from the
sheepfolds, praises the Eternal One himself as his Shepherd? But hark!
what noise is that I hear? There is some trouble among the sheep."

"Let me run and see," answers the boy, "and I will come and bring you
word."

So saying, Joseph cast off his father's shaggy coat, seized the sling
in his left hand and the crook in his right and ran swiftly out to the
brow of the hill. He was a strong lad, large of frame and a swift
runner, and the sling in his hand was a sure weapon. The old man
looked after him with pride, as he bounded over the rocks, and said to
himself:

"Some evil beast, I doubt not. But the lad's heart is brave and he
must learn to face dangers. I will wait a moment."

Presently the sheep came huddling round the hill in terror. The quick,
faint bleat of the ewes showed that they had seen a foe. The old man
arose and hurried in the direction in which the lad had disappeared.
Joseph was just returning, breathless, from the ravine below.

"It was a wolf, grandfather. The sheep on this side of the ledge had
seen him and were flying. Just as I reached the brow of the hill, he
was creeping round the end of the ledge below, ready to spring upon a
ewe that was feeding near. The first thing he knew a stone from my
sling hit him, and he went howling down the hill. I think I broke his
leg, for he went on three legs and I gained on him as I ran after him;
but he crawled into a narrow place among the rocks in the gorge down
yonder, and I could not follow him."

"Well done, my lad," said the ancient Stephanus proudly. "You will
make a good shepherd. These single wolves are cowards. It is always
safe to face them. When they come in packs, it is quite another thing.
But this fellow will keep at a safe distance for the rest of the
night, you may depend. Let us go back to our shelter and call the
sheep together."

It was several minutes before Stephanus and Joseph could collect the
sheep that the wolf had scattered; but at length, with the aid of the
dog, who was not a very brave specimen, and who had taken to his heels
when he saw the wolf coming, they succeeded in driving them into a
safe neighborhood, and then, with their blood quickened by the
adventure, they sat down again beneath the overhanging rock.

"You said, grandfather, that you always spent this night with the
flocks in the fields. Why this night?" asked the boy.

"Do you not know, my boy, that this is the night of the year on which
the Lord Christ was born?"

"Oh! yes," answered the lad. "My father told me as we were walking
hither today, but I had forgotten it. And you were with the sheep that
night?"

"Aye."

"Where was it?"

"Here, on this very spot."

The boy's eyes began to grow and fill with wonder and there was a
slight tremor in his voice as he hurriedly plied the aged man with his
eager questions. Stephanus drew his shepherd's cloak around him, and
leaned forward a little, and looked out upon the silent moonlit hills,
and then up into the sky.

"How long ago was that, grandfather?"

"Just fifty years ago this night."

"And how old were you then?"

"Fourteen, and a stout boy for my age. I had been for two years in
the fields with my father, and had tasted to the full the hardships
and dangers of the shepherd's life."

"Who were with you on that night?"

"My father, and his brother, James, and Hosea, the son of John, a
neighbor and kinsman of ours. On that year, as on this year and often,
there came in the midwinter a dry and warm season between the early
and the latter rain. We had driven forth our flocks from Bethlehem and
were dwelling by night in the shelter of the tower on the hillside
yonder, watching and sleeping two and two. My father and I were wont
to keep the early watches. At midnight we would call James and Hosea,
and they would watch till the morning. But that night, when the sun
went down and the stars came out, we were sitting here, upon this
hillside, talking of the troubles of Israel and of the promises of
deliverance spoken by the prophets; and James and Hosea were asking my
father questions, and he was answering them, for he was older than
they, and all the people of Bethlehem reverenced him as a wise and
devout man. Some even said that, if the people of Israel had not
ceased to look for prophets, they would have counted him a prophet. I
remember well that, when he rose in the synagogue, it seemed as if
some wisdom from on high touched his lips, and he would speak with
such hope and courage of the light that should yet shine in our
darkness and of the help that should yet arise to Judah, that the
people's faces would glow with joyful expectation."

Stephanus paused a moment and started forward, as his eye was turned
toward his own shadow upon the rock, cast by the rising moon. Did the
old man's figure that he saw remind him of the patriarch of whom he
was talking?

Soon he went on.

"Ah! but they should have heard my father talking here by night, under
the stars. It was here upon these hills where the royal shepherd used
to sing, that his tongue was loosed and he spoke wonderful words. So
it was that night, fifty years ago. I remember it as if it were
yesterday. My father sat in this very niche, where I am sitting now;
James and Hosea were on either side of him. I was lying at their feet,
as you now lie at mine. Their faces kindled and the tremor of deep
feeling was in their voices as they talked together; and the other two
had lingered here three or four hours after the sun had set. It was
not a moonlit night like this, but all the stars were out and all the
winds were still.

"Suddenly I saw my father rise to his feet. Then the other men sprang
up, with astonishment and wonder upon their faces. It had grown light
all at once, lighter than the brightest moon; and as I turned my face
in the direction in which the others were looking, I saw, standing
there upon that level place, a figure majestic and beautiful beyond
all the power of words to tell."

"Were you not afraid, grandfather?"

"Indeed, I was, my boy. My heart stopped beating. The others were
standing, but I had no power to rise. I lay there motionless upon the
earth. My eyes were fixed upon that wonderful face; upon those clear,
shining eyes; upon that brow that seemed to beam with the purity of
the soul within. It was not a smile with which that face was lighted.
It was something too noble and exalted to call by that name. It was a
look that told of power and peace, of joy and triumph."

"Did you know that it was an angel?"

"I knew not anything. I only knew that what I saw was glorious, too
glorious for mortal eyes to look upon. Yet, while I gazed, and in far
less time than I have now taken to tell you of what I saw, the
terribleness of the look began to disappear, the sweetness and grace
of the soul shone forth, and I had almost ceased to tremble before the
angel opened his mouth. And when he spoke, his voice, clearer than any
trumpet and sweeter than any lute, charmed away all my fears."

"'Be not afraid' he said, 'for behold I bring you good tidings of
great joy which shall be to all people. For there is born to you this
day, in the City of David, a Savior, which is Messiah, the King. And
this is the sign unto you. Ye shall find a babe wrapped in swaddling
clothes and lying in a manger.'

"Oh! that voice, my boy! It makes my heart beat now to remember its
sweetness. It seemed to carry these words into our innermost hearts;
to print them on our memory, so that we never could forget one
syllable of what he said. And then, before we had time to make reply,
he turned aside a little and lifted his face toward heaven, and, in a
tone far louder than that in which he had spoken to us, but yet so
sweet that it did not startle us at all, came forth from his lips the
first strain of the great song:

    "'Glory to God in the highest!'

"When he had uttered that, he paused a moment, and the echoes, one
after another, from hills that were near and hills that were far away,
came flying home to us; so that I knew for once what the prophet meant
when he said that all the mountains and the hills should break forth
into singing. But before the echoes had all faded we began to hear
other voices above our heads, a great chorus, taking up the strain
that the angel first had sung. At first it seemed dim and far away;
but gradually it came nearer, and filled all the air, filled all the
earth, filled all our souls with a most entrancing sweetness. Glory to
God in the highest!--that was the grandest part. It seemed as though
there could be no place so high that that strain would not mount up to
it, and no place so happy that that voice would not make it thrill
with new gladness. But then came the softer tones, less grand, but
even sweeter: 'Peace on earth; good will to men.'

"Oh! my boy, if you had heard that music as I did, you would not
wonder when I tell you that it has been hard for me to wait here, in
the midst of the dreary noises of earth, for fifty years before
hearing it again. But earth that night was musical as heaven. You
should have heard the echoes that came back, when the angels' chorus
ceased, from all these mountains and all these little hills on every
side. There is music enough even in this world, if one can only call
it forth; chords divine that will vibrate with wonderful harmony. It
only needs an angel's hand to touch the trembling strings."

"Did you see the choir of angels overhead, grandfather?"

"Nay, I saw nothing. The brightness was too dazzling for mortal eyes.
We all stood there, with downcast eyes, listening spell-bound to the
wonderful melody, until the chorus ceased, and the echoes, one after
another, died away, and the glory faded out of the sky and the stars
came back again, and no sound was heard but the faint voice of a young
lamb, calling for its mother.

"The first to break the silence was my father. 'Come,' he said, in a
solemn voice. 'Let us go at once to Bethlehem, and see this thing
which is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us.'

"So the sheep were quietly gathered into the fold at the tower, and we
hastened to Bethlehem. Never shall I forget that journey by night. We
spake not many words, as we traveled swiftly the twenty furlongs; talk
seemed altogether tame; but now and then my father broke forth in a
song, and the others joined in the chorus. We were not so spent with
running but that we could find voice for singing; and such words as
these of the prophet were the only ones that could give voice to our
swelling hearts:

    "'Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth;
      And break forth into singing, O mountains;
      For the Lord hath comforted His people,
      And will have mercy on His afflicted.

    "'How beautiful upon the mountains
      Are the feet of Him that bringeth good tidings,
      That publisheth peace,
      That bringeth good tidings of good,
      That publisheth salvation.'

"It was midnight when we climbed the hill to the little city of
Bethlehem; the constellation Cesil, called by the Greeks Orion, was
just setting in the west. We knew not whither to go. We had only the
sign of the angel by which we should know the infant Messiah. He was a
babe of one day. He was lying in a manger.

"'Let us go to the inn Chimham,' said my father. 'It stands on the
very spot where King David was born. Peradvanture we shall find him
there.'

"Over the entrance to the court of the inn a lantern was swinging from
a rope stretched across from post to post. Guided by its light, we
entered, and found the courtyard full of beasts of burden, showing
that the inn was crowded with travelers. In the arched shelter of the
hostelry as many as could find room were lying; some who could not
sleep were sitting up and waiting drearily for the morning. Two aged
women near the entrance, were talking in a low tone.

"'Peace be unto you!' said my father.

"'The Lord be gracious unto thee,' answered the oldest woman, in a
solemn voice, as she looked upon my father's white beard; 'but,' she
quickly added, 'there is scanty cheer in this place for late comers.'

"'We seek not lodging,' said my father; 'but know you whether among
these guests is an infant born this day?'

"'Verily there is,' answered the aged dame; 'a man-child more
beautiful than any my eyes have ever beheld. He is lying in a manger
there in the cave that serves for stable.'

"We hastened to the mouth of the cave, and there beheld our King. The
oxen and the asses were lying near, and a strong man, with a grave and
benignant face, was leaning on his staff above the manger. A beautiful
young mother lay close beside it, her cheek resting on her hands, that
were clasped over the edge of the rock-hewn crib. Into this a little
straw had been thrown, and over it a purple robe had been cast,
whereon the infant lay. A lamp, set upon a projection of the wall of
the cave, burned brightly near. The great eyes of the wonderful child
were wandering about the room; his hand touched his mother's lips. I
waited to hear him open his mouth and speak.

"There was a moment of silence after we entered the cave. My father
broke it with his salutation:

"'Hail, thou blessed among women!' he cried. 'This child of thine is a
Prince and a Savior.'

"And then we all bowed low upon our faces before him and worshipped
him with praise and gladness.

"The two aged women, with whom we had spoken, had followed us to the
door of the stable, and, seeing us worshipping there, had run to call
others who were awake in the inn, so that when we arose quite a
company were standing at the door, or just within, gazing upon the
King in his beauty and listening to our thanksgiving with great
wonder.

"Then my father told them all the things that we had heard and
seen--the message of the angel, the song in the air, the glory of the
Lord that had appeared to us--and how we had quickly come to
Bethlehem, and had found things as the angel had told us. 'And it is
even,' he cried, 'as the prophet himself hath spoken: "Thou Bethlehem
Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out
of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel,
whose going forth hast been of old; even from everlasting."'

"All that heard were full of astonishment--all save the mother. I saw
no wonder on her face; the great things that my father told caused her
no astonishment; she listened with a quiet and solemn joy, like one
who was saying in her heart: 'I knew it all before.'

"When my father had finished speaking, we all bowed low again before
the young child; and the mother lifted him in her arms and placed his
cheek against her own, smiling graciously on us, but uttering no word.
And we came forth from the stable and stood again beneath the stars in
the courtyard of the inn. By this time many of the travelers were
awake, and an eager company had gathered around us, all of whom
desired to be told of the sign that had been shown to us. To one and
another we rehearsed our story, lingering long to make known the good
tidings, until the morning star appeared and the dawn began to kindle
over the eastern hills. Then we hastened to our own homes in the city,
and told our kindred what had happened unto us. In the early morning
we came back again unto our pastures and our flocks, rejoicing to
stand again in the place where the glory of God had shone and the
music of heaven had filled the air."

Stephanus paused, his face all aglow with the tale that he had been
telling. His eyes swept again the circuit of the moonlit hills and
were lifted reverently up to the sky.

"Did you ever see the Lord Christ after that?" asked Joseph.

"Once only. My father and I were at Jerusalem at the passover. It was
the year before my father died, seventeen years ago; it was the same
week on which our Lord was crucified. My father was then an aged
man--fourscore and five years old. Our tent was pitched on the slope
of the Mount of Olives, near the Bethany road. While we sat there one
morning, a great noise of shouting was heard, and presently we saw one
riding on an ass, followed by a great company, crying 'Hosanna!' As we
drew nearer, we heard them say that it was Jesus of Nazareth; and,
when we saw His face, we knew that it was He, by the wonderful eyes,
though it was the face of a bearded man, and not of an infant, and was
very pale and sad. As He drew near to our tent, the city came full
into His view, with its gilded roofs and marble pinnacles, blazing
under the morning sun. Suddenly He paused in the way, and we heard Him
weeping aloud, though we could not hear His words of lamentation. The
multitude halted, too, when we did; and the cheering ceased, and some
of those who stood nearest Him wept also, though no one seemed to know
what had caused His grief. But soon they went on again, and before
they reached the foot of the hill another multitude met them, coming
forth from the city, and we heard their shouts of 'Hosanna in the
Highest!' as they entered the gate of Jerusalem."

"What said your father when he saw all this?" queried Joseph.

"He said but little. There was a shadow on his face, yet he spoke
cheerfully. 'I cannot understand it,' he murmured. 'They are trying to
make Him King of the Jews; but King He will not be, at least not in
their fashion. Yet in some way I know He will be Prince and Deliverer.
I cannot understand, I will wait.'"

"Were you not in Jerusalem when He was put to death?"

"No. My father was frail and ill and we had hastened home to
Bethlehem. News of His death on the cross had only just reached us
when another messenger came to tell us that the sepulcher in which He
had been laid was empty; that He had risen from the dead.

"My father's eyes kindled when he heard this message. He cast aside
his staff and stood firm on his feet. His voice, when he spoke, rang
out like a trumpet. 'Blessed be the Lord God of Israel!' he cried. It
is thus that He redeemeth His people. This Jesus is not to be the
Captain of our armies, but the Savior of our souls. His kingdom is the
kingdom of righteousness, and therefore it is that the prophet hath
said: "Of the increase of His government and peace there shall be
no end."

"Always after that, words of the prophet concerning the Messiah kept
coming back to my father; and once and again he cried out: 'Truly,
this Jesus was the Son of God, the true King of Israel!' As the months
wore on, his words were more and more of the crucified and risen Lord,
and he dwelt in a great peace. At length, when the flocks were led
forth to the midwinter pasturage, he begged to go with me. It was on
this very day that we came, the same day of the year on which the Lord
was born. He was feeble and tottered as he walked; but he leaned on
my arm and we came slowly. In the evening he said: 'Let me go, my son,
and sit once more under the great rock.' I wrapped him in my coat of
skins, and sat here where I sit now and where he was sitting when the
angel came. We talked here long, under the stars, that night, of Him
whom we had learned to love as Master and Lord, of the works that He
had done and the words that He had spoken, as His disciples had told
of them. We had been silent for a few moments, when I looked up, and
saw that his head had fallen backward against the rock wall. I sprang
to him. His eyes were shut, but his lips were moving. I put my ear to
his mouth, and heard him say only: 'Peace--on--earth--good
will'--they were his last words. He had gone beyond our starlight,
into the country where the light always shines--the glory that fell
that night, fifty years ago, upon these hills of Bethlehem."

Stephanus was silent and Joseph's eyes were full of tears. At length
the old man rose.

"Come, my son," he said. "Cesil is in the south; it is midnight; let
us call your father and his brother. The old man and the boy have kept
their watch, and it is now time for rest."

[*] Used by permission of the Author.




THE STORY OF CHRISTMAS[*]

Nora A. Smith

     "A great spiritual efficiency lies in story-telling".--_Froebel._


Christmas Day, you know, dear children, is Christ's day, Christ's
birthday, and I want to tell you why we love it so much, and why we
try to make every one happy when it comes each year.

A long, long time ago--more than eighteen hundred years--the baby
Christ was born on Christmas Day; a baby so wonderful and so
beautiful, who grew up to be a man so wise, so good, so patient and
sweet that, every year, the people who know about Him love Him better
and better, and are more and more glad when His birthday comes again.
You see that He must have been very good and wonderful; for people
have always remembered His birthday, and kept it lovingly for eighteen
hundred years.

He was born, long years ago, in a land far, far away across the seas.

Before the baby Christ was born, Mary, His mother, had to make a long
journey with her husband, Joseph. They made this journey to be taxed
or counted; for in those days this could not be done in the town where
people happened to live, but they must be numbered in the place where
they were born.

In that far-off time the only way of traveling was on a horse, or a
camel, or a good, patient donkey. Camels and horses cost a great deal
of money, and Mary was very poor; so she rode on a quiet, safe
donkey, while Joseph walked by her side, leading him and leaning on
his stick. Mary was very young, and beautiful, I think, but Joseph was
a great deal older than she.

People dress nowadays, in those distant countries, just as they did so
many years ago, so we know that Mary must have worn a long, thick
dress, falling all about her in heavy folds, and that she had a soft
white veil over her head and neck, and across her face. Mary lived in
Nazareth, and the journey they were making was to Bethlehem, many
miles away.

They were a long time traveling, I am sure; for donkeys are slow,
though they are so careful, and Mary must have been very tired before
they came to the end of their journey.

They had traveled all day, and it was almost dark when they came near
to Bethlehem, to the town where the baby Christ was to be born. There
was the place they were to stay,--a kind of inn, or lodging-house, but
not at all like those you know about.

They have them today in that far-off country, just as they built them
so many years ago.

It was a low, flat-roofed, stone building, with no windows and only
one large door. There were no nicely furnished bed rooms inside, and
no soft white beds for the tired travelers; there were only little
places built into the stones of the wall, something like the berths on
steamboats nowadays, and each traveler brought his own bedding. No
pretty garden was in front of the inn, for the road ran close to the
very door, so that its dust lay upon the doorsill. All around the
house, to a high, rocky hill at the back, a heavy stone fence was
built, so that the people and the animals inside might be kept safe.

Mary and Joseph could not get very near the inn; for the whole road in
front was filled with camels and donkeys and sheep and cows, while a
great many men were going to and fro, taking care of the animals. Some
of these people had come to Bethlehem to pay their taxes, as Mary and
Joseph had done, and others were staying for the night on their way to
Jerusalem, a large city a little further on.

The yard was filled, too, with camels and sheep; and men were lying on
the ground beside them, resting and watching and keeping them safe.
The inn was so full and the yard was so full of people that there was
no room for anybody else, and the keeper had to take Joseph and Mary
through the house and back to the high hill, where they found another
place that was used for a stable. This had only a door and front, and
deep caves were behind, stretching far into the rocks.

This was the spot where Christ was born. Think how poor a place!--but
Mary was glad to be there, after all; and when the Christ-child came,
He was like other babies, and had so lately come from heaven that He
was happy everywhere.

There were mangers all around the cave, where the cattle and sheep
were fed, and great heaps of hay and straw were lying on the floor.
Then, I think, there were brown-eyed cows and oxen there, and quiet,
woolly sheep, and perhaps even some dogs that had come in to take care
of the sheep.

And there in the cave, by and by, the wonderful baby came, and they
wrapped Him up and laid Him in a manger.

All the stars in the sky shone brightly that night, for they knew the
Christ-child was born, and the angels in heaven sang together for joy.
The angels knew about the lovely child, and were glad that He had come
to help the people on earth to be good.

There lay the beautiful baby, with a manger for His bed, and oxen and
sheep all sleeping quietly round Him. His mother watched Him and loved
Him, and by and by many people came to see Him, for they had heard
that a wonderful child was to be born in Bethlehem. All the people in
the inn visited Him, and even the shepherds left their flocks in the
fields and sought the child and His mother.

But the baby was very tiny, and could not talk any more than any other
tiny child, so He lay in His mother's lap, or in the manger, and only
looked at the people. So after they had seen Him and loved Him, they
went away again.

After a time, when the baby had grown larger, Mary took Him back to
Nazareth, and there He lived and grew up.

And He grew to be such a sweet, wise, loving boy, such a tender,
helpful man, and He said so many good and beautiful things, that
everyone who knew Him, loved Him. Many of the things He said are in
the Bible, you know, and a great many beautiful stories of the things
He used to do while He was on earth.

He loved little children like you very much, and often used to take
them up in His arms and talk to them.

And this is the reason we love Christmas Day so much, and try to make
everybody happy when it comes around each year. This is the reason;
because Christ, who was born on Christmas Day, has helped us all to be
good so many, many times, and because He was the best Christmas
present the world ever had!

[*] From "The Story Hour," by Kate Douglas Wiggins and Nora A.
Smith. Used by permission of the authors and also of the
publishers--Houghton, Mifflin and Company.




THE LEGEND OF THE CHRISTMAS TREE[*]

By Lucy Wheelock


Two little children were sitting by the fire one cold winter's night.
All at once they heard a timid knock at the door, and one ran to
open it.

There, outside in the cold and the darkness, stood a child with no
shoes upon his feet and clad in thin, ragged garments. He was
shivering with cold, and he asked to come in and warm himself.

"Yes, come," cried both the children; "you shall have our place by the
fire. Come in!"

They drew the little stranger to their warm seat and shared their
supper with him, and gave him their bed, while they slept on a hard
bench.

In the night they were awakened by strains of sweet music and, looking
out, they saw a band of children in shining garments approaching the
house. They were playing on golden harps, and the air was full of
melody.

Suddenly the Stranger Child stood before them; no longer cold and
ragged, but clad in silvery light.

His soft voice said: "I was cold and you took Me in. I was hungry, and
you fed Me. I was tired, and you gave Me your bed. I am the Christ
Child, wandering through the world to bring peace and happiness to all
good children. As you have given to Me, so may this tree every year
give rich fruit to you."

So saying, He broke a branch from the fir tree that grew near the
door, and He planted it in the ground and disappeared. But the branch
grew into a great tree, and every year it bore wonderful golden fruit
for the kind children.

[*] From "For the Children's Hour," by Bailey and Lewis. Used by
permission of the authors and the publishers--Milton Bradley Company.




LITTLE JEAN[*]

A Christmas Story


Long ago, and far from here, in a country with a name too hard to
pronounce, there lived a little boy named Jean. In many ways, he was
just like the boys here, for there are many Johns over here, are there
not? Then too, Jean lived with his auntie, and some of our boys do
that too. His father and mother were dead, and that is true here
sometimes, isn't it? But in some ways things were quite different with
Jean. In the first place his auntie was very, very cross, and she
often made him climb up his ladder to his little garret room to go to
sleep on his pallet of straw, without any supper, save a dry crust.
His stockings had holes in the heels, and toes and knees, because his
auntie never had time to mend them, and his shoes would have been worn
out all the time if they had not been such strong wooden shoes--for in
that country the boys all wore wooden shoes. Jean did many a little
service around the place, for his auntie made him work for his daily
bread, and he chopped the wood and swept the paths and made the fires
and ran the errands, but he never heard anyone say "Thank you."

Jean's happiest days were at school, and I wonder if he was like our
boys in that? There his playmates wore much better clothes and good
stockings too, and warm top coats, but they never thought of making
fun of Jean, for they all loved to play with him. One morning Jean
started off to school (which was next to the big church), and when he
got there he found the children all so happy and gay and dressed in
their best clothes, and he heard one boy say, "Won't it be jolly
tomorrow with the big tree full of oranges and popcorn and candy, and
the candles burning?" And another added, "Won't it be fun to see the
things in our shoes in the morning, the goodies that boys love?" And
another said, "My, but we have a big, fat goose at our house, stuffed
with plums and just brown to a turn," and he smacked his lips as he
thought of it. And Jean began to wonder about that beautiful tree and
wish that one would grow at his house. And he thought about his wooden
shoes and knew there would be no goodies in them for him in the
morning. Then he heard one boy say, "Don't you love Christmas?" And
Jean said, "Christmas! why, what is Christmas?" But just then the
teacher came in and said, "Boys, come into the church now and hear the
music." And so the boys marched one behind the other just as they do
in school here, and they went into the great church. Jean thought it
was beautiful in there! The soft light, the warm pleasant air, the
flowers, and the marble altar, and then the music! Oh, such music Jean
had never heard, and somehow as he sat on the high-backed bench and
listened, his own heart grew very warm although he could not
understand why, and he loved so to hear them singing: "Peace on earth,
good will to men." And it began to sing itself over and over in his
heart, this sweet, sweet song of "Peace on earth, good will to men."
Then the time came to go home, and the boys all shouted, "Good-bye,
Jean! and Merry Christmas!" And though Jean didn't know about "Merry
Christmas," he kept singing in his little warmed heart, "Peace on
earth, good will to men," and then he was glad the other boys could
have the tree and the goose and the wooden shoes full of goodies even
if he couldn't.

As Jean went home the snow began to fall and the big flakes lodged on
his shoulders and cap and hands, but he didn't mind the cold for his
heart was so warm. By and by as he ran down the street he passed a
tall house with the steps going up from the street, and there sitting
on the bottom step he saw a little boy with soft curling hair and a
beautiful face, leaning his head against the stone house, fast asleep.
Somehow as Jean looked at the sleeping face, his own heart grew still
and quiet and warm, and he felt like he could look at it forever, and
suddenly he caught himself singing softly under his breath, "Peace on
earth, good will to men." And then he looked down at the little boy's
feet and he saw that he was barefooted and his little feet were purple
with the cold. As Jean looked at the feet, and then at the face of the
child, and thought of the sweet song in his heart, he said, "Oh! I
wish I could give him my shoes, for I have stockings to keep me warm,
but auntie would be so mad! And the more he looked and thought, the
more he longed to give his shoes away, until all at once he said, "I
know what I'll do, I'll give him one shoe and one stocking and then he
won't be so cold," and he felt as though he couldn't get his shoe and
stocking off fast enough to give them to the little child. So gently
and tenderly he lifted the little cold foot in his hand to put on the
shoe that he did not waken the sleeping boy, even when he had put the
stocking on the other foot, and then as he stood up again and took a
last look at the lovely face, before he knew it he was singing aloud,
"Peace on earth, good will to men." Then he hopped off home in the
snow with the happiest heart he had ever had.

Now, I wish the story turned out differently and that his auntie said
when he told her about it, "I'm so glad you did it, Jean." But she was
so very cross, that she slapped Jean and sent him off to bed without
any supper, saying, "You had no right to give away that shoe and
stocking for my money paid for them!" Somehow Jean didn't mind doing
without supper that night and he soon went fast asleep and dreamed a
beautiful dream, for he thought he was still singing "Peace on earth,
good will to men!" And he saw a vision of the little sleeping boy,
that grew into a tall and gentle man with a radiant face who walked to
and fro in Jean's dream, singing with him "Peace on earth, good will
to men!" Then morning came and outside his window, Jean heard the
voices of children singing, "Glory to God in the highest, on earth
peace, good will to men!" And he heard a very strange sound too, for
his auntie's voice, soft and gentle, said, "Jean, wake up, and come
down and see what has happened," and Jean came down the ladder and lo!
there was a wonderful tree just like the other boys were having today,
and a goose, and by the fireplace his own wooden shoe, and beside it
the mate that he had given to the sleeping child, and far in the
distance Jean heard the children's voices singing as they ran down the
street, "Peace, peace on earth, good will to men!" Then the room grew
very still and peaceful and Jean's heart did too--and through the
silence there came a voice so tender and loving--so gentle that the
auntie's eyes were full of tears, and Jean wanted to listen forever,
and the voice said, "Jean, inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least
of these, my brethren, ye did it unto ME."

[*] Adapted from the French of Francois Coppee, by Nannie-Lee-Frayser.




HOW THE FIR TREE BECAME THE CHRISTMAS TREE[*]

By Aunt Hede, in "Kindergarten Magazine"


This is the story of how the fir tree became the Christmas tree.

At the time when the Christ Child was born all the people, the
animals, and the trees, and plants were very happy. The Child was born
to bring peace and happiness to the whole world. People came daily to
see the little One, and they always brought gifts with them.

There were three trees standing near the crypt which saw the people,
and they wished that they, too, might give presents to the Christ
Child.

The Palm said: "I will choose my most beautiful leaf, and place it as
a fan over the Child."

"And I," said the Olive, "will sprinkle sweet-smelling oil upon His
head."

"What can I give to the Child?" asked the Fir, who stood near.

"You!" cried the others. "You have nothing to offer Him. Your needles
would prick Him, and your tears are sticky."

So the poor little Fir tree was very unhappy, and it said: "Yes, you
are right. I have nothing to offer the Christ Child."

Now, quite near the trees stood the Christmas Angel, who had heard all
that the trees had said. The Angel was sorry for the Fir tree who was
so lowly and without envy of the other trees. So, when it was dark,
and the stars came out, he begged a few of the little stars to come
down and rest upon the branches of the Fir tree. They did as the
Christmas Angel asked, and the Fir tree shone suddenly with a
beautiful light.

And, at that very moment, the Christ Child opened His eyes--for He had
been asleep--and as the lovely light fell upon Him He smiled.

Every year people keep the dear Christmas Child's birthday by giving
gifts to each other, and every year, in remembrance of His first
birthday, the Christmas Angel places in every house a fir tree, also.
Covered with starry candles it shines for the children as the stars
shone for the Christ Child. The Fir tree was rewarded for its
meekness, for to no other tree is it given to shine upon so many happy
faces.

[*] From "For the Children's Hour," by Bailey and Lewis. Used by
permission of the authors and also the publishers--Milton Bradley
Company.




THE MAGI IN THE WEST AND THEIR SEARCH FOR THE CHRIST[*]

A Tale for the Christmas-Tide

By Frederick E. Dewhurst


[Sidenote: The Mountain of Vision]

Now, it happened a long time ago, in the year ----, but the exact year
does not matter, because you will not find this story written in the
history of any of the nations of the world. But in one of the
countries of Europe bordering on the Mediterranean Sea was a lofty
mountain, which, to the dwellers in the plains below, seemed to reach
to the very sky. At times its summit was covered with clouds, so that
it could not be seen; at other times it stood out fair and clear, as
though silently asking the people to look up and not down. The lower
slopes of the mountain were covered with olive trees, with groves of
oranges and lemons, and with vineyards, and they were dotted here and
there with the little white cottages of the peasants who made their
living from these groves and vineyards, the fruit of which they sold
in the city not far away.

[Sidenote: Sunset in the Sea]

Along the mountain-side wound a foot-trail even to the summit, and
nowhere, in all the region, was there a finer view of the
Mediterranean than from the summit of this mountain. In the long
summer afternoons the peasants and children would climb to the top and
look off on the lovely picture of land and sea. Then they would eat
their simple lunch of bread and dates and olives and quench their
thirst from the spring on the mountain-side, which they called
"Dew-of-heaven," so clear and fresh and sparkling was it; and when the
sun began to touch the western sky with his pencils of gold and
carmine and purple, they hastened down, that they might reach their
cottages before the night shut in.

[Sidenote: A Stranger Cometh]

On the day when this story begins a man was standing on the summit of
the mountain looking across the sea in the direction where you will
find Tyre and Joppa on the map. He was, very plainly, not one of the
peasants who lived on the mountain-side. He looked about sixty years
of age; he was tall and erect, though he carried a staff in his hand.
His hair and beard were long and flowing, and almost gray, but his eye
was clear and penetrating, and he was looking across the sea as though
he expected some one to appear.

And while he stood there gazing seaward, there appeared a second man
on the summit, helping himself up with his staff, and panting with the
effort of the long climb. From his dress and manner it was plain that
this man, too, was not one of the peasants, for, like the first comer,
he seemed to belong to another age and clime. The two men glanced at
each other and gave such greeting as strangers might who should meet
in so solitary a spot as a mountain summit. Then both lapsed into
silence and looked off across the sea.

[Sidenote: And Findeth a Friend]

Presently the last comer seemed to awake from his reverie. He walked
over to the place where the other man was sitting, still gazing off
toward Joppa, and touched him on the shoulder: "A thousand pardons, my
friend," he said, "but my mind is haunted with some far-off
recollection, as though in some other land and some far-off time I had
seen thy face. Wilt thou have the kindness to tell me thy name?"

Without lifting his eyes from the sea, and in a tone which seemed
regretful and sad, the stranger replied: "My name is Gaspard."

[Sidenote: A Far-off Pilgrimage Recalled]

"Gaspard! Indeed, then have I seen thee! Look at me, my friend; dost
thou not remember me? My name is Melchoir. Dost thou not recall that
time, how long I know not, when thou and I and Balthazar followed a
star which led us to a little Jewish hamlet, thou bearing gold and I
frankincense, and Balthazar myrrh? Dost thou not remember how, on the
long journey thither, we talked about the young Prince, whom we
expected to find in a royal palace, and how at last when we reached
the village, following the star, we were led not to a palace but to a
little inn, and not even to a room within the inn, but to the
stable-yard, where we found a sweet-faced woman bending over a babe
cradled in a manger; and standing near, a sturdy peasant, proud and
happy, whose name was Joseph? Dost thou not remember, too, that when
we had recovered from our surprise, we left our gifts and greetings,
and went our way as men who had been dreaming? Gaspard, dost thou not
remember?"

[Sidenote: And Wanderings in Many Lands]

And Gaspard, looking now intently in the other's face, replied: "Yes,
Melchoir, I remember thee, and I remember the journey of which thou
hast spoken better than I remember aught else. Neither have I
forgotten the surprise and disappointment with which we came to the
place whither the star led us; nor how, after leaving our gifts, we
went away as in a dream; and, Melchoir, I have been dreaming ever
since. Even here hast thou found me in a dream of perplexity. I am
still Gaspard, the wandering magician; for how many years I know not,
I have wandered up and down these lands of Europe. I have crossed the
seas; in every place I have sought to find the kingdom over which we
were told this young prince was one day to reign. Dost thou not
remember that we were told His kingdom was to last forever, that He
would reign in it himself forever and would never die? Alas! I have
lost the old power of the magician's art. I can summon no star to
guide me to the place where I shall find this kingdom and its king."

[Sidenote: If Only Balthazar Were Here]

"Truly, Gaspard," answered Melchoir, "the story of your wanderings is
but the repetition of my own; and even now was I drawn to this
mountain summit on the self-same errand that brought you here,--to see
if I could not discover in the direction of yonder land, where
Bethlehem was, some star which might prove to be His star, and which
might guide me in the new quest. If only our old companion, Balthazar,
were with us now, he might give us the clew to our search, for not
only was he more skilful in the magician's art, but he was braver and
more courageous, and withal more serene in spirit."

[Sidenote: A Song in the Air]

Now, even while Melchoir was speaking, a voice was heard a little way
down the mountain. Gaspard and Melchoir stopped to listen. The voice
was singing, and the words of the song floated up to them distinctly:

    If the sun has hid its light,
    If the day has turned to night,
    If the heavens are not benign,
    If the stars refuse to shine--

                  Heart of man lose not thy hope;
                  Door, there's none that shall not ope;
                  Path, there's none that shall not clear;
                  Heart of man! why shouldst thou fear?

    If for years should be thy quest,
    If for years thou hast no rest,
    If thou circlest earth and sea,
    If thou worn and weary be--

                  Heart of man, lose not thy hope;
                  Door, there's none that shall not ope;
                  Path, there's none that shall not clear;
                  Heart of man! why shouldst thou fear?

[Sidenote: Balthazar Cometh]

"That," exclaimed Gaspard and Melchoir together, "is the voice of
Balthazar," and they hastened to meet him, for he was now almost at
the summit, and the refrain of his song was still upon his lips. At
that moment Balthazar sprang up from the sloping path into full view
of the two men, and, giving each a hand, exclaimed: "Gaspard,
Melchoir, beloved companions, I have found you at last. The peasants
below were not mistaken. From their description, I was certain I
should find you here. And you, too, have been searching these long
years for the kingdom of the Christ! and, like me, you have met with
disappointment; but, comrades, be not of faint heart:

    Door, there's none that shall not ope;
    Path, there's none that shall not clear.

Let us hasten down the mountain, for see! the sky is already growing
gold and crimson beyond the pillars of Hercules. Let us seek the
wayfarer's lodging with the hospitable peasants in the valley, and
tomorrow let us begin our search for the Christ anew. We have wandered
alone; let us invoke now the star to guide us together."

[Sidenote: Forget Not Hospitality]

That night, therefore, the three strangers lodged with the simple
peasant people in the valley, partaking with thankfulness of the
coarse bread, the dates and the red wine--the common fare of their
daily life. Nor did they fail to notice a motto inscribed above the
fireplace in rude Greek letters:

       *       *       *       *       *

On the morrow they were ready to begin their search together for the
Christ, and they hoped not to wander far before they should find at
least the outskirts of His kingdom. But whither should they go? In
what direction should they first turn their steps?

[Sidenote: Once More a Star]

While they were thus wondering and debating, Balthazar suddenly
exclaimed: "I see the star!" And behold, a little way before them, and
at no great distance above their heads, they discerned in the gray of
the early morning a star of pale, opal light, which seemed to move
forward as the men moved toward it.

"We must follow the star!" Balthazar said in a whisper. Silently and
breathlessly his companions followed on.

Now, so intently did the three men keep their eyes fixed upon the
star, and so eagerly did they follow in the direction where it seemed
to lead, that it was only after a considerable time they discovered
that they had become separated from each other, and that their paths
were getting farther and farther apart. Yet, there before each of them
was the star, shining with its soft, opalescent light, and still
ringing in their ears were the words of Balthazar--"we must follow
the star."

[Sidenote: The Star Stands Still]

So each followed the star, each by himself alone. Gaspard's path
wound along near the shore of the gulfs and bays of the Mediterranean,
until at last the the star turned southward and drew him nearer and
nearer to a great city, and finally stood still over the dome of a
vast cathedral. "It must be," thought Gaspard, "that I have come to
the end of my search. This must be the capital and palace of the
eternal king."

[Sidenote: Marbled Aisle's Magnificence]

The square in front of the cathedral was thronged with people;
multitudes were pouring in through the great portals. Gaspard joined
the throngs, and at last found himself under the mighty dome, which
seemed to him as far away as the sky itself. Everything in this
wonderful place appealed to his imagination. There were great rows of
massive columns, symbol of a strength eternal, and they seemed like
wide-open arms holding out a welcome to the human race. There were
statues and paintings by great masters in art. The light of the sun
poured in through many-colored windows, on which were blazoned the
deeds of heroes and saints. Strains of music from the great organ in
the distance floated out upon the air. Touched and thrilled by all he
saw, Gaspard exclaimed to himself: "The place on which I stand is
holy ground."

[Sidenote: Kyrie Eleison]

Soon, however, he perceived that the throngs of people were not
lingering, like himself, in awe and wonder over the great columns and
the dome, and the statues, and the paintings, and the windows. Their
eyes were fixed intently upon something that was going on in the far
end of the cathedral. An altar was there, and priests in white robes
passing up and down before it, and tall tapers burning around it. Near
the altar was the image of a man hanging from a cross; his hands and
feet were pierced with nails, and a cruel wound was in his side. The
people were gazing at this altar, and at the image, and at what the
white-robed priests were doing. The strains of solemn music from the
organ blended with the voices of priests chanting the service. Clouds
of incense rose from censers, swung with solemn motion by the
altar-boys, and the fragrance of the incense was wafted down the long
aisles. At last, the tinkling of a bell. The organ became silent for
an instant, as though it felt within its heart the awful solemnity of
the moment; and then it burst forth into new rapture, and the people
began pouring out through the great doors.

[Sidenote: We Must Follow the Star]

Gaspard went forth with the throng into the cathedral square. "And
this," he said, "is the end of my search. I have found the Christ. His
kingdom is in the imagination of man. How beautiful, how wonderful,
how strange it was! 'Dominus vobiscum,' did not the priests say? Here,
then, at last I have found the city of the great King."

But as he lingered, behold! the star which had stood over the dome
of the cathedral was now before him, as at first, and seemed to waver
and tremble, as if beckoning him on. So, although his feet seemed
bound to the spot, and his heart was still throbbing with the deep
feelings the cathedral service had created in him, remembering the
words of Balthazar, "we must follow the star," he slowly and reluctantly
walked on.

[Sidenote: The Just Shall Live by Faith]

In the meantime Melchoir also had followed faithfully the path along
which the star seemed to lead. Through forests in which he almost lost
his way, across rivers difficult and dangerous to ford--still he
followed on. At length Melchoir's star seemed to tarry over the spire
of a gothic church, into which the people were going in throngs.
Waiting a moment, to be sure that the star was actually standing
still, Melchoir went in with the rest. In this place was no altar,
such as Gaspard saw; no image on the cross; no white-robed priests; no
swinging censers. But, as Melchoir entered he heard strains from the
organ, and a chorus of voices was singing an anthem beginning with
the words, "Te Deum Laudamus." And when the anthem came to a close, a
man clothed in a black robe, such as scholars were wont to wear, rose
in his place upon a platform elevated above the people, and began to
speak to them about the kingdom of Christ. Melchoir listened in eager
expectancy. [Sidenote: The Truth Shall Make You Free] "The kingdom of
the Christ," the preacher said, "is the kingdom of the truth, and the
truth is to be continued and kept alive by the strength of man's belief.
Those things which have been handed down by holy men and sacred oracles
since Christ was here upon the earth, are the truths by which we live.
How can Christ live except He live in our beliefs? Why did the Father
of all intrust us with our reasons, unless it were that we should
make them the instruments of our faith and our salvation? Let us
therefore stand in our places, while we recite together the articles
of our holy faith."

These and many such words did the scholar-preacher declare. And as he
sat there with the people, Melchoir felt the weight of the solemn and
earnest words, and he said: "So at last have I come to the end of my
search. The kingdom of Christ is in the mind of man. His kingdom is
the kingdom of the truth."

[Sidenote: More Light Shall Break Forth]

Then he followed the throngs as they went forth from the church; but
the star which had tarried over the lofty spire was now before him,
and the opal light wavered and trembled, as if beckoning him on; and
the words of the preacher, "we must believe," seemed to blend with the
words of Balthazar, "we must follow the star." So, reluctantly and
slowly he followed on.

[Sidenote: Thy Sacramental Liturgies]

But Balthazar--whither went he, following the star? Over many a rugged
way, through many a tangled thicket, through valleys and over hills.
His star tarried over no cathedrals; it lingered over no Gothic
spires. It seemed capricious and restless and tireless. At times it
seemed intent on coming to a pause over the head of some human being,
but perhaps it was because these human beings themselves were so
restless and so busy that the star could not accomplish its intent.
For Balthazar saw these men and women hurrying hither and thither on
errands of mercy, or deeds of justice; he saw them ferreting out great
wrongs, laying heavy blows on the backs of men who oppressed and
defrauded their fellow men.

At length Balthazar seemed to understand the movements of the star,
and, drawing nearer, he would seem to hear these men repeating
cheering and encouraging words to one another. "Pure religion and
undefiled," he heard one exclaiming, "is to visit the fatherless and
widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the
world." And another echoed, "Inasmuch as we do it to the least of
these, we do it unto Christ."

[Sidenote: The Joy of Doing Good]

"Ah! thought Balthazar as he listened, I see the meaning of it now; I
am coming to the end of my search. The kingdom of Christ--I have found
it. It is in the deeds of men; it is in the conscience and the serving
will. Devotion to right, this is the law of the kingdom of Christ."

Then Balthazar turned to go in search of his comrades again; but
behold! the opal star was trembling, as if beckoning him on. So, still
doubting if he had reached the end of his search, he followed the
star.

[Sidenote: The Paths Converge]

Thus Gaspard, Melchoir and Balthazar, each following the star, at last
approached each other. The star of each seemed to melt and blend into
the star of the others, and the opal light stood at last in the center
of the group. Gaspard exclaimed: "I have found that which we all were
seeking. The kingdom of Christ is in the imagination; Christ lives in
what man feels."

"Nay," said Melchoir, "I have followed the star, and I have found what
we sought. The kingdom of Christ is in the reason of man. Christ lives
in what man believes."

"But," cried Balthazar, "my star has led me to a different end. The
kingdom of Christ is in the will of man. Christ lives in what man
does."

"The truth," once more exclaimed Melchoir, "is the law of the
kingdom."

"Not truth," declared Balthazar, "but justice, righteousness, goodness
and purity--these are its laws and its marks."

"Nay, comrades beloved, hearken to me," answered Gaspard, "it is the
miracle of the divine presence. It is God among men, realized in the
holy mass. I beheld it all in yonder cathedral."

But lo! once more the star began to tremble and to change its place.

"Let us follow the star!" Balthazar whispered. "We will follow it,"
echoed the other two.

[Sidenote: Once More the Quest]

Then the star led them on, and they followed together until they came
at length to the doorway of a little cottage; and within the cottage
they saw a woman bending over a cradle, and in the cradle a little
child lay sleeping. She was a peasant woman; her clothing was not
rich; the furnishing of the cottage was humble and scanty. The cradle
itself was rude, as if put together by hands unskilful in tasks like
that. But when the mother looked at her babe a sweet smile played
about her lips, and a light was in her eyes. Then all suddenly the
three men remembered another scene long before, when they were bearers
of gold and frankincense and myrrh to another babe.

[Sidenote: He That Loveth Knoweth God]

And while they stood and wondered by the door, there came a strong and
sturdy peasant, broad-shouldered, roughly clad, his face browned in
the sun, his hands hardened with toil. He came and stood beside the
woman, and they bent together over the cradle of the sleeping child,
and the man drew the woman tenderly toward him and kissed her brow.

And still the three men lingered; for behold! the star stood still
above the child, and they dared not speak. But the heart of Gaspard
was saying in silence, "There is something greater than the repeated
miracle of the mass."

And Melchoir was thinking, "There is something mightier even than the
mind; something superior to naked truth."

[Sidenote: For God Is Love]

And Balthazar was confessing to himself that he had found something
more potent even than the righteous deed. For here they all beheld
how life was made sweet and blessed and holy by the power of love; and
by love for a little child, in whom was all weakness and helplessness,
whose only voice was a cry, but who was all strong and mighty with the
power of God, because he could transform roughness into tenderness,
and selfishness into loving care, and poverty itself into gifts of
gold and fragrant myrrh.

"Truly, my comrades," Balthazar said, "love is the greatest of all."

"And now I understand," said Gaspard, "how the weak things of the
world can confound the mighty."

"And I," added Melchoir, "see what it means for God to come to earth
in the form of a little child."

And so they turned away, and the radiance of the star was round about
them, and they were saying to each other: "Our search at last is
ended."

[*] Reprinted with the permission of "The Sketching Club,"
Indianapolis, Ind.




LITTLE GRETCHEN AND THE WOODEN SHOE[*]

By Elizabeth Harrison


Once upon a time, a long time ago, far away across the great ocean, in
a country called Germany, there could be seen a small log hut on the
edge of a great forest, whose fir trees extended for miles and miles
to the north. This little house, made of heavy hewn logs, had but one
room in it. A rough pine door gave entrance to this room, and a small
square window admitted the light. At the back of the house was built
an old-fashioned stone chimney, out of which in winter curled a thin,
blue smoke, showing that there was not very much fire within.

Small as the house was, it was large enough for two people who lived
in it. I want to tell you a story today about these two people. One
was an old gray-haired woman, so old that the little children of the
village, nearly half a mile away, often wondered whether she had come
into the world with the huge mountains and the giant fir trees, which
stood like giants back of her small hut. Her face was wrinkled all
over with deep lines, which, if the children could only have read
aright, would have told them of many years of cheerful, happy,
self-sacrifice; of loving, anxious, watching beside sick-beds; of
quiet endurance of pain, of many a day of hunger and cold, and of a
thousand deeds of unselfish love for other people; but, of course,
they could not read this strange handwriting. They only knew that she
was old and wrinkled, and that she stooped as she walked. None of
them seemed to fear her, for her smile was always cheerful, and she
had a kindly word for each of them if they chanced to meet her on her
way to and from the village. With this old, old woman lived a very
little girl. So bright and happy was she that the travellers who
passed by the lonesome little house on the edge of the forest often
thought of a sunbeam as they saw her. These two people were known in
the village as Granny Goodyear and Little Gretchen.

The winter had come and the frost had snapped off many of the smaller
branches of the pine trees in the forest. Gretchen and her granny were
up by daybreak each morning. After their simple breakfast of oatmeal,
Gretchen would run to the little closet and fetch Granny's old woolen
shawl, which seemed almost as old as Granny herself. Gretchen always
claimed the right to put the shawl over Granny's head, even though she
had to climb onto the wooden bench to do it. After carefully pinning
it under Granny's chin, she gave her a good-bye kiss, and Granny
started out for her morning's work in the forest. This work was
nothing more nor less than the gathering up of the twigs and branches
which the autumn winds and winter frosts had thrown upon the ground.
These were carefully gathered into a large bundle which Granny tied
together with a strong linen band. She then managed to lift the bundle
to her shoulder and trudged off to the village with it. Here she sold
the fagots for kindling wood to the people of the village. Sometimes
she would get only a few pence each day, and sometimes a dozen or
more, but on this money little Gretchen and she managed to live; they
had their home, and the forest kindly furnished the wood for the fire
which kept them warm in winter.

In the summer time Granny had a little garden at the back of the
house, where she raised, with little Gretchen's help, a few potatoes
and turnips and onions. These she carefully stored away for winter
use. To this meagre supply, the pennies, gained by selling the twigs
from the forest, added the oatmeal for Gretchen and a little black
coffee for Granny. Meat was a thing they never thought of having. It
cost too much money. Still, Granny and Gretchen were very happy,
because they loved each other dearly. Sometimes Gretchen would be left
alone all day long in the hut, because Granny would have some work to
do in the village after selling her bundle of sticks and twigs. It was
during these long days that little Gretchen had taught herself to sing
the song which the wind sang to the pine branches. In the summer time
she learned the chirp and twitter of the birds, until her voice might
almost be mistaken for a bird's voice, she learned to dance as the
swaying shadows did, and even to talk to the stars which shone through
the little square window when Granny came home late or too tired to
talk.

Sometimes, when the weather was fine, or her Granny had an extra
bundle of knitted stockings to take to the village, she would let
little Gretchen go along with her. It chanced that one of these trips
to the town came just the week before Christmas, and Gretchen's eyes
were delighted by the sight of the lovely Christmas trees which stood
in the window of the village store. It seemed to her that she would
never tire of looking at the knit dolls, the woolly lambs, the little
wooden shops with their queer, painted men and women in them, and all
the other fine things. She had never owned a plaything in her whole
life; therefore, toys which you and I would not think much of seemed
to her very beautiful.

That night, after their supper of baked potatoes was over, and little
Gretchen had cleared away the dishes and swept up the hearth, because
Granny dear was so tired, she brought her own little wooden stool and
placed it very near Granny's feet and sat down upon it, folding her
hands on her lap. Granny knew that this meant that she wanted to be
told about something, so she smilingly laid away the large Bible which
she had been reading, and took up her knitting, which was as much as
to say: "Well, Gretchen, dear, Granny is ready to listen."

"Granny," said Gretchen slowly, "It's almost Christmas time, isn't
it?"

"Yes, dearie," said Granny, "only five days more now," and then she
sighed, but little Gretchen was so happy that she did not notice
Granny's sigh.

"What do you think, Granny, I'll get this Christmas?" said she,
looking up eagerly into Granny's face.

"Ah, child, child," said Granny, shaking her head, "you'll have no
Christmas this year. We are too poor for that."

"Oh, but Granny," interrupted little Gretchen, "think of all the
beautiful toys we saw in the village today. Surely Santa Claus has
sent enough for every little child."

"Ah, dearie, those toys are for people who can pay for them, and we
have no money to spend for Christmas toys."

"Well, Granny," said Gretchen, "perhaps some of the little children
who live in the great house on the hill at the other end of the
village, will be willing to share some of their toys with me. They
will be glad to give some to a little girl who has none."

"Dear child, dear child," said Granny, leaning forward and stroking
the soft, shiny hair of the little girl, "your heart is full of love.
You would be glad to bring a Christmas to every child; but their heads
are so full of what they are going to get that they forget all about
anybody else but themselves." Then she sighed and shook her head.

"Well, Granny," said Gretchen, her bright, happy tone of voice growing
a little less joyous, "perhaps the dear Santa Claus will show some of
the village children how to make presents that do not cost money, and
some of them may surprise me Christmas morning with a present. And,
Granny, dear," added she, springing up from her low stool, "can't I
gather some of the pine branches and take them to the old sick man who
lives in the house by the mill, so that he can have the sweet smell of
our forest in his room all Christmas day?"

"Yes, dearie," said Granny, "you may do what you can to make the
Christmas bright and happy, but you must not expect any present
yourself."

"Oh, but, Granny," said little Gretchen, her face brightening, "you
forgot all about the shining Christmas angels, who came down to earth
and sang their wonderful song the night the beautiful Christ-Child was
born! They are so loving and good that _they_ will not forget any
little child. I shall ask my dear stars tonight to tell them of us.
You know," she added, with a look of relief, "the stars are so very
high that they must know the angels quite well as they come and go
with their messages from the loving God."

Granny sighed as she half whispered. "Poor child, poor child!" but
Gretchen threw her arm around Granny's neck and gave her a hearty
kiss, saying as she did so: "Oh, Granny, Granny, you don't talk to the
stars often enough, else you would not be sad at Christmas time." Then
she danced all around the room, whirling her little skirts about her
to show Granny how the wind had made the snow dance that day. She
looked so droll and funny that Granny forgot her cares and worries and
laughed with little Gretchen over her new snow dance. The days passed
on and the morning before Christmas Eve came. Gretchen having tidied
up the little room--for Granny had taught her to be a careful little
housewife--was off to the forest, singing a birdlike song, almost as
happy and free as the birds themselves. She was very busy that day
preparing a surprise for Granny. First, however, she gathered the most
beautiful of the fir branches within her reach to take the next
morning to the old sick man who lived by the mill.

The day was all too short for the happy little girl. When Granny came
trudging wearily home that night, she found the frame of the doorway
covered with green pine branches.

"It is to welcome you, Granny! It is to welcome you!" cried Gretchen;
"our dear old home wanted to give you a Christmas welcome. Don't you
see, the branches of the evergreen make it look as if it were smiling
all over, and it is trying to say, 'A happy Christmas to you Granny'."

Granny laughed and kissed the little girl, as they opened the door and
went in together. Here was a new surprise for Granny. The four posts
of the wooden bed, which stood in one corner of the room, had been
trimmed by the busy little fingers, with smaller and more flexible
branches of the pine trees. A small bouquet of red mountain ash
berries stood at each side of the fireplace, and these, together with
the trimmed posts of the bed, gave the plain old room quite a festive
look. Gretchen laughed and clapped her hands and danced about until
the house seemed full of music to poor, tired Granny, whose heart had
been sad as she turned toward their home that night, thinking of the
disappointment that must come to loving little Gretchen the next
morning.

After supper was over little Gretchen drew her stool up to Granny's
side, and laying her soft, little hands on Granny's knee asked to be
told once again the story of the coming of the Christ-Child; how the
night that he was born the beautiful angels had sung their wonderful
song, and how the whole sky had become bright with a strange and
glorious light, never seen by the people of earth before. Gretchen had
heard the story many, many times before, but she never grew tired of
it, and now that Christmas Eve had come again, the happy little child
wanted to hear it once more.

When Granny had finished telling it the two sat quiet and silent for a
little while thinking it over; then Granny rose and said that it was
time for her to go to bed. She slowly took off her heavy wooden shoes,
such as are worn in that country, and placed them beside the hearth.
Gretchen looked thoughtfully at them for a minute or two, and then she
said, "Granny, don't you think that _somebody_ in all this wide world
will think of us tonight?"

"Nay, Gretchen, I do not think any one will."

"Well, then, Granny," said Gretchen, "the Christmas angels will, I
know; so I am going to take one of your wooden shoes and put it on the
windowsill outside, so that they may see it as they pass by. I am sure
the stars will tell the Christmas angels where the shoe is."

"Ah, you foolish, foolish child," said Granny, "you are only getting
ready for a disappointment. Tomorrow morning there will be nothing
whatever in the shoe. I can tell you that now."

But little Gretchen would not listen. She only shook her head and
cried out: "Ah, Granny, you do not talk enough to the stars." With
this she seized the shoe, and opening the door, hurried out to place
it on the window sill. It was very dark without and something soft and
cold seemed to gently kiss her hair and face. Gretchen knew by this
that it was snowing, and she looked up to the sky, anxious to see if
the stars were in sight, but a strong wind was tumbling the dark,
heavy snow-clouds about and had shut away all else.

"Never mind," said Gretchen softly to herself, "the stars are up
there, even if I can't see them, and the Christmas angels do not mind
snow storms."

Just then a rough wind went sweeping by the little girl, whispering
something to her which she could not understand, and then it made a
sudden rush up to the snow clouds and parted them, so that the deep
mysterious sky appeared beyond, and shining down out of the midst of
it was Gretchen's favorite star.

"Ah, little star, little star!" said the child, laughing aloud, "I
knew you were there, though I could not see you. Will you whisper to
the Christmas angels as they come by that little Gretchen wants so
very much to have a Christmas gift tomorrow morning, if they have one
to spare, and that she has put one of Granny's shoes upon the
windowsill for it?"

A moment more and the little girl, standing on tiptoe had reached the
windowsill and placed the shoe upon it, and was back again in the
house beside Granny and the warm fire.

The two went quietly to bed, and that night as little Gretchen knelt
to pray to the Heavenly Father, she thanked him for having sent the
Christ-Child into the world to teach all mankind to be loving and
unselfish, and in a few minutes she was sleeping, dreaming of the
Christmas angels.

The next morning, very early, even before the sun was up, little
Gretchen was awakened by the sound of sweet music coming from the
village. She listened for a moment and then she knew that the choir
boys were singing the Christmas carols in the open air of the village
street. She sprang up out of bed and began to dress herself as quickly
as possible, singing as she dressed. While Granny was slowly putting
on her clothes, little Gretchen having finished dressing herself,
unfastened the door and hurried out to see what the Christmas angels
had left in the old wooden shoe.

The white snow covered everything--trees, stumps, roads, and
pastures--until the whole world looked like fairy land. Gretchen
climbed up on a large stone which was beneath the window and carefully
lifted down the wooden shoe. The snow tumbled off of it in a shower
over the little girl's hands, but she did not heed that; she ran
hurriedly back into the house, putting her hand into the toe of the
shoe as she ran.

"Oh, Granny, Granny!" she exclaimed; "you did not believe the
Christmas angels would think about us, but see, they have, they have!
Here is a dear little bird nestled down in the toe of your shoe! Oh,
isn't he beautiful?"

Granny came forward and looked at what the child was holding lovingly
in her hand. There she saw a tiny chick-a-dee, whose wing was
evidently broken by the rough and boisterous winds of the night
before, and who had taken shelter in the safe, dry toe of the old
wooden shoe. She gently took the little bird out of Gretchen's hands,
and skilfully bound his broken wing to his side, so that he need not
hurt himself trying to fly with it. Then she showed Gretchen how to
make a nice warm nest for the little stranger, close beside the fire
and when their breakfast was ready, she let Gretchen feed the little
bird with a few moist crumbs.

Later in the day Gretchen carried the fresh, green boughs to the old
sick man by the mill, and on her way home stopped to enjoy the
Christmas toys of some other children that she knew, never once
wishing they were hers. When she reached home she found that the
little bird had gone to sleep. Soon, however, he opened his eyes and
stretched his head up, saying just as plain as a bird can say:

"Now, my new friends, I want you to give me something more to eat."
Gretchen gladly fed him again, and then, holding him in her lap, she
softly and gently stroked his gray feathers until the little creature
seemed to lose all fear of her. That evening Granny taught her a
Christmas hymn and told her another beautiful Christmas story. Then
Gretchen made up a funny little story to tell the birdie. He winked
his eyes and turned his head from side to side in such a droll fashion
that Gretchen laughed until the tears came.

As Granny and she got ready for bed that night, Gretchen put her arms
softly around Granny's neck, and whispered: "What a beautiful
Christmas we have had today, Granny. Is there anything more lovely in
all the world than Christmas?"

"Nay, child, nay," said Granny, "not to such loving hearts as yours."

[*] Reprinted by permission of the author from her collection,
"Christmastide." Published by the Chicago Kindergarten College.




THE LITTLE SHEPHERD[*]

By Maud Lindsay


The shepherd was sick and the shepherd's wife looked out from her door
with anxious eyes. "Who will carry the sheep to the pasture lands
today?" she said to her little boy Jean.

"I will," cried Jean, "I will. Mother, let me."

Jean and his father and mother lived long ago in a sunny land across
the sea, where flowers bloom, and birds sing, and shepherds feed their
flocks in the green valleys. Every morning, as soon as it was light,
Jean's father was up and away with his sheep. He had never missed a
morning before, and the sheep were bleating in the fold as if to say,
"Don't forget us today."

The sheep were Jean's playfellows. There was nothing he liked better
than to wander with them in the pleasant pastures, and already they
knew his voice and followed at his call.

"Let the lad go," said his old grandfather. "When I was no older than
he I watched my father's flock."

Jean's father said the same thing, so the mother made haste to get the
little boy ready.

"Eat your dinner when the shadows lie straight across the grass," she
said as she kissed him good-bye.

"And keep the sheep from the forest paths," called his sick father.

"And watch, for it is when the shepherd is not watching that the wolf
comes to the flock," said the old grandfather.

"Never fear," said little Jean. "The wolf shall not have any of my
white lambs."

They were white sheep and black sheep and frolicsome lambs in the
shepherd's flock, and each one had a name of its own. There was
Babbette, and Nannette, and Pierrot, and Jeannot,--I cannot tell them
all, but Jean knew every name.

"Come, Bettine and Marie. Come, Pierrot and Croisette. Come, pretty
ones all," he called as he led them from the fold that day. "I will
carry you to the meadows where the daisies grow."

"Baa," answered the sheep, well satisfied, as they followed him down
the king's highway, and over the hill to the pasture lands.

The other shepherds were already there with their flocks, so Jean was
not lonely. He watered his sheep at the dancing brook that ran through
the flowers, and led them along its shady banks to feed in the sunny
fields beyond, and not one lambkin strayed from his care to the forest
paths.

The forest lay dim and shadowy on one side of the pasture lands. The
deer lived there, and the boars that fed upon acorns, and many other
creatures that loved the wild woods. There had been wolves in the
forest, but the king's knights had driven them away and the shepherds
feared them no longer. Only the old men like Jean's grandfather, and
the little boys like Jean, talked of them still.

Jean was not afraid. Oh, no. There was not a lamb in the flock so
merry and fearless as he. He sang with the birds and ran with the
brook, and laughed till the echoes laughed with him as he watched the
sheep from early morn to noon, when the shadows fell straight across
the grass and it was time for him to eat his dinner.

There were little cakes in Jean's dinner basket. He had seen his
mother put them there, but he had not tasted a single one when, out on
the king's highway, beyond the hill, he heard the sound of pipes and
drums, and the tramp, tramp of many feet.

The other shepherds heard too, and they began to listen and to stare
and to run. "The king and his knights are coming," they cried. "Come
let us see them as they pass by."

"Who will take care of the sheep?" asked Jean, but nobody answered, so
he too left his dinner and ran with the rest, away from the pastures
and up the hillside path that led to the highway.

"How pleased my mother will be when I tell her that I have seen the
king," he said to himself, and he was hurrying over the hill top when
all at once he remembered the forest, and the wolf, and his
grandfather's words.

"Come on," called the others.

"I must stay with the sheep," answered he; and he turned and went
back, though the pipes and the drums all seemed to say, "Come this
way, come this way." He could scarcely keep from crying as he
listened.

There was nothing in sight to harm the sheep, and the pasture lands
were quiet and peaceful, but into the forest that very day a hungry
gray wolf had come. His eyes were bright and his ears were sharp and
his four feet were as soft as velvet, as he came creeping, creeping,
creeping under the houses and through the tanglewood. He put his nose
out and sniffed the air, and he put his head out and spied the sheep
left alone in the meadows. "Now's my chance," he said, and out he
sprang just as little Jean down the hill.

"Wolf, wolf, wolf!" shouted Jean. "Wolf, wolf, wolf!" He was only a
little boy, but he was brave and his voice rang clear as a bugle call
over the valley, and over the hill, "Wolf, wolf, wolf!"

The shepherds and knights and the king himself came running and riding
to answer his cry, and as for the gray wolf, he did not even stop to
look behind him as he sped away to the forest shades. He ran so fast
and he ran so far that he was never seen in the king's country again,
though the shepherds in the pastures watched for him day after day.

Jean led his flock home at eventide, white sheep and black sheep and
frolicsome lambs, not one was missing.

"Was the day long?" asked his mother, who was watching in the doorway
for him.

"Are the sheep all in?" called the sick father.

"Did the wolf come?" said the old grandfather; but there is no need
for me to tell you what _Jean_ said. You can imagine that for
yourself.

[*] From "More Mother Stories," by Maud Lindsay. Used by permission of
the author and the publishers--the Milton Bradley Company.




BABOUSCKA[*]

Russian Legend


It was the night the dear Christ Child came to Bethlehem. In a country
far away from Him, an old, old woman named Babouscka sat in her snug
little house by her warm fire. The wind was drifting the snow outside
and howling down the chimney, but it only made Babouscka's fire burn
more brightly.

"How glad I am that I may stay indoors!" said Babouscka, holding her
hands out to the bright blaze. But suddenly she heard a loud rap at
her door. She opened it and her candle shone on three old men standing
outside in the snow. Their beards were as white as the snow, and so
long that they reached the ground. Their eyes shone kindly in the
light of Babouscka's candle, and their arms were full of precious
things--boxes of jewels, and sweet-smelling oils, and ointments.

"We have traveled far, Babouscka," said they, "and we stop to tell you
of the Baby Prince born this night in Bethlehem. He comes to rule the
world and teach all men to be loving and true. We carry Him gifts.
Come with us, Babouscka!"

But Babouscka looked at the driving snow, and then inside at her cozy
room and the crackling fire. "It is too late for me to go with you,
good sirs," she said, "the weather is too cold." She went inside again
and shut the door, and the old men journeyed on to Bethlehem without
her. But as Babouscka sat by her fire, rocking, she began to think
about the little Christ Child, for she loved all babies.

"Tomorrow I will go to find Him," she said; "tomorrow, when it is
light, and I will carry Him some toys."

So when it was morning Babouscka put on her long cloak, and took her
staff, and filled a basket with the pretty things a baby would
like--gold balls, and wooden toys, and strings of silver cobwebs--and
she set out to find the Christ Child.

But, oh! Babouscka had forgotten to ask the three old men the road to
Bethlehem, and they had traveled so far through the night that she
could not overtake them. Up and down the roads she hurried, through
woods and fields and towns, saying to whomsoever she met: "I go to
find the Christ Child. Where does he lie? I bring some pretty toys for
His sake."

But no one could tell her the way to go, and they all said: "Farther
on, Babouscka, farther on." So she traveled on, and on, and on for
years and years--but she never found the little Christ Child.

They say that old Babouscka is traveling still, looking for Him. When
it comes Christmas eve, and the children are lying fast asleep,
Babouscka comes softly through the snowy fields and towns, wrapped in
her long cloak and carrying her basket on her arm. With her staff she
raps gently at the doors and goes inside and holds her candle close to
the little children's faces.

"Is He here?" she asks. "Is the little Christ Child here?" And then
she turns sorrowfully away again, crying: "Farther on, farther on."
But before she leaves she takes a toy from her basket and lays it
beside the pillow for a Christmas gift. "For His sake," she says
softly and then hurries on through the years and forever in search of
the little Christ Child.

[*] From "For the Children's Hour," by Bailey and Lewis. Used by
permission of the authors and also the publishers--Milton Bradley
Company.




THE BOY WITH THE BOX

By Mary Griggs Van Voorhis


It was an ideal Christmas day. The sun shone brightly but the air was
crisp and cold, and snow and ice lay sparkling everywhere. A light
wind, the night before, had swept the blue, icebound river clean of
scattering snow; and, by two o'clock in the afternoon, the broad bend
near Creighton's mill was fairly alive with skaters. The girls in gay
caps and scarfs, the boys in sweaters and mackinaws of every
conceivable hue, with here and there a plump, matronly figure in a
plush coat or a tiny fellow in scarlet, made a picture of life and
brilliancy worthy of an artist's finest skill.

Tom Reynolds moved in and out among the happy throng, with swift, easy
strokes, his cap on the back of his curly head, and his brown eyes
shining with excitement. Now and again, he glanced down with
pardonable pride, at the brand new skates that twinkled beneath his
feet. "Jolly Ramblers," sure enough "Jolly Ramblers" they were! Ever
since Ralph Evans had remarked, with a tantalizing toss of his
handsome head, that "no game fellow would try to skate on anything but
'Jolly Ramblers,'" Tom had yearned, with an inexpressible longing, for
a pair of these wonderful skates. And now they were his and the ice
was fine and the Christmas sun was shining!

Tom was rounding the big bend for the fiftieth time, when he saw,
skimming gracefully toward him through the merry crowd, a tall boy in
a fur-trimmed coat, his handsome head proudly erect.

"That's Ralph Evans now," said Tom to himself. "Just wait till you see
these skates, old boy, and maybe you won't feel so smart!" And with
slow, cautious strokes, he made his way through laughing boys and
girls to a place just in front of the tall skater, coming toward him
down the broad white way. When Ralph was almost upon him, Tom paused
and in conspicuous silence, looked down at his shining skates.

"Hullo," said Ralph good naturedly, seizing Tom's arm and swinging
around. Then, taking in the situation with a careless glance, he
added, "Get a new pair of skates for Christmas?"

"'Jolly Ramblers,'" said Tom impressively, "the best 'Jolly Ramblers'
in the market!"

Ralph was a full half head the taller, but, as Tom delivered himself
of this speech with his head held high, he felt every inch as tall as
the boy before him.

If Ralph was deeply impressed he failed to show it, as he answered
carelessly, "Huh, that so? Pretty good little skates they are, the
'Jolly Ramblers!'"

"You said no game fellow would use any other make," said Tom hotly.

"O but that was nearly a year ago," said Ralph. "I got a new pair of
skates for Christmas, too," he added, as if it had just occurred to
him, "'Club House' skates, something new in the market just this
season. Just look at the curve of that skate, will you?" he added,
lifting a foot for inspection, "and that clamp that you couldn't shake
off if you had to! They're guaranteed for a year, too, and if anything
gives out, you get a new pair for nothing. Three and a half, they
cost, at Mr. Harrison's hardware store. I gave my 'Jolly Ramblers' to
a kid about your size. A mighty good little skate they are!" And, with
a long, graceful stroke, Ralph Evans skated away.

And it seemed to Tom Reynolds that all his Christmas joy went skimming
away behind him. The sun still shone, the ice still gleamed, the
skaters laughed and sang, but Tom moved slowly on, with listless,
heavy strokes. The "Jolly Ramblers" still twinkled beneath his feet,
but he looked down at them no more. What was the use of "Jolly
Ramblers" when Ralph Evans had a pair of "Club House" skates that cost
a dollar more, had a graceful curve, and a faultless clamp, and were
guaranteed for a year?

It was only four o'clock when Tom slipped his new skates carelessly
over his shoulder and started up the bank for home. He was slouching
down the main street, head down, hands thrust deep into his pockets,
when, on turning a corner, he ran plump into--a full moon! Now I know
it is rather unusual for full moons to be walking about the streets by
daylight; but that is the only adequate description of the round,
freckled face that beamed at Tom from behind a great box, held by two
sturdy arms.

"That came pretty near being a collision," said the owner of the full
moon, still beaming, as he set down the box and leaned against a
building to rest a moment.

"Nobody hurt, I guess," said Tom.

"Been down to the ice?" asked the boy, eagerly. "I could see the
skaters from Patton's store. O, I see, you got some new skates for
Christmas! Ain't they beauties, now?" And he beamed on the despised
"Jolly Ramblers" with his heart in his little blue eyes.

"A pretty good little pair of skates," said Tom, in Ralph's
condescending tone.

"Good! Well I should guess yes! And Christmas ice just made o'
purpose!" In spite of his ill humor, Tom could not help responding to
the warm interest of the shabby boy at his side. He knew him to be
Harvey McGinnis, the son of a poor Irish widow, who worked at Patton's
department store out of school hours. Looking at the great box with an
awakening interest, he remarked, kindly, "What you been doin' with
yourself on Christmas day?"

"Want to know, sure enough?" said Harvey, mysteriously, his round face
beaming more brightly than ever, "Well, I've been doin' the Santy
Claus act down at Patton's store.

"About a week ago," he went on, leaning back easily against the tall
building and thrusting his hands down deep into his well worn pockets,
"about a week ago, as I was cleaning out the storeroom, I came on
three big boxes with broken dolls in 'em. Beauties they were, I kin
tell you, the Lady Jane in a blue silk dress, the Lady Clarabel in
pink, and the Lady Matilda in shimmerin' white. Nothin' wrong with 'em
either only broken rubbers that put their jints out o' whack and set
their heads arollin' this way and that. 'They could be fixed in no
time, I ses to myself, 'and what a prize they'd be fer the kids to be
sure!' For mom and me had racked our brains considerable how we'd
scrape together the money for Christmas things for the girls.

"So I went to the boss and I asked him right out what he'd charge me
for the three ladies just as they wus, and he ses, 'Jimmie,' he ses
(I've told him me name a dozen times, but he allus calls me 'Jimmie'),
'Jimmie,' he ses, 'if you'll come down on Christmas day and help me
take down the fixin's and fix up the store for regular trade, I'll
give you the dolls fer nothin',' he ses.

"So I explained to the kids that Santy'd be late to our house this
year (with so many to see after it wouldn't be strange) and went down
to the store early this morning and finished me work and fixed up the
ladies es good es new. Would you like to be seein' 'em, now?" he
added, turning to the great box with a look of pride.

"Sure, I'd like to see 'em," said Tom.

With careful, almost reverent touch, Harvey untied the string and
opened the large box, disclosing three smaller boxes, one above the
other. Opening the first box, he revealed a really handsome doll in a
blue silk dress, with large dark eyes that opened and shut and dark,
curling locks of "real hair."

"This is the Lady Jane," he said, smoothing her gay frock with gentle
fingers. "We're goin' to give her to Kitty. Kitty's hair is pretty and
curly, but she hates it, 'cause it's red; and she thinks black hair is
the prettiest kind in the world. Ain't it funny how all of us will be
wantin' what we don't have ourselves?"

Tom did not reply to this bit of philosophy; but he laid a repentant
hand on the "Jolly Ramblers" as if he knew he had wronged them in his
heart. "That's as handsome a doll as ever I saw and no mistake," he
said.

Pleased with this praise, Harvey opened the second box and disclosed
the Lady Matilda with fair golden curls and a dress of "shimmerin'
white." "The Lady Matilda goes to Josephine," said Harvey. "Josephine
has black hair, straight as a string, and won't she laugh, though, to
see them fetchin' yellow curls?"

"She surely ought to be glad," said Tom.

The Lady Clarabel was another fair-haired lady in a gown of the
brightest pink. "This here beauty's for the baby," said Harvey, his
eyes glowing. "She don't care if the hair's black or yellow, but won't
that stunnin' dress make her eyes pop out?"

"They'll surely believe in Santy when they see those beauties," said
Tom.

"That's just what I was sayin' to mom this morning," said Harvey.
"Kitty's had some doubts, (she's almost nine), but when she sees those
fine ladies she'll be dead sure mom and I didn't buy 'em. If I had a
Santy Claus suit, I'd dress up and hand 'em out myself."

Tom's face lighted with a bright idea. "My brother Bob's got a Santa
Claus suit that he used in a show last Christmas," he said. "Say, let
me dress up and play Santa for you. The girls would never guess who I
was!"

"Wouldn't they stare, though!" said Harvey, delightedly. "But do you
think you'd want to take time," he asked apologetically, "and you with
a new pair of skates and the ice like this?"

"Of course, I want to if you'll let me," said Tom. "I'll skate down
the river and meet you anywhere you say."

"Out in our back yard, then, at seven o'clock," said Harvey.

"All right, I'll be there!" and with head up, and skates clinking, Tom
hurried away.

It was a flushed, excited boy who burst into the Reynolds' quiet
sitting room a few minutes later, with his skates still hanging on his
shoulder and his cap in his hand. "Say, mother," he cried, "can I have
Bob's Santa Claus suit this evening, please? I'm going to play Santa
Claus for Harvey McGinnis!"

"Play Santa Claus for Harvey McGinnis. What do you mean, child?"

"You know Mrs. McGinnis, mother, that poor woman who lives in the
little house by the river. Her husband got killed on the railroad last
winter, you know. Well, Harvey, her boy, has fixed up some grand
looking dolls for his sisters and he wants me to come out and play
Santa tonight," and Tom launched out into a long story about Harvey
and his good fortune.

"He must be a splendid boy," said Mrs. Reynolds, heartily, "and I am
sure I shall be glad to have you go."

"And another thing, mother," said Tom, hesitating a little, "do you
think grandma would care if I spent part of that five dollars she gave
me for a pair of skates for Harvey? He hasn't any skates at all, and I
know he'd just love to have some!"

"It is generous of you to think of it," said his mother, much pleased,
"and you would still have two and a half for that little trip down to
grandma's."

"But I'd like to get him some 'Club House' skates," said Tom. "They're
a new kind that cost three dollars and a half."

"But I thought you said the 'Jolly Ramblers' were the best skates
made?" Mrs. Reynolds looked somewhat hurt as she glanced from Tom to
the skates on his shoulder and back to Tom again.

"They are, mother, they're just dandies!" said Tom blushing with
shame that he could ever have despised his mother's gift. "But these
'Club House' skates are just the kind for Harvey. You see, Harvey's
shoes are old and worn, and these 'Club House' skates have clamps that
you can't shake loose if you have to. Then, if anything happens to
them before the year's up, you get a new pair free; and Harvey, you
know, wouldn't have any money to be fixing skates."

"Well, do as you like," said Mrs. Reynolds, pleased with Tom's
eagerness, for such a spell of generosity was something new in her
selfish younger son. "But remember, you will have to wait a while for
your visit to grandma."

"All right, and thank you, mother," said Tom. "You can buy the skates
down at Harrison's and I'm going over and ask Mr. Harrison if he won't
open up the store and get a pair for me for a special time like this.
I'm most sure he will!" and away he flew.

That evening, at seven, as the moon was rising over the eastern hills,
a short, portly Santa Claus stepped out of the dry reeds by the river
bank and walked with wonderfully nimble feet, right into the McGinnis'
little back yard. As he neared the small back porch, a dark figure
rose to greet him, one hand held up in warning, the other holding at
arm's length, a bulky grain sack, full to the brim.

"Here's yer pack, Santy," he whispered, gleefully. "They're all
waitin' in the front room yonder. I'll slip in the back way, whilst
you go round and give a good thump at the front door and mom'll let
you in."

Trembling with eagerness, Tom tiptoed round the house, managing to
slip an oblong package into the capacious depths of the big sack as
he did so. Thump, thump! how his knock reëchoed in the frosty air! The
door swung wide, and Mrs. McGinnis' gaunt figure stood before him.

"Good evenin', Santy, come right in," she said.

Tom had always thought what a homely woman Harvey's mother was when he
happened to meet her at the grocery, with her thin red hair drawn
severely back from her gaunt face, and a black shawl over her head.
But as he looked up into her big, kind face, so full of Christmas
sunshine, he wondered he could ever have thought her anything but
lovely. The room was small and bare, but wonderfully gay with pine and
bits of red and green crepe paper, saved from the 'fixins' at the
store. And on a large bed in the corner sat the three little girls,
Kitty with her bright curls bobbing, Josephine with her black braids
sticking straight out, and the baby with tiny blue eyes that twinkled
and shone like Harvey's.

The fine speech that Tom had been saying over to himself for the past
two hours seemed to vanish into thin air before this excited little
audience. But in faltering, stammering tones, which everyone was too
excited to notice, he managed to say something about "Merry Christmas"
and "good children" and then proceeded to open the magic sack. "Miss
Kitty McGinnis!" he called, in deep, gruff tones. Kitty took the box
he offered with shy embarrassment, slowly drew back the lid and gave a
cry of amazement and delight. "A doll, O the loveliest doll that ever
was!" she cried. Then turning to her brother, she whispered as softly
as excitement would permit, "O Harvey, I'm afeard ye paid too much!"

"Aw, go on!" said Harvey, his face more like a full moon than ever.
"Don't ye know that Santy kin do whatever he wants to?"

The other dolls were received with raptures, Josephine stroking the
golden curls of the Lady Matilda with wondering fingers, and the baby
dancing round and round, waving the pink-robed Lady Clarabel above her
head.

"Mr. Harvey McGinnis!" came the gruff tones of Santa Claus; and Harvey
smiled over to his mother as he drew out a pair of stout cloth gloves.

"Mrs. McGinnis!" And that good lady smiled back, as she shook out a
dainty white apron with a coarse embroidery ruffle.

"I reckon Santy wanted you to wear that of a Sunday afternoon," said
Harvey, awkwardly.

"And I'll be proud to do it!" said his mother.

Little sacks of candy were next produced and everyone settled down to
enjoy it, thinking that the bottom of the big sack must be reached,
when Santa called out in tones that trembled beneath the gruffness,
"Another package for Mr. Harvey McGinnis!"

"Fer me--why--what--" said Harvey, taking the heavy oblong bundle;
then, as the sparkling "Club House" skates met his view, his face lit
up with a glory that Tom never forgot. The glory lasted but a moment,
then he turned a troubled face toward the bulky old saint.

"You never ought to a done it," he said. "These must have cost a lot!"

"Aw, go on," was the reply in a distinctly boyish tone, "don't you
know that Santy can do whatever he wants to?" and, with a prodigious
bow, old Santa was gone.

A few minutes later, a slender boy with a bundle under his arm, was
skating swiftly down the shining river in the moonlight. As he rounded
the bend, a tall figure in a fur-trimmed coat came skimming slowly
toward him, and a voice called out in Ralph Evans' condescending
tones, "Well, how are the 'Jolly Ramblers' doing tonight?"

But the answer, this time, was clear and glad and triumphant. "The
best in the world," said Tom, "and isn't this the glorious night for
skating?"




THE WORKER IN SANDALWOOD[*]

By Marjorie L. C. Pickthall


The good curé of Terminaison says that this tale of Hyacinthe's is all
a dream. But then Madame points triumphantly to the little cabinet of
sandalwood in the corner of her room. It had stood there for many
years now, and the dust has gathered in the fine lines of the little
birds' feathers, and softened the petals of the lilies carved at the
corners. And the wood has taken on a golden gleam like the memory of a
sunset.

"What of that, my friend?" says Madame, pointing to the cabinet. And
the old curé bows his head.

"It may be so. God is very good," he says gently. But he is never
quite sure what he may believe.

On that winter day long ago, Hyacinthe was quite sure of one thing and
that was that the workshop was very cold. There was no fire in it, and
only one little lamp when the early dark drew on. The tools were so
cold they scorched his fingers, and feet were so cold he danced
clumsily in the shavings to warm them. He was a great clumsy boy of
fourteen, dark-faced, dull-eyed, and uncared for. He was clumsy
because it is impossible to be graceful when you are growing very fast
and have not enough to eat. He was dull-eyed because all eyes met his
unlovingly. He was uncared for because no one knew the beauty of his
soul. But his heavy young hands could carve things like birds and
flowers perfectly. On this winter evening he was just wondering if he
might lay aside the tools, and creep home to the cold loft where he
slept, when he heard Pierre L'Oreillard's voice shouting outside.

"Be quick, be quick, and open the door, thou _imbecile_. It is I, thy
master."

"_Oui, mon maitre_," said Hyacinthe, and he shambled to the door and
opened it.

"Slow worm!" cried Pierre, and he cuffed Hyacinthe as he passed in.
Hyacinthe rubbed his head and said nothing. He was used to blows. He
wondered why his master was in the workshop at that time of day
instead of drinking brandy at the Cinq Chateaux.

Pierre L'Oreillard had a small heavy bundle under his arm, wrapped in
sacking, and then in burlap, and then in fine soft cloths. He laid it
on a pile of shavings, and unfolded it carefully; and a dim sweetness
filled the dark shed and hung heavily in the thin winter sunbeams.

"It is a piece of wood," said Hyacinthe in slow surprise. He knew that
such wood had never been seen in Terminaison.

Pierre L'Oreillard rubbed the wood respectfully with his knobby
fingers.

"It is sandalwood," he explained to Hyacinthe, pride of knowledge
making him quite amiable, "a most precious wood that grows in warm
countries, thou great goblin. Smell it, idiot. It is sweeter than
cedar. It is to make a cabinet for the old Madame at the big house."

"_Oui, mon maitre_," said the dull Hyacinthe.

"Thy great hands shall shape and smooth the wood, _nigaud_, and I
will render it beautiful," said Pierre, puffing out his chest.

"Yes, Master," answered Hyacinthe humbly, "and when is it to be ready
for Madame?"

"Madame will want it perhaps next week, for that is Christmas. It is
to be finished and ready on the holy festival, great sluggard. Hearest
thou?" and he cuffed Hyacinthe's ears again furiously.

Hyacinthe knew that the making of the cabinet would fall to him, as
most of the other work did. When Pierre L'Oreillard was gone he
touched the strange sweet wood and at last laid his cheek against it,
while the fragrance caught his breath. "How it is beautiful!" said
Hyacinthe, and for a moment his eyes glowed, and he was happy. Then
the light passed and with bent head he shuffled back to his bench
through a foam of white shavings curling almost to his knees.

"Madame will want the cabinet for Christmas," repeated Hyacinthe to
himself, and fell to work harder than ever, though it was so cold in
the shed that his breath hung in the air like a little silvery cloud.
There was a tiny window on his right, through which, when it was clear
of frost, one looked on Terminaison; and that was cheerful, and made
him whistle. But to the left, through the chink of the ill-fitting
door, there was nothing to be seen but the forest, and the road dying
under the snow.

Brandy was good at the Cinq Chateaux and Pierre L'Oreillard gave
Hyacinthe plenty of directions, but no further help with the cabinet.

"That is to be finished for Madame at the festival, sluggard," said he
every day, cuffing Hyacinthe about the head, "finished, and with a
prettiness about the corners, hearest thou, _ourson_?"

"Yes, Monsieur," said Hyacinthe in his slow way; "I will try to finish
it. But if I hurry I shall spoil it."

Pierre's little eyes flickered. "See that it is done, and done
properly. I suffer from a delicacy of the constitution and a little
feebleness of the legs these days, so that I cannot handle the tools
properly. I must leave this work to thee, _gacheur_. And stand up and
touch a hand to thy cap when I speak to thee, slow-worm."

"Yes, monsieur," said Hyacinthe wearily.

It is hard to do all the work and to be beaten into the bargain. And
fourteen is not very old. Hyacinthe worked on at the cabinet with his
slow and exquisite skill. But on Christmas eve he was still at work,
and the cabinet unfinished.

"The master will beat me," thought Hyacinthe, and he trembled a
little, for Pierre's beatings were cruel. "But if I hurry, I shall
spoil the wood, and it is too beautiful to be spoiled."

But he trembled again when Pierre came into the workshop, and he stood
up and touched his cap.

"Is the cabinet finished, _imbecile_?" asked Pierre. And Hyacinthe
answered in a low voice, "No, it is not finished yet, monsieur."

"Then work on it all night, and show it to me completed in the
morning, or thy bones shall mourn thine idleness," said Pierre, with a
wicked look in his little eyes. And he shut Hyacinthe into the shed
with a smoky lamp, his tools, and the sandalwood cabinet.

It was nothing unusual. He had been often left before to finish a
piece of work overnight while Pierre went off to his brandies. But
this was Christmas eve, and he was very tired. Even the scent of the
sandalwood could not make him fancy he was warm. The world seemed to
be a black place, full of suffering and despair.

"In all the world, I have no friend," said Hyacinthe, staring at the
flame of the lamp. "In all the world, there is no one to care whether
I live or die. In all the world, no place, no heart, no love. O kind
God, is there a place, a love for me in another world?"

I hope you feel very sorry for Hyacinthe, lonely, and cold, and shut
up in the workshop on the eve of Christmas. He was but an overgrown,
unhappy child. And I think with old Madame that for unhappy children,
at this season, no help seems too divine for faith.

"There is no one to care for me," said Hyacinthe. And he even looked
at the chisel in his hand, thinking that by a touch of that he might
lose it all, and be at peace, somewhere, not far from God. Only it was
forbidden. Then came the tears, and great sobs that shook him, so that
he scarcely heard the gentle rattling of the latch.

He stumbled to the door, opening it on the still woods and the frosty
stars. And a lad who stood outside in the snow said, "I see you are
working late, comrade. May I come in?"

Hyacinthe brushed his ragged sleeve across his eyes and nodded "Yes."
Those little villages strung along the great river see strange
wayfarers at times. And Hyacinthe said to himself that surely here was
such a one. Blinking into the stranger's eyes, he lost for a flash the
first impression of youth, and received one of incredible age or
sadness. But the wanderer's eyes were only quiet, very quiet, like
the little pools in the wood where the wild does went to drink. As he
turned within the door, smiling at Hyacinthe and shaking some snow
from his cap, he did not seem to be more than sixteen or so.

"It is very cold outside," he said. "There is a big oak tree on the
edge of the fields that had split in the frost and frightened all the
little squirrels asleep there. Next year it will make an even better
home for them. And see what I found close by!" He opened his fingers
and showed Hyacinthe a little sparrow lying unruffled in the palm.

"_Pauvrette!_" said the dull Hyacinthe. "_Pauvrette!_ Is it then
dead?" He touched it with a gentle forefinger.

"No," answered the strange boy, "it is not dead. We will put it here
among the shavings, not far from the lamp, and it will be well by the
morning."

He smiled at Hyacinthe again, and the shambling lad felt dimly as if
the scent of the sandalwood were sweeter, and the lamp-flame clearer.
But the stranger's eyes were only quiet, quiet.

"Have you come far?" asked Hyacinthe. "It is a bad season for
traveling, and the wolves are out."

"A long way," said the other. "A long, long way. I heard a child
cry--"

"There is no child here," put in Hyacinthe. "Monsieur L'Oreillard says
children cost too much money. But if you have come far, you must need
food and fire, and I have neither. At the Cinq Chateaux you will find
both."

The stranger looked at him again with those quiet eyes, and Hyacinthe
fancied that his face was familiar. "I will stay here," he said; "you
are late at work, and you are unhappy."

"Why as to that," answered Hyacinthe, rubbing his cheeks and ashamed
of his tears, "most of are sad at one time or another, the good God
knows. Stay here and welcome if it pleases you; and you may take a
share of my bed, though it is no more than a pile of balsam boughs and
an old blanket in the loft. But I must work at this cabinet, for the
drawers must be finished and the handles put on and the corners
carved, all by the holy morning; or my wages will be paid with a
stick."

"You have a hard master," put in the other, "if he would pay you with
blows upon the feast of Noel."

"He is hard enough," said Hyacinthe, "but once he gave me a dinner of
sausages and white wine; and once, in the summer, melons. If my eyes
will stay open, I will finish this by morning. Stay with me an hour or
so, comrade, and talk to me of your travels, so that the time may pass
more quickly."

And while Hyacinthe worked, he told,--of sunshine and dust, of the
shadow of vine-leaves on the flat white walls of a house; of rosy
doves on the roof; of the flowers that come out in the spring,
anemones crimson and blue, and white cyclamen in the shadow of the
rocks; of the olive, the myrtle, and the almond; until Hyacinthe's
fingers ceased working, and his sleepy eyes blinked wonderingly.

"See what you have done, comrade," he said at last; "you have told me
of such pretty things that I have done but little work for an hour.
And now the cabinet will never be finished, and I shall be beaten."

"Let me help you," smiled the other. "I also was bred a carpenter."

At first Hyacinthe would not, fearing to trust the sweet wood out of
his own hands. But at length he allowed the stranger to fit in one of
the drawers. And so deftly was it done that Hyacinthe pounded his
fists on the bench in admiration. "You have a pretty knack," he cried.
"It seemed as if you did but hold the drawer in your hands a moment,
and hey! it jumped into its place."

"Let me fit in the other little drawers while you rest awhile," said
the stranger. So Hyacinthe curled up among the shavings, and the other
boy fell to work upon the little cabinet of sandalwood.

Hyacinthe was very tired. He lay still among the shavings, and thought
of all the boy had told him, of the hillside flowers, the laughing
leaves, the golden bloom of the anise, and the golden sun upon the
roads until he was warm. And all the time the boy with the quiet eyes
was at work upon the cabinet, smoothing, fitting, polishing.

"You do better work than I," said Hyacinthe once, and the stranger
answered, "I was lovingly taught." And again Hyacinthe said, "It is
growing towards morning. In a little while I will get up and help
you."

"Lie still and rest," said the other boy. And Hyacinthe lay still. His
thoughts began to slide into dreams, and he woke with a little start,
for there seemed to be music in the shed; though he could not tell
whether it came from the strange boy's lips, or from the shappy tools
as he used them, or from the stars.

"The stars are much paler," thought Hyacinthe. "Soon it will be
morning, and the corners are not carved yet. I must get up and help
this kind one in a little moment. Only the music and the sweetness
seem to fold me close, so that I may not move."

Then behind the forest there shone a pale glow of dawn, and in
Terminaison the church bells began to ring. "Day will soon be here,"
thought Hyacinthe, "and with day will come Monsieur L'Oreillard and
his stick. I must get up and help for even yet the corners are not
carved."

But the stranger looked at him, smiling as though he loved him, and
laid his brown finger lightly on the four empty corners of the
cabinet. And Hyacinthe saw the squares of reddish wood ripple and
heave and break, as little clouds when the wind goes through the sky.
And out of them thrust forth the little birds, and after them the
lilies, for a moment living; but even as Hyacinthe looked, settling
back into the sweet reddish-brown wood. Then the stranger smiled
again, laid all the tools in order, and, opening the door, went away
into the woods.

Hyacinthe crept slowly to the door. The winter sun, half risen, filled
all the frosty air with splendid gold. Far down the road a figure
seemed to move amid the glory, but the splendor was such that
Hyacinthe was blinded. His breath came sharply as the glow beat on the
wretched shed, on the old shavings, on the cabinet with the little
birds and the lilies carved at the corners.

He was too pure of heart to feel afraid. But "Blessed be the Lord,"
whispered Hyacinthe, clasping his slow hands, "for He hath visited and
redeemed His people. But who will believe?"

Then the sun of Christ's day rose gloriously, and the little sparrow
came from his nest among the shavings and shook his wings to the
light.

[*] Reprinted by permission of the publishers of "Everyland."




THE SHEPHERD WHO DIDN'T GO[*]

By Jay T. Stocking


You have all heard of the shepherds who went to Bethlehem, but I do
not believe any of you have heard of the shepherd who didn't go. The
Bible does not say anything about him, but his story has come to me,
and I am going to tell it to you.

The city of Bethlehem stood on a hill. Below the town, with its steep
narrow streets and white walls, were gray olive orchards. Below the
orchards were gardens bright with flowers. Below the gardens lay green
meadows, and beyond these pasture-lands that stretched away to the
wilderness plains where little patches of grass grew among the bushes
and between the great rocks. There were caves among these rocks where
wolves used to skulk and sometimes robbers hid. So the shepherds who
guarded their flocks in these wild pastures dared not leave them
alone.

One clear beautiful night, many centuries ago, four shepherds were
watching their flocks on these pastures. Samuel, Ezra, Joel, and
Dahvid were their names. Samuel, Ezra, and Joel were strong men, no
longer young, with shaggy eyebrows and brown beards; Ezra's was short,
Joel's long, and Samuel's streaked with gray. They owned the flocks
which they tended. Dahvid was a boy with ruddy cheeks, bright eyes,
and strong lithe limbs. He cared for the flocks of old Abraham.
Abraham was old and rich, and did not work any more, but hired
Dahvid, whose family was very poor, to care for his sheep.

The flocks of the four shepherds were lying quiet on the plain far
below the city, and near by Samuel, Ezra, Joel, and Dahvid lay wrapped
in their shepherds' cloaks.

"Samuel," said Dahvid, rising upon his elbow.

"What is it, Dahvid?" asked the other in a deep voice.

"Are you not glad that you tend sheep in Bethlehem instead of some
distant place?"

"Why, Dahvid?" asked Samuel sleepily.

"Because it is in Bethlehem that the King we have been looking for so
long is to be born. I have been reading it in the prophets only
today."

"Have you only just heard of that?" asked Ezra sourly.

"No," replied the boy hotly. "I have heard my mother tell of it ever
since I can remember, and I have read it over and over again. Samuel!"

"Yes, Dahvid?"

"Do you think we shall ever see the promised King?"

"I do not know, my boy," the older man answered sadly. "We have waited
long, and there seems little hope for Israel now. But he will come
some day, he will come some day. Why do you ask, Dahvid?"

"I cannot tell. It is often in my mind. Something makes me think of it
tonight. Perhaps it is because I read of him today. Samuel, I would
walk to the end of the earth to see the Christ-child."

"Well, you need not start now," grumbled Ezra, and Joel added roughly,
"Go to sleep, boy, the hour is late."

It was much later before Dahvid fell asleep, for his head was full of
dreams, and the stories of wonderful days to come that his mother had
told him. But at length he joined the rest in healthy slumber.

Suddenly it seemed to each of them that something had passed over him,
and touched him lightly on the cheek. The older men raised themselves
on their elbows, but Dahvid sprang to his feet. At first they saw only
a great light, which nearly blinded them, then they discerned a
shining form in the sky, and heard a voice saying: "Be not afraid; for
behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all
the people; for there is born to you this day in the city of David a
Saviour, who is Christ the Lord. And this is the sign unto you: Ye
shall find a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a manger."

And then all the sky was full of light, and the air was full of
heavenly voices, singing, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
peace, good will toward men."

While the shepherds listened, half joyful, half afraid, the light
faded and the voices floated away--"Good will to men--to men--to men,"
and all was still as before. For a moment the shepherds looked at each
other in silent awe and wonder. Then Ezra spoke in a voice dry with
fear. "What was it?"

Dahvid stood speechless, and Samuel answered reverently, "Angels."

"Brothers," he continued, "a wonderful thing has happened to us. It
has been a long, long day since angels have spoken to men."

Then he girded his shepherd's cloak about him and seized his staff.
"Come, Ezra, Joel, Dahvid, let us be going."

"Going--where?" asked Ezra and Joel.

"Why, to Bethlehem to see the Child. Did not the angel tell us the
sign? Let us go at once to find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes
and lying in a manger."

"There be many mangers in Bethlehem," objected Ezra.

"I know not how we shall find him," said Joel. "It is a vain search, I
fear," and he drew his cloak about him and reached for his staff, "but
I will go with you if you say."

So they started, Samuel, Ezra, and Joel--but Dahvid stood still.

"Come, Dahvid, make haste!" called Samuel.

But the boy did not move.

"I cannot go," he said.

"Cannot go!" cried Samuel in amazement; and Ezra added, "Who said but
a little while ago that he would go to the end of the earth to see the
King?"

"And so I would," cried Dahvid; "but the sheep--we cannot leave the
sheep alone."

"The sheep will be safe enough," said Samuel. "The dogs will keep them
together. There are no wolves tonight. Come, Dahvid."

But the boy was firm. "There is my master; he'll be angry if I leave
his flocks alone."

"Old Abraham will never know," said Joel.

"Abraham is a hard master," said Dahvid. "Many a time I have felt his
heavy staff on my back. But it is not that which keeps me. I have
given him my word that, come day, come night, come life, come death, I
will not fail to keep the flocks. Go on without me; I must keep my
word. Go on."

So they went on, impatient and eager for this wondrous quest, Ezra
and Joel muttering now and then at the obstinacy of the boy, but
Samuel full of glowing admiration. Dahvid watched them as they moved
up the hill. That dream of finding the Christ-child--how could he give
it up? Once he started forward: "I will go!" But something held him
back, and he threw himself on the ground and kept back tears of bitter
disappointment. After a time he grew calmer, and found a certain
comfort in thinking of the helplessness of his flock.

Suddenly the low growling of his dog brought him to his feet. But he
saw nothing, heard nothing, and bade the dog be still. In a moment,
with a bark of alarm, the dog was up again and away. Dahvid sprang up,
certain now that danger was near. There was panic in the flock. Toward
the wilderness he could see lean, gray forms, moving stealthily and
swiftly among the sheep. Wolves! Springing upon a rock, and waving his
cloak in circles about his head, he uttered the familiar call which
gathered the sheep about him, his own sheep nearest, and behind them
the flocks of Samuel, Ezra, and Joel. The wolves made off and Dahvid
quickly looked over his flock to see if all were there--for the
Eastern shepherd knows his sheep by name.

One by one he named them, with an increasing feeling of relief. They
were all there. No! One was missing--Ke-barbara, the pet of the flock.
Ke-barbara means striped, and the little sheep was so called because
of the dark marking of her fleece. After waving his staff over the
huddled beasts, and uttering a few times the soothing cry, "Hoo-o-o,
ta-a-a! hoo-o-o, ta-a-a!" he rushed off in the direction which the
wolves had taken. At the top of the steep bank, at the edge of the
pasture, he stopped and called, "Ke-barbara! Ke-barbara!" and for
answer heard an anguished bleat from the rocks below.

It was a steep and slippery way, but Dahvid plunged down with no
thought of anything but the sheep. Loose stones gave way and he lost
his footing. At the bottom he picked himself up unhurt, and there
beside him were two wolves quarreling over the wounded sheep. One of
them slunk away at sight of the boy, but the other had a taste of
blood and sprang at Dahvid, missing his throat but sinking his teeth
into his leg. Then Dahvid, as the beast turned to spring again, struck
him a heavy blow on the head with his staff and killed him. His own
wounds were bleeding and painful, but he turned at once with caressing
words to the sheep.

"Ke-barbara, they have hurt you, little sheep! But they have not
killed you! I reached you just in time. You cannot walk; can you? And
I am afraid I cannot carry you. But I can help. There, put your head
on my arm." He groaned with pain. "No, the other one." So he talked to
her, as to a child, as the wounded boy and the wounded sheep slowly
made their way up the steep hillside and over the rough rocks. It was
not a long way, and, half an hour before, the sturdy shepherd lad
would have bounded over it quickly enough. But now the wounded leg was
slow, the wounded arm was weak, and the wounded lamb seemed very
heavy. It was a weary journey, with many stops. When at last they
reached the flock, still huddled trembling together, Dahvid had only
strength to give one reassuring "Hoo-o-o, ta-a-a," then fell
exhausted.

How long he lay there he did not know, but the dawn was growing
bright when three men appeared from the direction of the town. It was
not the shepherds, but old Abraham and two of his servants. As the old
man caught sight of his flock, but he saw no shepherd, he raged with
anger. "Dahvid!" he shouted fiercely. "Dahvid!" There was no answer.

"The young vagabond! He has left the sheep. Of great worth are his
promises! He would keep my flock. 'Come life--come death!' Dahvid! Let
me once find him and I will give him something he will remember longer
than he does his vows."

As he drew near the flock he discovered the boy lying on the ground.
"Ah, asleep is he? and the sun this high! Come, get up!" he shouted
fiercely, and lifted his staff to strike. But, as he did so he caught
sight of the white face and the bleeding arm, and noticed the wounded
sheep. Old Abraham dropped his angry arm, and there was a touch of
tenderness that was strange to him, as he continued: "Ah, Dahvid, boy!
You did not forget your promises; did you, Dahvid? And I would have
struck you! Forgive me, my lad." Then, turning to his servants, he
gave them command: "Take him to the inn and bid them care for him. I,
myself, will keep the flock today."

The servants bowed low, "The inn is full, my lord."

Old Abraham commanded again positively, "Take him to the inn, I say."

"But the inn is full, my lord," replied the older servant, trembling.

Then the other servant spoke, "There is perhaps room in the stable, my
lord."

"Then bear him thither, and bid them give him the best of care. Go at
once."

So the servants bore Dahvid away, still unconscious from his wounds
and made him comfortable on a bed of straw in the stable of the inn.

It was some hours before he came to himself. When at last he opened
his eyes, and his ears began to catch once more the sounds about him,
the first thing he heard was a faint cry.

"What is that?" he asked eagerly of Samuel, who was watching beside
him.

"That," said the old shepherd, in tones of mingled joy and reverence,
"is the Child the angels told us about, the Child we came to see. We
found him here in the stable, in a manger."

"And I am not to see him?"

"Yes, you are," said Samuel, and a grave-faced man brought the Child
and laid Him in Dahvid's arms, the Child for whose coming the people
had been longing for a thousand years.

       *       *       *       *       *

The color at length came back to Dahvid's white cheeks and strength
and health to his limbs and he went back again to the plain. Old
Abraham embraced him, "Forgive me, my son. I have been a hard master.
Thou hast been very faithful, and for thy reward I make thee lord over
all my flocks and half of them shall be thine own."

So Dahvid became a man of flocks, and all his days he was known among
the other shepherds as the one who had held the Christ-child in his
arms. And there was none among them who was thought so brave, and
gentle, and wise as the _Shepherd Who Didn't Go_.

[*] Reprinted by permission from "The City that Never Was Reached," by
Jay T. Stocking; published by the Pilgrim Press.




PAULINA'S CHRISTMAS[*]

A Story of Russian Life. Adapted from Anna Robinson's

_Little Paulina_


One day, in Russia, there was a heavy snowstorm. The snow was deep on
the ground; and in the forest the branches of the trees bent under its
weight.

In this forest a little girl was struggling along. There was no path
for her to follow, for the snow covered all the paths. The little
girl's name was Paulina. She was dressed in a long fur coat, and she
wore a cap and mittens and gaiters of fur, so that she looked more
like a little furry animal than a little girl. She kept tramping
along, not a bit afraid, when suddenly she heard a call for help.

"Help! Help!" the call came.

"Coming, coming!" she called back. She went in the direction of the
voice and soon she saw a man making his way toward her. His dress was
that of a peasant.

"Will you please direct me out of this forest, little one?" he asked.
"You probably know the paths about."

"No, I am a stranger here," Paulina answered. "I live in Kief--that
is, I did live there; but I am on my way to my father."

"Where is your father?" asked the man.

"He is in Siberia. They banished him."

"But, little one," said the stranger, "that is a terrible place for a
child to go to. That frozen country, where wicked people are sent!"

"O, yes,--but my father is there, you know," said Paulina.

"Who is your father?" the man asked.

The little girl was about to tell him, when she noticed a look of
interest on the stranger's face, so she said,

"Did you say that you had lost your way in the forest? Do you live far
from here?"

"Yes, very far. I am lost, and am nearly perishing from hunger and
cold. How far is it to the next village?"

"They told me it was some miles on," said the child. "But I will take
you back to the woodsman's cottage where I spent the night. The woman
is a kind-hearted person, and I am sure she will give you shelter."

"That is kind of you, little one," said the stranger, "but you will be
hindering your own journey if you do that."

"I know that my father would want me to show a kindness, even though
it did put me back some," Paulina said.

"You must have a good father, to give you such training. Why did the
Emperor send him into exile?" the stranger asked her.

"O, my father had enemies who lied to the Emperor--and there was no
chance given to my father to explain. So the Emperor sent him away to
Siberia,--and I am trying to find my way there to him."

While they walked through the forest, the stranger told Paulina about
his own little daughter who was expecting him to spend Christmas with
her. At last they reached the woodsman's hut. The woman greeted them
kindly, and while Paulina went into another room to help her prepare
the evening meal, the stranger was left warming himself by the fire,
and rocking the cradle.

Once Paulina thought she heard voices, as if the stranger were talking
to someone; but when she went back, she found him alone, still warming
his hands and rocking the cradle with his foot.

That night the stranger slept on the floor in front of the fire--there
was no other place for him; but he was glad to be safe from the storm
outside.

Early in the morning, the two started out through the forest again.
They must hurry, if they were to reach the next village before
darkness fell. The storm had passed over, and the day was cold and
clear. A beautiful winter's day. The little girl and the stranger
reached the village on the other side of the forest early in the
afternoon, and there before them they saw a beautiful sleigh drawn by
four horses. There were four servants standing near.

"What a lovely sleigh!" exclaimed Paulina.

"Yes, I wonder where they are going. I will ask them," the stranger
said. He went nearer the men and spoke to them.

"We are driving for our master to Igorhof," they said.

"Why, that is where my daughter is. If I might only ride with you, I
could spend Christmas with her. Tomorrow is Christmas day, you know.
And, little one, you could spend Christmas with us, too."

"O, no," said Paulina. "I could not take the time. I must hurry on to
my father. But it would be lovely if we could only ride in this
beautiful sleigh."

"You could spend the night with us, and then we could set you on your
way, because you have been so kind to me," the man told her.

The servants were willing to let them ride in the beautiful sleigh,
and soon they were speeding over the snow toward the great city. Once,
the stranger took a scarf from a pocket on the side of the sleigh and
threw it about his neck. Paulina frowned, and promptly placed it back
in the pocket.

"It isn't right for you to touch anything in the sleigh. It belongs to
someone else. I am beginning to fear that you may not be an honest
man," she said gravely.

The stranger laughed at her, but he did not take the scarf again. They
sped on over the snow until, as darkness fell, they reached the city.
Soon they entered a large courtyard, and the stranger took Paulina's
hand and led her into a narrow passageway, and up a small winding
stairway.

"Where are you taking me?" asked Paulina. "I feel almost sure now,
that you are not an honest man. I think that you may even be a thief!"

The man laughed again.

"No, I am an honest man. You will believe me when you see my little
daughter. I trusted you in the forest. Now you trust me."

He led her into a large room, and they sat down upon a sofa.

"We will wait here until my daughter comes," he said.

Soon the door opened, and a beautiful little girl, about as large as
Paulina, came toward them. She looked puzzled when she saw the
rough-looking man with the little girl. She went close to the stranger
and looked into his face.

"It _is_ my father!" she cried, and threw her arms around his neck.

"But why are you dressed like a peasant? Has there been an accident?
And who is this little stranger?"

The man took her on his lap and told her how his sleigh had been
overturned in the storm, and how he had found his way to a peasant's
hut, where they had given him dry clothes to put on, and how he had
started out alone to find his way through the forest; and how he was
nearly perishing with cold and hunger when this little girl had
rescued him, and how, if it had not been for her, he would have died
in the snow in the forest. He told her how little Paulina was on her
way to Siberia to find her father, and how they went to the woodsman's
hut where a servant had found him, and how he had planned for the
sleigh to meet them on the other side of the forest.

"O," Paulina interrupted him, "then there was somebody talking with
you when we were preparing the evening meal?"

"Yes, and everything came out just as I had planned. And do you know,
little daughter, this Paulina would not let me put my own scarf around
my neck. She thought that I was a thief. She is an honest little girl.
But she will not tell me her name. She does not trust me."

"But why should I trust you, when you will not tell me who you are, or
anything about yourself?" Paulina asked.

"Do trust my father, Paulina. I'm sure he can help you. He will tell
you who he is soon, I know," the beautiful little girl said.

"Yes, little one," the stranger said. "I know someone who could speak
to the Emperor about your father, and perhaps he could be pardoned.
Please tell me your name; and then before you go away I will answer
any questions about myself you may ask me."

"Do tell my father, Paulina," the little girl urged.

Paulina threw her arms about the stranger's knees.

"O, if you could only get the Emperor to pardon him.--But I do not ask
for a _pardon_--he has done nothing to be pardoned for. All that I ask
is that he may have justice done him. My father is Vladimir Betzkoi."

The stranger frowned, and then he whispered,

"There must be some mistake. He must be a good man to have such an
honest little daughter." Then he said to Paulina,

"Do you believe now that I am an honest man, since you have seen my
daughter?"

"O, yes, indeed I do. You couldn't help being good and honest. She is
so beautiful. I think her face is like what a queen's should be,"
Paulina answered eagerly.

The stranger and his little daughter smiled, and the man said,

"Well, I believe that your father is an honest man since I have seen
you. And I can tell you now, I _know_ he will be pardoned."

"Tell her, father, tell the little Paulina who you are," his daughter
whispered.

"Until your father returns to you, little one, you must stay here and
I will be a father to you--as I am father to all the people of Russia,
for _I am the Emperor!_"

Just then the bells began ringing, and voices outside began
singing,--for it was the beginning of Christmas morning. And Paulina
said,

"This is the happiest Christmas morning I have ever known."

[*] By permission--Copyright, 1912, by Sturgis & Walton Company.




UNTO US A CHILD IS BORN

As Told by Phebe A. Curtiss at a "White Gift" Service


It was in the little town of Bethlehem, with its white walls and
narrow streets, that a wonderful thing happened many, many years ago.
The whole aspect of the place had been completely transformed, and
instead of the quiet which usually existed there, confusion reigned.
The little town was crowded full of people. All day long men, women
and children had been pouring in companies into it until every
available place was full. It had something to do with the payment of
taxes, and the people had come from far and near in response to the
call of those in authority.

Many of them were staying with relatives and friends, and every door
had been opened to receive those who came. There were not many places
where the public could go to stay in those days, and the ones that
there were had been already filled.

Just as the shadows were closing down around the hill, an interesting
little group found its way up the winding path through the orchards,
touched as they were by the sunset coloring, and into the gate of the
city. The man, seemingly about fifty years of age, walked with slow
and measured tread. He had a black beard, lightly sprinkled with gray,
and he carried in his hand a staff, which served him in walking and
also in persuading the donkey he was leading to move a little more
rapidly.

It was plain to see that the errand he had come on was an important
one, both from the care with which he was dressed and from the anxious
look which now and then spread over his face.

Upon the donkey's back sat a woman, and your attention would have been
directed to her at once if you could have been there. She was
marvelously beautiful. She was very young--just at that interesting
period between girlhood and womanhood, when the charm is so great.

Her eyes were large and blue and they were a prominent feature in the
face that was absolutely perfect in contour and coloring.

She wore an outer robe of a dull woolen stuff which covered the blue
garment worn underneath--the garment which indicated that she was a
virgin. Over her head and around her neck she wore the customary white
veil or "wimple."

As the donkey jogged along, stopping now and then to nibble at the
bushes on either side, she sat calmly looking out upon the
surroundings. Once in a while she would draw aside her veil and her
beautiful eyes would lift themselves to heaven with a look of rapture
and adoration in them, which was wonderful to see.

As they drew nearer to the town the look of anxiety upon the face of
the man deepened, for he began to realize more and more the crowded
condition of the place they were approaching. The hurry and bustle and
confusion made themselves felt far beyond the bounds of the town
itself.

They seemed to be strangers--at least they did not have relatives or
friends to whom they could turn; and the man started at once to make
his way to the inn or "kahn," as it was called in those days.

This inn was a quadrangular building made of rough stones. It was one
story high, with a flat roof, and it had not a single window. All
around it was a high wall, built of rocks; and the space between that
wall and the building made a safe enclosure for the animals.

The thing about these inns that would surprise you or me today was the
way in which the business connected with them was run. There was no
charge made for staying there, but safe lodging was freely given. Each
company which came brought its own bedding, its own food and
everything they needed to use in cooking. A resting place and safe
protection were all that were offered. The inn was in charge of one
caretaker. There were no other servants.

As the traveler, whose name was Joseph, drew near he found to his
dismay that he could not even make his way through the crowd to the
gate keeper, who was guarding the one entrance to the inn.

He decided to leave Mary, his wife, in the company of a family with
whom he had been talking while he made an effort to gain entrance.

When at last he reached the man in charge, he found it was just as he
had feared. The inn was full--there was no room for them there.

In vain he urged; he told of his own line of ancestors; of the noble
line from which his wife descended. The answer was always the same:
"There is no room."

At last he pleaded for Mary, his wife. He told the man in charge that
she was not strong, that she had come a long, long way and was very
tired; and urged that some place be found for her. He feared the
results if she should be compelled to stay in the open all night.

So earnestly he pleaded his case that at last the man said, "I have no
room and yet I cannot turn you away; come with me and I will find you
a place in the stable."

Joseph then found Mary and they and the ones with whom she had been
tarrying went together to the stable and there made themselves
comfortable for the night.

This was not at all the cross to them that it would seem to you today.
It was a very common thing indeed for people to stay in the stables
when the inn was full. And then, too, you must remember that they were
descended from a long line of shepherds. They naturally loved the
animals and did not feel at all badly to sleep where they had been, or
even in very close company with them.

We can imagine that it was with very thankful hearts they lay down to
rest that night.

There was a company of men, asleep in the pasture lands at some little
distance from Bethlehem, on the slope of the hill. They were
shepherds. They had cared for their sheep and after that all but one
of them had lain down to sleep. It was their custom for all of the
number to watch while the others slept. They were wrapped in their
great, warm shepherd's cloaks, for the air was chilly at that season.
All at once a strange thing happened. It began to grow very light, and
the one who was watching could not understand. He spoke to the others
and they sprang to their feet.

Brighter and brighter shone the light until it was like the day, and
you can imagine that the shepherds were startled. They could not
speak, so great was their astonishment; but as they drew closer
together they heard a voice coming out of the light. The voice said,
"Be not afraid. Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which
shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day, in the city of
David, a Saviour which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign
unto you; ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes lying in
a manger."

And then there were with this angel, who spoke, many other angels; and
they sang, praising God, saying, "Glory to God in the highest, and on
earth peace, good will toward men."

They sang it again and again until the heavens fairly rang with it.

For a while after the beautiful song had died away and the light had
failed, the shepherds stood with bowed heads. Then each one gathered
his cloak around him and took his staff in his hand and they started
together to find the place and the Child about which they had heard.

Hastening into Bethlehem they came to the inn and found Joseph and
Mary, and the babe, lying in the manger, just as the angel said they
would. They worshipped the Child and returned to their duties,
praising God and glorifying Him.

After that Joseph and Mary went away to another place and took the
child Jesus with them, and many others came to worship Him. Among them
were three Wise Men who had come from separate places and all from a
great distance.

They followed the star which was set in the heavens to guide them and
they too found the One they sought.

As they came into the place where He was, each one bowed in worship
and they laid before Him the gifts they had brought--gold,
frankincense and myrrh.

What a wonderful story it is, and how our hearts swell with love as we
think about it! It is fitting that tonight we should dwell upon it,
for we, too, have come to worship our King. It is His birthday and we
have come together to bring Him our gifts. We have brought "white
gifts" because they are the expression of our pure, unselfish love.

The Wise Men brought gold, and we have brought our gifts of
_substance_--money and food and clothing and things that will help to
make others comfortable and happy.

The Wise Men brought frankincense, and we bring gifts of _service_;
for each one of us desires to do some one thing all during the year
that will make for good and make us worthy followers of Him.

The Wise Men brought myrrh, and we bring devotion; for we bring the
gift of _self_. If we have not already given ourselves to the Master,
we want to do so now; and if we have done so, we want to reconsecrate
our lives to Him.




THE STAR[*]

By Florence M. Kingsley


Once upon a time in a country far away from here, there lived a little
girl named Ruth. Ruth's home was not at all like our houses, for she
lived in a little tower on top of the great stone wall that surrounded
the town of Bethlehem. Ruth's father was the hotel-keeper--the Bible
says the "inn keeper." This inn was not at all like our hotels,
either. There was a great open yard, which was called the courtyard.
All about this yard were little rooms and each traveler who came to
the hotel rented one. The inn stood near the great stone wall of the
city, so that as Ruth stood, one night, looking out of the tower
window, she looked directly into the courtyard. It was truly a strange
sight that met her eyes. So many people were coming to the inn, for
the King had made a law that every man should come back to the city
where his father used to live to be counted and to pay his taxes. Some
of the people came on the backs of camels, with great rolls of bedding
and their dishes for cooking upon the back of the beast. Some of them
came on little donkeys, and on their backs too were the bedding and
the dishes. Some of the people came walking--slowly; they were so
tired. Many miles some of them had come. As Ruth looked down into the
courtyard, she saw the camels being led to their places by their
masters, she heard the snap of the whips, she saw the sparks shoot up
from the fires that were kindled in the courtyard, where each person
was preparing his own supper; she heard the cries of the tired, hungry
little children.

Presently her mother, who was cooking supper, came over to the window
and said, "Ruthie, thou shalt hide in the house until all those people
are gone. Dost thou understand?"

"Yes, my mother," said the child, and she left the window to follow
her mother back to the stove, limping painfully, for little Ruth was a
cripple. Her mother stooped suddenly and caught the child in her arms.

"My poor little lamb. It was a mule's kick, just six years ago, that
hurt your poor back and made you lame."

"Never mind, my mother. My back does not ache today, and lately when
the light of the strange new star has shone down upon my bed my back
has felt so much stronger and I have felt so happy, as though I could
climb upon the rays of the star and up, up into the sky and above the
stars!"

Her mother shook her head sadly. "Thou art not likely to climb much,
now or ever, but come, the supper is ready; let us go to find your
father. I wonder what keeps him."

They found the father standing at the gate of the courtyard, talking
to a man and woman who had just arrived. The man was tall, with a long
beard, and he led by a rope a snow white mule, on which sat the
drooping figure of the woman. As Ruth and her mother came near, they
heard the father say, "But I tell thee that there is no more room in
the inn. Hast thou no friends where thou canst go to spend the night?"
The man shook his head. "No, none," he answered. "I care not for
myself, but my poor wife." Little Ruth pulled at her mother's dress.
"Mother, the oxen sleep out under the stars these warm nights and the
straw in the caves is clean and warm; I have made a bed there for my
little lamb."

Ruth's mother bowed before the tall man. "Thou didst hear the child.
It is as she says--the straw is clean and warm." The tall man bowed
his head. "We shall be very glad to stay," and he helped the
sweet-faced woman down from the donkey's back and led her away to the
cave stable, while the little Ruth and her mother hurried up the
stairs that they might send a bowl of porridge to the sweet-faced
woman, and a sup of new milk, as well.

       *       *       *       *       *

That night when little Ruth lay down in her bed, the rays of the
beautiful new star shone through the window more brightly than before.
They seemed to soothe the tired aching shoulders. She fell asleep and
dreamed that the beautiful, bright star burst and out of it came
countless angels, who sang in the night:

"Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, good will to men." And
then it was morning and her mother was bending over her and saying,
"Awake, awake, little Ruth. Mother has something to tell thee." Then
as the eyes opened slowly--"The angels came in the night, little one,
and left a Baby to lay beside your little white lamb in the manger."

       *       *       *       *       *

That afternoon, Ruth went with her mother to the fountain. The mother
turned aside to talk to the other women of the town about the strange
things heard and seen the night before, but Ruth went on and sat down
by the edge of the fountain. The child, was not frightened, for
strangers came often to the well, but never had she seen men who
looked like the three who now came towards her. The first one, a tall
man with a long white beard, came close to Ruth and said, "Canst tell
us, child, where is born he that is called the King of the Jews?"

"I know of no king," she answered, "but last night while the star was
shining, the angels brought a baby to lie beside my white lamb in the
manger." The stranger bowed his head. "That must be he. Wilt thou show
us the way to Him, my child?" So Ruth ran and her mother led the three
men to the cave and "when they saw the Child, they rejoiced with
exceeding great joy, and opening their gifts, they presented unto Him
gold, and frankincense and myrrh," with wonderful jewels, so that
Ruth's mother's eyes shone with wonder, but little Ruth saw only the
Baby, which lay asleep on its mother's breast.

"If only I might hold Him in my arms," she thought, but was afraid to
ask.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a few days, the strangers left Bethlehem, all but the three--the
man, whose name was Joseph, and Mary, his wife, and the Baby. Then, as
of old, little Ruth played about the courtyard and the white lamb
frolicked at her side. Often she dropped to her knees to press the
little woolly white head against her breast, while she murmured: "My
little lamb, my very, very own. I love you, lambie," and then together
they would steal over to the entrance of the cave to peep in at the
Baby, and always she thought, "If I only might touch his hand," but
was afraid to ask. One night as she lay in her bed, she thought to
herself: "Oh, I wish I had a beautiful gift for him, such as the wise
men brought, but I have nothing at all to offer and I love him so
much." Just then the light of the star, which was nightly fading, fell
across the foot of the bed and shone full upon the white lamb which
lay asleep at her feet--and then she thought of something. The next
morning she arose with her face shining with joy. She dressed
carefully and with the white lamb held close to her breast, went
slowly and painfully down the stairway and over to the door of the
cave. "I have come," she said, "to worship Him, and I have brought
Him--my white lamb." The mother smiled at the lame child, then she
lifted the Baby from her breast and placed Him in the arms of the
little maid who knelt at her feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few days after, an angel came to the father, Joseph, and told him to
take the Baby and hurry to the land of Egypt, for the wicked King
wanted to do it harm, and so these three--the father, mother and
Baby--went by night to the far country of Egypt. And the star grew
dimmer and dimmer and passed away forever from the skies over
Bethlehem, but little Ruth grew straight and strong and beautiful as
the almond trees in the orchard, and all the people who saw her were
amazed, for Ruth was once a cripple.

"It was the light of the strange star," her mother said, but little
Ruth knew it was the touch of the blessed Christ-Child, who was once
folded against her heart.

[*] Used by permission of the author and the publishers, Henry Altemus
Company.





End of Project Gutenberg's Christmas Stories And Legends, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTMAS STORIES AND LEGENDS ***

***** This file should be named 17770-8.txt or 17770-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/7/7/17770/

Produced by Stacy Brown Thellend, Barbara Tozier, Bill
Tozier and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
