The Project Gutenberg EBook of The House Fly and How to Suppress It, by 
L. O. Howard and F. C. Bishopp

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The House Fly and How to Suppress It
       U. S. Department of Agriculture Farmers' Bulletin No. 1408

Author: L. O. Howard and F. C. Bishopp

Release Date: March 26, 2006 [EBook #18050]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE FLY AND HOW TO ***




Produced by K.D. Thornton and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

FARMERS' BULLETIN No. 1408

_The_ HOUSE FLY AND HOW TO SUPPRESS IT

[Illustration: fly]

[Illustration: USDA seal]




The presence of flies is an indication of uncleanliness, insanitary
conditions, and improper disposal of substances in which they breed.
They are not only annoying; they are actually dangerous to health,
because they may carry disease germs to exposed foods.

It is therefore important to know where and how they breed, and to apply
such knowledge in combating them. This bulletin gives information on
this subject. Besides giving directions for ridding the house of flies
by the use of screens, fly papers, poisons, and flytraps, it lays
especial emphasis on the explanation of methods of eliminating breeding
places and preventing the breeding of flies.

This bulletin supersedes Farmers' Bulletin 851.

Washington, D. C. Issued April, 1925; revised November, 1926




THE HOUSE FLY[1] AND HOW TO SUPPRESS IT.

By L. O. HOWARD, _Chief of the Bureau of Entomology_, and F. C. BISHOPP,
_Entomologist_.

       *       *       *        *       *


                                    CONTENTS.
                                                                      Page.
  Kinds of flies found in houses                                         1
  Where the true house fly lays its eggs                                 2
  How the house fly passes the winter                                    6
  Carriage of disease by the house fly                                   6
  Excluding and capturing flies                                          7
    The use of screens                                                   7
    Fly papers and poisons                                               8
    Fly sprays                                                           8
    Flytraps                                                             9
  Preventing the breeding of flies                                       9
    Construction and care of stables                                     9
    Fly-tight manure pits                                               10
    Frequency with which manure should be removed in cities and towns   10
    Health office regulations for control of house flies in cities      10
    Disposal of manure in rural and suburban districts                  11
    Chemical treatment of manure to destroy fly maggots                 12
    Maggot trap for destruction of fly larvæ from horse manure          13
    Compact heaping of manure                                           15
    Garbage disposal and treatment of miscellaneous breeding places     15
    Sewage disposal in relation to the prevention of fly-borne diseases 15
  What communities can do to eliminate the house fly                    16


       *       *       *        *       *


KINDS OF FLIES FOUND IN HOUSES.


Several species of flies are found commonly in houses. Some of them so
closely resemble the true house fly that it requires very careful
observation to distinguish them from it.

One of these is the biting stable fly[2] (fig. 1). It occurs frequently
in houses and differs from the house fly in the important particular
that its mouth parts are formed for piercing the skin. This fly is so
often mistaken for the house fly that most people think that the house
fly can bite.

Another frequent visitant of houses, particularly in the spring and
fall, is the cluster fly.[3] It is somewhat larger than the house fly,
and is distinguished by its covering of fine yellowish hairs.
Occasionally this fly occurs in houses in such numbers as to cause great
annoyance. It gets its name of "cluster fly" from its habit of
collecting in compact groups or clusters in protected corners during
cold periods.

Several species of metallic greenish or bluish flies also are found
occasionally in houses. These include a blue-bottle fly,[4] the black
blowflies,[5] and the green-bottle (fig. 2) flies.[6] They breed in
decaying animal matter.

[Footnote 1: _Musca domestica_ L.]
[Footnote 2: _Stomoxys calcitrans_ L.]
[Footnote 3: _Pollenia rudis_ Fab.]
[Footnote 4: _Calliphora erythrocephala_ Meig.]
[Footnote 5: _Phormia regina_ Meig. and _P. terrae-novae_ Desv.]
[Footnote 6: _Lucilia caesar_ L., _L. sericata_ Meig., and other species
of the genus.]

There is still another species, smaller than any of those so far
mentioned, which is sometimes called the "lesser house fly."[7] This
insect is distinguished from the ordinary house fly by its paler and
more pointed body. The male, which is commoner than the female, has
large pale patches at the base of the abdomen, which are translucent
when the fly is seen on the window pane. These little flies are not the
young of the larger flies. Flies do not grow after the wings have once
expanded and dried.

[Footnote 7: _Fannia canicularis_ L.]

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--The stable fly. Much enlarged.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--One of the green-bottle flies (_Lucilia
caesar_). Much enlarged.]

In late summer and autumn many specimens of a small fruit fly, known as
the "vinegar fly,"[8] make their appearance, attracted by the odor of
overripe fruit.

All of these species, however, are greatly dwarfed in numbers by the
common house fly. In 1900 the senior author made collections of the
flies in dining rooms in different parts of the country, and found that
the true house fly made up 98.8 per cent of the whole number captured.
The remainder comprised various species, including those mentioned
above.

[Footnote 8: _Drosophila ampelophila_ Loew.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--The true house fly. Enlarged.]




WHERE THE TRUE HOUSE FLY LAYS ITS EGGS.


The true house fly (fig. 3), which is found in nearly all parts of the
world, is a medium-sized fly with four black stripes on the back and a
sharp elbow in one of the veins of the wings. The house fly can not
bite, its mouth parts being spread out at the tip for sucking up liquid
substances.

The eggs (figs. 4, 5) are laid upon horse manure. This substance seems
to be its favorite larval food. It will breed also in human excrement,
and because of this habit it is very dangerous to the health of human
beings, carrying as it does the germs of intestinal diseases, such as
typhoid fever and cholera, from the excreta to food supplies. It has
also been found to breed freely in hog manure, in considerable numbers
in chicken dung, and to some extent in cow manure. Indeed, it will lay
its eggs on a great variety of decaying vegetable and animal materials,
but of the flies that infest dwelling houses, both in cities and on
farms, a vast proportion come from horse manure.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Eggs of the house fly. About natural size.
(Newstead.)]

It often happens, however, that this fly is very abundant in localities
where little or no horse manure is found, and in such cases it breeds in
other manure, such as chicken manure in backyard poultry lots, or in
slops or fermenting vegetable material, such as spent hops, moist bran,
ensilage, or rotting potatoes. Accumulations of organic material on the
dumping grounds of towns and cities often produce flies in great
numbers.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Eggs of the house fly. Highly magnified.
(Newstead.)]

The house fly begins laying eggs in from 2 1/2 to 20 days after
emerging, the time interval depending to a large extent upon
temperature, humidity, and character and abundance of food. The number
of eggs laid by an individual fly at one time ranges from 120 to 159 and
a single female will usually lay two and sometimes four such batches.
Dunn has recently reported that in Panama a fly may deposit as many as
2,367 eggs in 21 batches, and sometimes an interval of only 36 hours may
occur between the deposition of large batches of eggs. The enormous
numbers in which the insects occur are thus plainly accounted for,
especially when the abundance and universal occurrence of appropriate
larval food is considered. The eggs are deposited below the surface in
the cracks and interstices of the manure, several females usually
depositing in one spot, so that the eggs commonly are found in large
clusters (fig. 4) in selected places near the top of the pile, where a
high degree of heat is maintained by the fermentation below. The second
batch of eggs is laid from 8 to 10 days after the first. The eggs
usually hatch in less than 24 hours. Under the most favorable conditions
of temperature and moisture the egg state may last hardly more than 8
hours. The maggots which issue from the eggs are very small and
transparent. They grow rapidly, completing the growth of the larva stage
in three days under the most favorable conditions, although this stage
usually lasts from 4 to 7 days. The larval period may be prolonged
greatly by low temperature or by dryness or scarcity of the larval food.
As the larvæ (fig. 6) attain full size they gradually assume a creamy
white color. A few hours before pupation they become very restless and
migrate from their feeding ground in search of a favorable place in
which to pass the pupa stage. They will often congregate at the edges of
manure piles near the ground or burrow into the soil beneath, or they
may crawl considerable distances away from the pile to pupate in the
ground or in loose material under the edges of stones, boards, etc.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--Larvæ, or maggots, of the house fly. About
natural size. (Newstead.)]

The pupæ (fig 7), or "sleepers," are more or less barrel shaped and dark
brown in color. In midsummer this stage usually lasts from 3 to 6 days.
The pupa stage is easily affected by temperature changes and may be
prolonged during hibernation for as long as 4 or 5 months. Numerous
rearing experiments in various parts of the country have shown that the
shortest time between the deposition of eggs and the emergence of the
adult fly is 8 days, and 10 and 12 day records were very common.

The adult fly, upon emerging from the puparium, works its way upward
through the soil or manure and upon reaching the air it crawls about
while its wings expand and the body hardens and assumes its normal
coloration. In from 2 1/2 to 20 days, as previously stated, the female
is ready to deposit eggs. As in the case of other periods of its life
history, so the preoviposition period is prolonged considerably by the
lower temperatures of spring and fall. In midsummer, with a
developmental period of from 8 to 10 days from egg to adult, and a
preoviposition period of from 3 to 4 days, a new generation would be
started every 11 to 14 days. Thus the climate of the District of
Columbia allows abundance of time for the development of from 10 to 12
generations every season.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--Pupæ of the house fly. About natural size.
(Newstead.)]

Flies usually remain near their breeding places if they have plenty of
food, but experiments recently made at Dallas, Tex., show that they may
migrate considerable distances; in fact, house flies, so marked that the
particular individuals could be identified, have been recaptured in
traps as far as 13 miles from the place where they were liberated.




HOW THE HOUSE FLY PASSES THE WINTER.


The prevailing opinion that the house fly lives through the winter as an
adult, hiding in cracks and crevices of buildings, etc., appears to be
erroneous. Under outdoor conditions house flies are killed during the
first really cold nights, that is, when the temperature falls to about
15° or 10° F. In rooms and similar places protected from winds and
partially heated during the winter flies have been kept alive in cages
for long periods, but they never lived through the entire winter. In
longevity experiments one record of 70 days and another of 91 days was
obtained. No uncaged house flies were found during three seasons'
observations in unheated and only partially heated attics, stables,
unused rooms, etc., where favorable temperature conditions prevailed.
The common occurrence in such places of the cluster fly and a few other
species, which may be easily mistaken for the house fly, is responsible
for the prevailing belief as to the way the house fly overwinters. There
is therefore no reliable evidence whatever that adult house flies
emerging during October and November pass the winter and are able to
deposit their eggs the following spring, although they may continue
active in heated buildings until nearly the end of January. On the other
hand, there is evidence that house flies pass the winter as larvæ and
pupæ, and that they sometimes breed continuously throughout the winter.
In experiments at both Dallas, Tex., and Bethesda, Md., house flies have
been found emerging during April from heavily infested manure heaps
which had been set out and covered with cages during the preceding
autumn. In the Southern States, during warm periods in midwinter, house
flies may emerge and become somewhat troublesome; they frequently lay
eggs on warm days.

The second way in which the house fly may pass the winter is by
continuous breeding. House flies congregate in heated rooms with the
approach of the winter season. If no food or breeding materials are
present they eventually die. However, where they have access to both
food and suitable substances for egg laying they will continue breeding
just as they do outdoors during the summer. Even in very cold climates
there are undoubtedly many places, especially in cities, where house
flies would have opportunity to pass the winter in this manner.




CARRIAGE OF DISEASE BY THE HOUSE FLY.


The body of the house fly is covered thickly with hairs and bristles of
varying lengths, and this is especially true of the legs. Thus, when it
crawls over infected material it readily becomes loaded with germs, and
subsequent visits to human foods result in their contamination. Even
more dangerous than the transference of germs on the legs and body of
the fly is the fact that bacteria are found in greater numbers and live
longer in its alimentary canal. These germs are voided, not only in the
excrement of the fly, but also in small droplets of regurgitated matter
which have been called "vomit spots." When we realize that flies
frequent and feed upon the most filthy substances (it may be the excreta
of typhoid or dysentery patients or the discharges of one suffering from
tuberculosis), and that subsequently they may contaminate human foods
with their feet or excreta or vomit spots, the necessity and importance
of house-fly control is clear.

In army camps, in mining camps, and in great public works, where large
numbers of men are brought together for a longer or shorter time, there
is seldom the proper care of excreta, and the carriage of typhoid germs
from the latrines and privies to food by flies is common and often
results in epidemics of typhoid fever.

And such carriage of typhoid is by no means confined to great temporary
camps. In farmhouses in small communities, and even in badly cared for
portions of large cities, typhoid germs are carried from excrement to
food by flies, and the proper supervision and treatment of the breeding
places of the house fly become most important elements in the prevention
of typhoid.

In the same way other intestinal germ diseases, such as Asiatic cholera,
dysentery, enteritis (inflammation of the intestine), and infantile
diarrhea, are all so carried. There is strong circumstantial evidence
also that tuberculosis, anthrax, yaws, ophthalmia, smallpox, tropical
sore, and the eggs of parasitic worms may be and are carried in this
way. In the case of over 30 different disease organisms and parasitic
worms, actual laboratory proof exists, and where lacking is replaced by
circumstantial evidence amounting almost to certainty.




EXCLUDING AND CAPTURING FLIES.


The principal effort to control this dangerous insect must be made at
the source of supply--its breeding places. Absolute cleanliness and the
removal or destruction of anything in which flies may breed are
essential; and this is something that can be done even in cities.
Perhaps it can be done more easily in the cities than in villages, on
account of their greater police power and the lesser insistence on the
rights of the individual. Once people are educated to the danger and
learn to find the breeding places, the rest will be easy.

In spite of what has just been said, it is often necessary to catch or
otherwise destroy adult flies, or to protect food materials from
contamination and persons from annoyance or danger; hence the value of
fly papers and poisons, flytraps, and insect screens.


THE USE OF INSECT SCREENS.

A careful screening of windows and doors during the summer months, with
the supplementary use of sticky fly papers, is a protective measure
against house flies known to everyone. As regards screening, it is only
necessary here to emphasize the importance of keeping food supplies
screened or otherwise covered so that flies can gain no access to them.
This applies not only to homes but also to stores, restaurants, milk
shops, and the like. Screening, of course, will have no effect in
decreasing the number of flies, but at least it has the virtue of
lessening the danger of contamination of food.

Insect screens for doors and windows should be well made and must fit
tightly, otherwise they will not keep insects out. It is equally
important that they be made of good and durable screen cloth. Copper
insect screen cloth, although a little higher in price, will prove more
economical in the long run, as it lasts many years. If, however, the
cost of copper screen cloth is objectionable, steel screen cloth, either
painted or galvanized, can be used. Painted steel screen cloth will last
one or more years without repainting, its durability depending upon the
climate. In humid regions, of course, it will rust more quickly than it
will where the climate is dry. The same may be said of galvanized steel
insect screen cloth.

Insect screen cloth made with 16 meshes to the inch is recommended, for
16-mesh screen cloth will keep out flies and most mosquitoes[9] and
other small insects which at times are found almost everywhere.

[Footnote 9: Where the yellow fever or dengue fever mosquito occurs,
18-mesh screen cloth (or 16-mesh screen cloth made from extra heavy
wire) should be used.]


FLY PAPERS AND POISONS.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--Conical hoop flytrap side view. _A_, Hoops
forming frame at bottom. _B_, Hoops forming frame at top. _C_, Top of
trap made of barrel head. _D_, Strips around door. _E_, Door frame. _F_,
Screen on door. _G_, Buttons holding door. _H_, Screen on outside of
trap. _I_, Strips on side of trap between hoops. _J_, Tips of these
strips projecting to form legs. _K_, Cone. _L_, United edges of screen
forming cone. _M_, Aperture at apex of cone. (Bishopp.)]

The use of sticky fly papers to destroy flies that have gained access to
houses is well known. Fly-poison preparations also are common. Many of
the commercial fly poisons contain arsenic, and their use in the
household is attended with considerable danger, especially to children.
This danger is less with the use of a weak solution of formalin. A very
effective fly poison is made by adding 3 teaspoonfuls of the commercial
formalin to a pint of milk or water sweetened with a little brown sugar.
A convenient way of exposing this poison is by partly filling an
ordinary drinking glass with the solution. A saucer or plate is then
lined with white blotting paper cut the size of the dish and placed
bottom up over the glass. The whole is then quickly inverted and a small
match stick placed under the edge of the glass. As the solution
evaporates from the paper more flows out from the glass and thus the
supply is automatically renewed.


FLY SPRAYS.

Sprays designed to destroy or repel house flies fill a certain need in
connection with the house-fly problem. No very satisfactory repellent
substances for this insect have been found which are at the same time
adaptable to general use about the home, or places where foods are
handled. Extracts of pyrethrum flowers are now generally available
commercially, and these give fairly good results in the destruction of
house flies in buildings. Most of the sprays of pyrethrum extract
contain kerosene oil as a carrier, and undoubtedly the kerosene has much
to do with the toxicity of the spray. Such materials are most applicable
to buildings which become infested with flies and which can be readily
closed up at night and the air within thoroughly saturated with the
spray by means of an atomizer. Under such conditions the flies are
rather quickly overcome by the spray and if a sufficient quantity is
used they will not revive.


FLYTRAPS.

Flytraps may be used to advantage in decreasing the number of flies.
Their use has been advocated not only because of the immediate results,
but because of the chances that the flies may be caught before they lay
eggs, and the number of future generations will be reduced greatly.

Many types of flytraps are on the market. As a rule the larger ones are
the more effective. Anyone with a few tools can construct flytraps for a
small part of the price of the ready-made ones. A trap (fig. 8) which is
very effective in catching flies and is easily made, durable, and cheap,
may be made of four barrel hoops, four laths, a few strips of boxing,
and 8 1/2 lineal feet of screening, 24 inches wide. (For greater details
see Farmers' Bulletin 734.)

The effectiveness of the traps will depend on the selection of baits. A
good bait for catching house flies is 1 part of blackstrap molasses to 3
parts of water, after the mixture has been allowed to ferment for a day
or two. Overripe or fermenting bananas crushed and placed in the bait
pans give good results, especially with milk added to them. A mixture of
equal parts brown sugar and curd of sour milk, thoroughly moistened,
gives good results after it has been allowed to stand for three or four
days.




PREVENTING THE BREEDING OF FLIES.


As previously stated, fly papers, poisons, and traps are at best only
temporary expedients. The most logical method of abating the fly
nuisance is the elimination or treatment of all breeding places. It
would appear from what is known of the life history and habits of the
common house fly that it is perfectly feasible for cities and towns to
reduce the numbers of this annoying and dangerous insect so greatly as
to render it of comparatively slight account. On farms also, in dairies,
and under rural conditions generally, much can and should be done to
control the fly, which here, as elsewhere, constitutes a very serious
menace to health.


CONSTRUCTION AND CARE OF STABLES.

In formulating rules for the construction and care of stables and the
disposal of manure the following points must be taken into
consideration. In the first place, the ground of soil-floor stables may
offer a suitable place for the development of fly larvæ. The larvæ will
migrate from the manure to the soil and continue their growth in the
moist ground. This takes place to some extent even when the manure is
removed from the stables every day. Even wooden floors are not entirely
satisfactory unless they are perfectly water-tight, since larvæ will
crawl through the cracks and continue their development in the moist
ground below. Water-tight floors of concrete or masonry, therefore, are
desirable. Flies have been found to breed in surprising numbers in small
accumulations of material in the corners of feed troughs and mangers,
and it is important that such places be kept clean.


FLY-TIGHT MANURE PITS.

The Bureau of Entomology for a number of years has advised that manure
from horse stables be kept in fly-tight pits or bins. Such pits can be
built in or attached to the stable so that manure can be easily thrown
in at the time of cleaning and so constructed that the manure can be
readily removed. It is desirable that the manure be placed in these
fly-proof receptacles as soon as possible after it is voided. The
essential point is that flies be prevented from reaching the manure, and
for this reason the pit or bin must be tightly constructed, preferably
of concrete, and the lid kept closed except when the manure is being
thrown in or removed. The difficulty has been that manure often becomes
infested before it is put into the container, and flies frequently breed
out before it is emptied and often escape through the cracks. To obviate
these difficulties a manure box or pit with a modified tent trap or cone
trap attached is desirable.

In order to retain the fertilizing value of manure to the greatest
extent it is advisable that air be excluded from it as much as possible
and that it be protected from the leaching action of rains. This being
the case, there is really no necessity for covering a large portion of
the top of the box with a trap, but merely to have holes large enough to
attract flies to the light, and to cover these holes with ordinary
conical traps, with the legs cut off, so, that the bottoms of the traps
will fit closely to the box. The same arrangement can be made where
manure is kept in a pit. If manure boxes or pits are kept fly tight they
are satisfactory under farm or dairy conditions for the storage of
manure during the busy season when it can not be hauled out daily.


FREQUENCY WITH WHICH MANURE SHOULD BE REMOVED IN CITIES AND TOWNS.

In deciding the question as to how often manure should be removed in
cities and towns, it should be borne in mind that when the larvæ have
finished feeding they will often leave the manure and pupate in the
ground below or crawl some distance away to pupate in débris under
boards or stones and the like. Hence the manure should be removed before
the larvæ reach the migratory stage; that is to say, removal is
necessary every three days, and certainly not less frequently than twice
a week during the summer months. A series of orders issued in 1906 by
the health department of the District of Columbia, on the authority of
the Commissioners of the District, covers most of these points, and
these orders, which may well serve as a model to other communities
desiring to undertake similar measures, may be briefly condensed as
follows:


   HEALTH OFFICE REGULATIONS FOR CONTROL OF HOUSE FLIES IN CITIES.

     All stalls in which animals are kept shall have the surface of the
     ground covered with a water-tight floor. Every person occupying a
     building where domestic animals are kept shall maintain in
     connection therewith a bin or pit for the reception of manure and,
     pending the removal from the premises of the manure from the animal
     or animals, shall place such manure in said bin or pit. This bin
     shall be so constructed as to exclude rain water and shall in all
     other respects be water-tight, except as it may be connected with
     the public sewer. It shall be provided with a suitable cover and
     constructed so as to prevent the ingress and egress of flies. No
     person owning a stable shall keep any manure or permit any manure
     to be kept in or upon any portion of the premises other than the
     bin or pit described, nor shall he allow any such bin or pit to be
     overfilled or needlessly uncovered. Horse manure may be kept
     tightly rammed into well-covered barrels for the purpose of removal
     in such barrels. Every person keeping manure in the more densely
     populated parts of the District shall cause all such manure to be
     removed from the premises at least twice every week between June 1
     and October 31, and at least once every week between November 1 and
     May 31 of the following year. No person shall remove or transport
     any manure over any public highway in any of the more densely
     populated parts of the District except in a tight vehicle, which,
     if not inclosed, must be effectually covered with canvas, so as to
     prevent the manure from being dropped. No person shall deposit
     manure removed from the bins or pits within any of the more densely
     populated parts of the District without a permit from the health
     officer. Any person violating any of the provisions shall, upon
     conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $40 for
     each offense.

Not only must horse stables be cared for, but chicken yards, piggeries,
and garbage receptacles as well. In cities, with better methods of
disposal of garbage and with the lessening of the number of horses and
horse stables consequent upon electric street railways, bicycles, and
automobiles, the time may come, and before very long, when window
screens may be discarded.


DISPOSAL OF MANURE IN RURAL AND SUBURBAN DISTRICTS.

The control of flies in rural and suburban districts offers a much more
difficult problem. Here it is often out of the question to remove all
manure from the premises twice a week, and the problem is to find some
method of disposal or storage which will conserve the fertilizing value
of the manure and at the same time prevent all flies from breeding, or
destroy such as do breed there.

With this idea in mind, it has been recommended that stable manure be
collected every morning and hauled out at once and spread rather thinly
on the fields. This procedure is advisable from the point of view of
getting the maximum fertilizing value from the manure. Immediate
spreading on the fields is said largely to prevent the loss of plant
food which occurs when manure is allowed to stand in heaps for a long
time. This method will be effective in preventing the breeding of flies
only if the manure is hauled out promptly every morning and spread
thinly so that it will dry, since it is unfavorable for fly development
in desiccated condition. The proper scattering of the manure on the
fields is best and most easily and quickly accomplished by the use of a
manure spreader, and many dairies, and even farms, are practicing the
daily distribution of manure in this way. Removal every three or four
days will not be sufficient. Observations have shown that if manure
becomes flyblown and the maggots attain a fairly good size before the
manure is scattered on the fields, they can continue their development
and will pupate in the ground.


CHEMICAL TREATMENT OF MANURE TO DESTROY FLY MAGGOTS.

During the summer months, when fly breeding is going on most actively,
the farmer is also busy and often can not spare the time to remove
manure regularly. The general practice, therefore, has been to keep the
manure in heaps located, as a rule, very near the stables. How can fly
breeding be prevented in such accumulations? As a result of recent
investigations, it is now possible to point out two methods which are
practical and effective.

The first is the treatment of the manure pile with chemical substances
which will kill the eggs and maggots of the house fly. The Bureau of
Entomology, in cooperation with the Bureau of Chemistry and the Bureau
of Plant Industry, has conducted a series of experiments in which a
large number of chemicals were applied to infested manure and
observations made, not only on their efficiency in killing the maggots
but also as to their effect on the chemical composition and bacterial
flora of the manure. The object was to find some cheap chemical which
would be effective in destroying the fly larvæ and at the same time
would not reduce the fertilizing value of the manure.


TREATMENT WITH HELLEBORE.

Of the numerous substances tried, the one which seems best to fulfill
these conditions is powdered hellebore.[10] For the treatment of manure a
water extract of the hellebore is prepared by adding 1/2 pound of the
powder to every 10 gallons of water, and after stirring it is allowed to
stand 24 hours. The mixture thus prepared is sprinkled over the manure
at the rate of 10 gallons to every 8 bushels (10 cubic feet) of manure.
From the result of 12 experiments with manure piles treated under
natural conditions it appears that such treatment results in the
destruction of from 88 to 99 per cent of the fly larvæ.

Studies of treated manure indicated that its composition and rotting
were not interfered with. Furthermore, several field tests showed that
there was no apparent injury to growing crops when fertilized with
treated manure.

Since the solution is somewhat poisonous it should not be left exposed
where it might be drunk by livestock. It is quite safe to say that
chickens will not be injured by pecking at hellebore-treated manure.
This has been tested carefully. Hellebore can be obtained both in ground
and powdered form, but the powder gives the best results in the
destruction of fly larvæ.

[Footnote 10: _Veratrum viride_ or _V. aloum_.]


TREATMENT WITH POWDERED BORAX.

Another chemical found to be even more effective as a larvicide is
powdered borax. This substance is available in commercial form in all
parts of the country. It has the advantage of being comparatively
nonpoisonous and noninflammable and is easily transported and handled.
The minimum amount necessary to kill fly larvæ was found to be 0.62
pound per 8 bushels of manure, or about 1 pound per 16 cubic feet. Best
results were obtained when the borax was applied in solution, or when
water was sprinkled on after the borax had been scattered evenly over
the pile. Borax is not only effective in killing the larvæ, but when it
comes in contact with the eggs it prevents them from hatching. When
applied at the rate of 1 pound to 16 cubic feet it was found to kill
about 90 per cent of the larvæ, heavier applications killing from 98 to
99 per cent.

Borax has no injurious effect on the chemical composition or rotting of
the manure. However, when added in large quantities with manure to the
soil it will cause considerable injury to growing plants. A number of
experiments have been conducted to determine the effect on crops of the
use of manure treated with borax as herein recommended. When applied at
the rate of 15 tons per acre it appears that no injury as a rule will
follow. Some crops are more sensitive to borax than others, and also the
tendency to injury appears to vary on different soils. It is necessary,
therefore, to repeat the warning issued in connection with a previous
bulletin[11] on this subject, that great care be exercised, in the
application of borax, that the manure does not receive more than 1 pound
for every 16 cubic feet, and that not more than 15 tons of manure so
treated are applied to the acre.

In view of the possible injury from the borax treatment as a result of
carelessness in applying it, or from other unforeseen conditions, it is
recommended that horse manure and other farmyard manures which are to be
used as fertilizer be treated with hellebore. Borax, on the other hand,
is such a good larvicide that it call be used with advantage on the
ground of soil-floor stables, in privies, on refuse piles, and on any
accumulations of fermenting organic matter which are not to be used for
fertilizing purposes.

[Footnote 11: Department Bulletin 118, U. S. Department of Agriculture,
p. 25.]


TREATMENT WITH CALCIUM CYANAMID AND ACID PHOSPHATE.

Many experiments with mixtures of commercial fertilizers were tried to
determine whether fly larvæ would be killed by any substance the
addition of which would increase the fertilizing value of the manure. A
mixture of calcium cyanamid and acid phosphate was found to possess
considerable larvicidal action. Several experiments showed that 1/2
pound of calcium cyanamid plus 1/2 pound of acid phosphate to each
bushel of manure give an apparent larvicidal action of 98 per cent. The
mixture in the form of a powder was scattered evenly over the surface
and then wet down with water. The use of this mixture adds to the manure
two important elements, nitrogen and phosphorus.


MAGGOT TRAP FOR DESTRUCTION OF FLY LARVÆ FROM HORSE MANURE.

The second method of handling manure is one which does not require the
application of chemicals. It is based on the fact, mentioned on page 4,
that the larvæ of the house fly, a few hours before they are ready to
pupate, show a strong tendency to migrate. This migration takes place
mostly at night, and the larvæ sometimes crawl considerable distances
from the manure pile. Now it is possible by means of a very simple
arrangement called a maggot trap to destroy fully 99 per cent of all
maggots breeding in a given lot of manure. A successful maggot trap
which the Maryland Agricultural College constructed at the college barn
is shown in Figure 9. The trap was designed by R. H. Hutchison and
constructed under his supervision. The manure, instead of being thrown
on the ground, is heaped carefully on a slatted platform, which stands
about 1 foot high. This particular platform measures 10 by 20 feet.
There are six 2 by 4 pieces running lengthwise 2 feet apart. Across
these are nailed 1-inch strips with 1/2 to 1 inch spaces between them.
The wooden platform stands on a concrete floor, and a rim or wall of
concrete 4 inches high surrounds the floor. The floor slopes a little
toward one corner from which a pipe leads to a small cistern near by.
This pipe is plugged with a stopper of soft wood, and the concrete floor
is filled with water to a depth of 1 inch in the shallowest part. Flies
will lay their eggs on the manure as usual, but the maggots, when they
have finished feeding and begin to migrate, crawl out of the manure,
drop into the water below, and are drowned. Each week the plug is
removed from the pipe, and all the maggots are washed into the cistern.
The floor is then cleaned of any solid particles by means of a
long-handled stable broom or by a strong stream of water from a hose.
The pipe being again plugged, the floor is again partly filled with
water and the trap is ready for another week's catch. A platform of this
size will hold the manure accumulating from four horses during the
period of four months, or about 20 days' accumulation from 25 horses, if
the heap is well built and made at least 5 feet high.

[Illustration: FIG. 9. A maggot trap for house-fly control. View showing
the concrete basin containing water in which larvæ are drowned, and the
wooden platform on which manure is heaped. (Hutchison.)]

Experience with this maggot trap clearly indicates that best results can
be secured if the manure is compactly heaped on the platform and kept
thoroughly moistened. It is best to apply a small amount of water each
morning after the stable cleanings have been added to the pile. It
should be borne in mind that in order to make this trap a success the
platform beneath the pile must be kept comparatively free of
accumulations of manure, and moisture applied regularly to drive the
maggots out.


COMPACT HEAPING OF MANURE.

Another method of disposing of manure has been recommended by English
writers. The manure is built up in a compact rectangular heap, the sides
of which are beaten hard with shovels. The ground around the edges of
the heap is made smooth and hard and loose straw is placed in small
windrows around the manure pile about 1 foot from the edge. The
exclusion of the air, together with the high temperature and gases
formed by fermentation, tends to make the heap unfavorable for the
development of fly larvæ. Those which do happen to develop in the
surface layers will migrate and pupate in the ring of straw around the
heap, where they are destroyed by burning.


GARBAGE DISPOSAL AND TREATMENT OF MISCELLANEOUS BREEDING PLACES.

It is just as true under farm conditions as in cities that breeding
places other than horse manure must be attended to. Garbage must be
disposed of, hog and poultry manure must be cared for, and especially on
dairy farms it is extremely important that every precaution be taken to
prevent the contamination of milk by flies.

It is very desirable that all refuse possible, accumulated from cities
and towns, be burned. Incineration has been practiced successfully by a
number of towns and cities with populations of from 10,000 to 15,000 and
over. In larger cities provision should be made for burning carcasses as
well as garbage and other refuse. If city and town garbage is sold to
hog feeders the municipal authorities should have control of the
sanitary conditions about the feeding yards, as there is great danger
from fly breeding in such places if not kept clean.


SEWAGE DISPOSAL IN RELATION TO THE PREVENTION OF FLY-BORNE DISEASES.

In the consideration of these measures we have not touched upon the
remedies for house flies breeding in human excrement. On account of the
danger of the carriage of typhoid fever, the dropping of human excrement
in the open in cities or towns, either in vacant lots or in dark
alleyways, should be made a misdemeanor, and the same care should be
taken by the sanitary authorities to remove or cover up such depositions
as is taken in the removal of the bodies of dead animals. For modern
methods of sewage disposal adapted for farm use one should consult
Department of Agriculture Department Bulletin No. 57. In the absence of
modern methods of sewage disposal, absolutely sanitary privies are prime
necessities, whether in towns or on farms. Directions for building and
caring for such privies will be found in Farmers' Bulletin 463 and in
Yearbook Separate 712, "Sewage Disposal on the Farm." The box privy is
always a nuisance from many points of view, and is undoubtedly dangerous
as a breeder of flies which may carry the germs of intestinal diseases.
The dry-earth treatment of privies is unsatisfactory. No box privy
should be permitted to exist unless it is thoroughly and regularly
treated with some effective larvicide. Since the fecal matter in such
privies is seldom used for fertilizing purposes it may well be treated
liberally with borax. The powdered borax may be scattered two or three
times a week over the exposed surface so as to whiten it.




WHAT COMMUNITIES CAN DO TO ELIMINATE THE HOUSE FLY.


Antifly crusades have been very numerous in recent years, and some have
been noteworthy both in methods and in results. However, it will not be
amiss here to emphasize the importance of concerted, organized effort on
the part of whole communities, not only cities, but suburban and rural
neighborhoods as well. By the most painstaking care one may prevent all
fly breeding on his premises, but it will avail him little if his
neighbors are not equally careful. Some sort of cooperation is
necessary. One of the first and most important elements in any antifly
crusade is a vigorous and continued educational campaign. It has been
the experience of those who have undertaken such crusades that people
generally regard the fly as a somewhat harmless nuisance and that the
first work of the campaign was to bring the people to a realization of
the dangers from flies and the possibility of getting rid of them. In
the educational campaign every possible means of publicity can be
employed, including newspapers, lectures, moving pictures, posters,
handbills, cartoons, instruction in schools, etc.

The antifly crusade is a matter of public interest and should be
supported by the community as a whole and engineered by the health
officers. But health officers can do little toward the necessary work of
inspection and elimination without funds, and therefore the support of
the campaign must manifest itself in increased appropriations for
public-health work. Very often it is lack of funds which prevents the
health officers from taking the initiative in the antifly crusades, and
there must necessarily be much agitation and education before they can
profitably take up the work. Right here lies a field for civic
associations, women's clubs, boards of trade, etc., to exercise their
best energy, initiative, and leadership.




ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE WHEN THIS
PUBLICATION WAS LAST PRINTED

  _Secretary of Agriculture_              ARTHUR M. HYDE.

  _Assistant Secretary_                   R. W. DUNLAP.

  _Director of Scientific Work_           A. F. WOODS.

  _Director of Regulatory Work_           WALTER G. CAMPBELL.

  _Director of Extension Work_            C. W. WARBURTON.

  _Director of Personnel and Business
       Administration_                    W. W. STOCKBERGER.

  _Director of Information_               M. S. EISENHOWER.

  _Solicitor_                             E. L. MARSHALL.

  _Bureau of Agricultural Economics_      NILS A. OLSEN, _Chief_.

  _Bureau of Agricultural Engineering_    S. H. MCCRORY, _Chief_.

  _Bureau of Animal Industry_             JOHN R. MOHLER, _Chief_.

  _Bureau of Biological Survey_           PAUL G. REDINGTON, _Chief_.

  _Bureau of Chemistry and Soils_         H. G. KNIGHT, _Chief_.

  _Office of Cooperative Extension Work_  C. B. SMITH, _Chief_.

  _Bureau of Dairy Industry_              O. E. REED, _Chief_.

  _Bureau of Entomology_                  C. L. MARLATT, _Chief_.

  _Office of Experiment Stations_         JAMES T. JARDINE, _Chief_.

  _Food and Drug Administration_          WALTER G. CAMPBELL, _Director_
                                          _of Regulatory Work, in Charge._

  _Forest Service_                        R. Y. STUART, _Chief_.

  _Grain Futures Administration_          J. W. T. DUVEL, _Chief_.

  _Bureau of Home Economics_              LOUISE STANLEY, _Chief_.

  _Library_                               CLARIBEL R. BARNETT, _Librarian_.

  _Bureau of Plant Industry_              WILLIAM A. TAYLOR, _Chief_.

  _Bureau of Plant Quarantine_            LEE A. STRONG, _Chief_.

  _Bureau of Public Roads_                THOMAS H. MACDONALD, _Chief_.

  _Weather Bureau_                        CHARLES F. MARVIN, _Chief_.


U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1938


For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D. C.
Price 5 cents


[Transcriber's Note:
Footnotes 10 & 11 renumbered to avoid the confusion generated
by two footnote 9's.]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The House Fly and How to Suppress It, by 
L. O. Howard and F. C. Bishopp

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE FLY AND HOW TO ***

***** This file should be named 18050-8.txt or 18050-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/0/5/18050/

Produced by K.D. Thornton and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

