The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brochure Series of Architectural
Illustration, Volume 01, No. 03, March 1895, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Brochure Series of Architectural Illustration, Volume 01, No. 03, March 1895
       The Cloister at Monreale, Near Palermo, Sicily

Author: Various

Release Date: July 17, 2006 [EBook #18852]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROCHURE SERIES OF ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sigal Alon and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE BROCHURE SERIES

OF ARCHITECTURAL ILLUSTRATION.


VOL. I.    MARCH, 1895.    No. 3.


THE CLOISTER AT MONREALE, NEAR PALERMO, SICILY.


The island of Sicily, being in form nearly an equilateral triangle, with
one side facing towards Italy, another towards Greece, and the third,
towards Africa, was a tempting field for conquest to the various nations
surrounding it. It was successively overrun by the Greeks,
Carthaginians, and Romans, and later, after the Christian era, again
successively by the Byzantines, the Moors, and the Normans. Almost all
of the architectural remains of the older periods belong to the time of
the Greeks, as neither the Carthaginians nor Romans left much to show
for their occupation of the island. With the exception of occasional
ruined examples surviving from the time of the Dorian Greeks who
colonized Sicily, most of the monuments now existing belong to the
Byzantine, Saracenic, and Romanesque periods. As would be natural to
expect, the latter influences are not clearly separable one from another
either in time or in locality. They overlap in all directions; but in
general the Byzantine, which was the earliest and most powerful element,
is found more strongly marked, and more frequently on the east coast. It
however forms the groundwork and is the main ingredient of all that
follows. The Saracenic work, which succeeds the Byzantine in date, found
a stronger foothold in the South, on the coast nearest Africa; and the
influence of the Normans appears in the North.

Every new race of masters in this frequent recurrence of conquest found
the island already occupied by a very numerous population of extremely
various origin. The newcomers could do no more than add their own forms
to those previously in use; the consequence being in every case a mixed
style, containing elements derived from every portion of the
inhabitants.

Palermo, being on the northern coast, has felt the Norman influence
strongly. Its architecture is principally Romanesque in form, with a
generous admixture of Byzantine and Saracenic motives in detail and
decoration. Exuberance of detail and wealth of color are the rule.

Under the Norman conquerors the Sicilians built as they were directed.
Their arts and their civilization were superior to those of their
masters, and the Normans were apparently willing to make use of this
superiority, and merely adapted the forms of decoration and methods of
construction which they found here in use to their own needs and
purposes. The polychromatic decoration of the buildings of this
neighborhood, such as the interiors of the Capella Palatina and the
cathedral at Monreale, ranks among the most successful, if it be not the
most successful, work of its class now in existence. It is thoroughly
Oriental in character, although applied to buildings intended for Roman
ritual. On account of the great superiority of the Moors in art and
civilization, not only to the Normans but to all the other inhabitants
at the time of the Norman conquest, in the eleventh century, many of the
buildings of this period show very little Norman influence. In fact the
Oriental character is so extreme in some instances, such as the church
of San Giovanni degli Eremiti, that there is very little to suggest that
it was Norman and intended for Norman uses.

The village of Monreale is situated on the steep mountain-side about
five miles to the west of and overlooking the city of Palermo. The
cathedral and the cloister-adjoining it on the south were both parts of
a Benedictine convent, which is now mostly in ruins. They were erected
by King William the Second, between the years 1174 and 1182, and richly
endowed by him. The plan of the cathedral is that of a basilica.

The famous cloister, with coupled columns and clusters of four in the
corners, and with a charming fountain and a separate little square of
cloisters around it, as it were, in one corner of the open space, is one
of the most interesting relics of Palermo. In arrangement it follows the
style universal in the countries bordering on the Mediterranean, that
is, consisting of a pointed arcade supported by small but elegant
columns of Corinthian design, grouped in pairs; while in the North, in
England, France, and Germany, a cloister is formed of a series of
unglazed windows.

The columns surrounding the fountain, which unfortunately cannot be seen
in the general view given in Plate XX., show the richest decoration. The
shafts are either plain, rusticated, or covered with patterns executed
in relief or mosaic.

There appears to be some doubt as to the date of this work, as the
columns have evidently been inserted since the arches which spring from
them were built. The discrepancy will be seen in Plates XVIII., XIX.,
and XX. The disproportion of the dainty columns and capitals to the
heavy arches which are entirely in keeping with the architecture of the
rest of the cathedral, but which manifestly do not fit the columns,
leads to the conclusion that the columns were a later addition, although
probably inserted soon after the other work was completed.




[Illustration: XVII. Capitals from the Cloister of Monreale, Sicily.]


XVII.

CAPITALS FROM THE CLOISTER OF MONREALE, SICILY.

The hybrid character of this work will be perfectly evident at a glance.
It plainly belongs to none of the styles of the North, but nevertheless
has a distinct character and unmistakable charm. The use of mosaic
originally placed in the channels of the shafts added greatly to the
decorative effect and airiness of these columns.




[Illustration: XVIII. Capitals from the Cloister of Monreale, Sicily.]


XVIII.

CAPITALS FROM THE CLOISTER OF MONREALE, SICILY.

A common device in most of the Romanesque cloisters for adding interest
to the long colonnade was the grouping of two columns of dissimilar
design. This plan is followed here in treating the mosaic inlay
vertically in one and horizontally in the other.




[Illustration: XIX. Capitals from the Cloister of Monreale, Sicily.]


XIX.

CAPITALS FROM THE CLOISTER OF MONREALE, SICILY.

The design of the capitals shown in this plate follows the Corinthian
model very closely.




[Illustration: XX. The Cloister of Monreale, Sicily.]


XX.

THE CLOISTER OF MONREALE, SICILY.

In a later number of THE BROCHURE SERIES another view of this most
charming building will be given. The portion surrounding the fountain,
with its groups of four clustered columns, is, in many respects, the
most beautiful portion of the structure This will be taken up later.




Ravenna Capitals.


With the reign of Constantine, and the introduction of Christianity as
the acknowledged religion of Rome, Byzantine art, as such, made its
appearance. The culture of Rome was transferred to Byzantium, henceforth
to be known as Constantinople. Governed alternately by Greek and by
Persian, it had received a strong Oriental character from the Eastern
nations, and had added to the Greek subtlety and delicacy of expression
the Oriental love of detail. When converted by Constantine into New
Rome, it became a perfect treasure house of Eastern and Grecian art. The
Byzantine work, which spread over the East in the sixth, seventh, and
eighth centuries, is therefore a union of the refinement of the Greek,
the desire for color and detail of the Oriental, and the vigor of
constructional invention and conception of mass and grandeur of the
Roman. A portion of it was transplanted to Ravenna during Justinian's
reign, and there is a glorious afterglow in the Venetian splendor of the
tenth and eleventh centuries. The three great centres of Byzantine art
work are Constantinople, Ravenna, and Venice; and the three most noted
examples, the churches of Sta. Sophia, S. Vitale, and St. Mark's. Apart
from these, the cathedral at Monreale, and the Capella Palatina in
Palermo, Sicily, represent a variation from the Byzantine type affected
by Moslem design.

From the time of Constantine to that of Justinian, one hundred and fifty
years, is a period of formation. Under the reign of Justinian, Byzantine
art reached its height. Prominent among its factors is the use of
mosaic, the influence of which spread insidiously through its whole
system, until in the later work the cornices and entablatures of classic
design withered into long thin lines of moulding; projections which
disturbed the effect of color by the shadows they cast were discarded;
voussoirs disappeared under a mosaic veil; surfaces resolved themselves
into broad expanses of infinitely varied tones, bounded by narrow but
strongly contrasting bands and borders of marble. All ornament had
resolved itself into surface decoration, or as nearly that as possible.

In 539 Belisarius took Ravenna in the name of the Emperor Justinian, and
to celebrate this event Justinian decided to erect a magnificent
monument in the city. He chose to replace, by a more important
structure, the small church dedicated to S. Vitale, and built by Néon in
the reign of Theodoric.

The wonderful basilica of Sta. Sophia at Constantinople was just
completed, and the novelty of its plan and immense effect Produced by
its dome, a method of construction entirely novel in Roman architecture,
doubtless excited the admiration of the Emperor and led to the adoption
of a similar plan for S. Vitale. S. Vitale 18 by no means a copy of Sta.
Sophia, but unquestionably was strongly influenced by it.

It was founded in 540, and consecrated in 547. It is octagonal in plan,
with an inner structure of eight large piers, arranged in a circle,
connected by arches which support a pendentive dome. Following the
custom then in vogue, its interior is incrusted throughout with
elaborate mosaics in a wealth of color. The most elaborate design and
richest color is used in the apse, which was the centre of display in
all Byzantine churches.




[Illustration: XXI. Capital from the Apse of the Church of S. Vitale,
Ravenna, Italy.]


XXI.

CAPITAL FROM THE APSE OF THE CHURCH OF S. VITALE, RAVENNA, ITALY.

This is one of the most beautiful and most characteristic capitals of
the Byzantine style. Its form and decoration are both typical of the
style. The flat treatment of the interlace of the vine motive is very
generally used, and can be seen in great variety in S. Vitale and
elsewhere. The ornament is here enriched with gold and color. In the
double capitals of Ravenna the upper member, or cushion, is usually
ornamented with symbolic designs drawn from various sources, both Pagan
and Christian.




[Illustration: XXII. Capital from the Church of S. Vitale, Ravenna,
Italy.]


XXII.

CAPITAL FROM THE CHURCH OF S. VITALE, RAVENNA, ITALY.

Here again is the rhomboidal double capital of a much more severe design
than that of the preceding plate, but with a remarkable delicacy and
refinement of treatment.




[Illustration: XXIII. Capital from the Church of S. Vitale, Ravenna,
Italy.]


XXIII.

CAPITAL FROM THE CHURCH OF S. VITALE, RAVENNA, ITALY.

This is a mean between the two extreme types shown in Plates XXI. and
XXII.

In all these examples the treatment of the angles should be noted.
Strong confining lines, with a distinct upward tendency of the ornament,
contrasted with the flat sides, contribute much to the good effect of
these capitals as constructive members.




[Illustration: XXIV. Capital in the Museum of the Accademia di Belle
Arti, Ravenna, Italy.]


XXIV.

CAPITAL IN THE MUSEUM OF THE ACCADEMIA DI BELLE ARTI, RAVENNA, ITALY.

Whether this capital was originally intended for S. Vitale or some of
the other churches of Ravenna we cannot state, but at all events it is a
fitting companion for the others illustrated in this number.




The Brochure Series

of Architectural Illustration.

PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY

BATES & GUILD,

6 BEACON STREET, BOSTON, MASS.


Subscription Rates per year 50 cents, in advance. Special Club Rate for
five subscriptions $2.00.

Entered at the Boston Post Office as Second-class Matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

An illustrated catalogue has come to be one of the important features of
exhibitions of architectural drawings, and these catalogues are now
exceedingly valuable records of recent progress in architecture. The
contributions of the present year to this department of an architect's
library are especially notable. Of the catalogues which have come to our
notice, that of the architectural exhibition at the Academy of Fine Arts
in Philadelphia is in point of illustration the most complete, and shows
the most judicious selection of material. In this there was a marked
endeavor to give as large a number of geometrical drawings as possible,
and it is unquestionably a move in the right direction. The desire for
the picturesque, which has been until recently the ruling motive with
American architects, has had its day, and trained and conservative
designers have gradually taken the place of the pyrotechnic draughtsman
of the past. The change has been working gradually to be sure, but scale
and detail drawings both in the exhibitions, which of necessity are
intended to appeal to a more or less popular taste, and in the
professional journals are from year to year growing more prominent. In
their recognition of this tendency, the Philadelphia catalogue committee
are to be highly commended.

The same trend may be observed in a little less marked degree in the
Architectural League catalogue. The exhibitions of the League have for
years been the models by which minor exhibitions have been ruled, and
its catalogue has been a guide to all others. As usual there is a great
deal of valuable and interesting material presented in its
illustrations.

The Catalogue Committee of the St. Louis exhibition have made a
departure from the general rule, and increased the size of their pages,
allowing the use of much larger plates. In some of the drawings this is
a distinct advantage, and their catalogue gains in consequence.

The Boston Society of Architects and the Boston Architectural Club will
hold a joint exhibition in April, and their catalogue now promises to be
a very creditable publication.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the recent draughtsmen's competitions, Boston has been more than
ordinarily fortunate. The medal in both the competitions of the Society
of Beaux-Arts Architects has come to Mr. F. M. Mann, of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and a number of the first and
second mentions have also come to Boston. In fact, nearly if not quite
all the designs sent from Boston have received some recognition at the
hands of the jury.

A complimentary dinner has been arranged for by the M. I. T.
Architectural Society in honor of the winners of the last competition.

The annual competition for the Architectural League gold medal, which
was awarded to Mr. A. H. Wright, also resulted in adding another victory
to the credit of Boston draughtsmen.

Interest in these contests is not purely local, however, for
Philadelphia, Rochester, and several other cities have furnished
contributors and shared the honors. Mr. H. L. Duhring, Jr., of
Philadelphia, was awarded the Architectural League silver medal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fulfilling the bequest of the late Arthur Rotch leaving $5,000 to the
Boston Architectural Club, this sum has been paid to the treasurer of
the club by the executors of Mr. Rotch's estate. The income only is to
be expended in the purchase of books to form an architectural library.
This is only one of many indications that the architectural clubs of the
country are recognized as permanent and established institutions. With
the spread of this feeling their influence will grow in importance, and
as the working foundation of the profession they deserve all the
encouragement that can be given them.




The Cleveland Architectural Club.


There are none of the now numerous architectural associations of the
country which can more deservingly congratulate themselves upon the
early success of their first few months of existence than the Cleveland
Architectural Club, which was organized on the 22d of last November, and
is now only four months old.

Its original members, fifteen in number, met in the office of Messrs.
Coburn & Barnum, and here the meetings for the few succeeding weeks were
also held.

It soon became evident that a wide field of usefulness was open to the
new organization, and a permanent location of its own would become
necessary. Such a location in the heart of the city, with all necessary
conveniences, was found in the Garfield Building, and the new rooms have
been properly fitted up for the use of the club.

With the purpose of making the influence of its work as far-reaching as
possible, the restriction which has commonly been applied in other
similar clubs, limiting the membership to architects and draughtsmen, or
at least limiting the number of non professional members, has been
entirely done away with, and any one who may have an interest in
architecture or the "allied arts" is eligible for membership. What will
be the effect of this arrangement it remains for the future to decide.
In some of the older clubs it has been found by experience that the
professional membership was overbalanced and its work impeded by a too
large non-professional element, and the professional lines have been
closely drawn in consequence.

The work thus far entered upon is modest but of an important character,
and if pursued with the earnest purpose which has marked the first few
months will lead to a fruitful future.

Of the monthly competitions in design the one for March, the subject of
which is a scheme for the public buildings of Cleveland, has attracted
considerable attention, and the public exhibition of the designs will
doubtless lead to profitable discussion outside the club. A plan which
we believe has not been adopted here, but which has been the means of
awakening considerable interest in the study of design in the clubs of
New York, Philadelphia, and Boston, might possibly be followed to
advantage. In the January number of THE BROCHURE SERIES the competitions
instituted by the Society of Beaux-Arts Architects were outlined. Of
course with all the numberless calls upon his time, the average
draughtsman does not have the leisure to properly study and render the
drawings required in these competitions; but by the joining of forces
four or five, or even more, men can easily work out such a problem, and
in some respects the advantages to be gained are greater than is the
case when an individual works alone. Several large tables can be
provided in the club-rooms, and the problem worked up as a club design.
This plan has been followed in the Boston Architectural Club with great
success.

The study of academic design is of the utmost importance to the young
architect, and unfortunately the opportunities for such study in the
usual routine of office practice are not very extensive. The working out
each season of two or three such designs as those required by the
Beaux-Arts Society will be of material benefit to the older men who are
already familiar with the academic methods of design, and of much more
benefit to the younger men whose opportunities have been more limited.
The criticism and suggestion of the older men in the profession is
easily obtained while the work is in progress. Nothing could be better
calculated to foster a certain _esprit de corps_, which is certainly a
desirable quality in any club.

The personnel of the Cleveland Club is as follows: Benj. S. Hubbell,
president; Harry S. Nelson, vice-president; Herbert B. Briggs,
secretary; Perley H. Griffin, librarian; E. E. Noble, treasurer; W. D.
Benes and Wilbur M. Hall, members of the executive board. The officers
and Robert Allen, Frederick Baird, J. W. Russell, G. B. Bohm, Williard
Hirsh, Ray Rice, Albert E. Skeel, and C. S. Schneider constitute the
charter membership.




Books.


_Church of Sancta Sophia, Constantinople_: A Study of Byzantine
Building. By W. R. Lethaby and Harold Swainson. Macmillan & Co. 1894.
307 pages with illustrations. $6.50.

It seems especially fitting that a notice of Mr. Lethaby's work on the
church of Sta. Sophia, or as he calls it Sancta Sophia, should appear in
the same issue with the beautiful Byzantine capitals from Ravenna, which
we publish this month. In the description of this work from Ravenna, on
another page, the connection is pointed out between Constantinople, the
capital of the Roman Empire in the East, and Ravenna, then the Western
capital.

The work before us is an important and exhaustive study, both
architecturally and historically, of this beautiful building, which Mr.
Van Brunt has called "the central building of the world." Nothing has
ever been done in enriching interiors which approaches in splendor the
best work of the Byzantine builders, and Sta. Sophia, by general
consent, is the most beautiful of the Byzantine churches; but its
exterior is by no means without faults, and its claim for distinction
would fall if supported only by this.

The book takes up in order the history of Sta. Sophia, with citations of
various authorities for statements concerning its early history;
accounts of the various vicissitudes through which it has passed; its
construction, lighting, details, mosaics, etc., all carefully and
conscientiously described, the descriptive portion based on a
painstaking study of the building itself. The illustrations which
accompany the text are numerous and excellent; there is no attempt to
furnish illustrations at large scale, which are already accessible in
Salzenberg.

The monumental work of Salzenberg, which has been the architect's
reference book for Sta. Sophia, is referred to and largely quoted from.

The two articles by Mr. Henry Van Brunt and Prof. A. D. F. Hamlin,
published in _The Architectural Review_, Vol. II., No. 5, and Vol. III.,
No. 2, will be found of considerable interest in connection with Mr.
Lethaby's book.




Club Notes.


When in our January issue it was announced that we should devote a
certain amount of space and attention to the architectural clubs of the
country, we had no idea of the extent to which these organizations had
developed within the last year or two. The work of a few of the older
clubs was familiar to us, but it is a surprise to find that nearly every
city of importance in the United States has an active and flourishing
society of draughtsmen and young architects. It may be well to suggest
right here that any city which has not such an organization should look
to its laurels.

Among the newer accessions to the ranks is the Baltimore Architectural
Club. It is fortunate in being able to start with a strong, if limited
membership. It is holding weekly meetings, and has already instituted a
series of monthly competitions in design, for which a small cash prize
is offered.

The list of officers is the best evidence of its seriousness of purpose
and ability to accomplish an unlimited amount of good work.

The officers are: president, J. E. Sperry; vice-president, J. B. N.
Wyatt; secretary, Louis E. Simon; and E. F. Baldwin, George Worthington,
J. W. Case, and W. G. Keimig, together with the officers, constitute the
Board of Control.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Sketch Club of New York is following the lead of the Chicago
Architectural Club in delegating to one or two of its members the office
of Entertainment Committee for one evening, when these members act as
hosts and provide for the entertainment of the club. This plan has
resulted in an increased attendance at the meetings, and is giving
general satisfaction.

       *       *       *       *       *

An outgrowth of the Boston Architectural Club which has shown a great
deal of vitality and in many ways justified its claim to a separate
existence is the little club of twelve members known as the "P. D's."
Without organization and with only the mutual desire for a sort of
Bohemian companionship, these congenial spirits have worked together and
amused each other for the last two years.

They are all members of the Architectural Club and among its most
zealous supporters.

The mystic monogram of the club, the initials P and D contained in a
circle, which was placed on their designs submitted in the two
Beaux-Arts competitions, has probably set more than one interested
person guessing its significance. Its primary meaning is said to be
"Poor Draughtsmen."

       *       *       *       *       *

Preceding the last regular meeting of the Philadelphia T Square Club an
informal supper was held at "Bohemia," a charming rathsheller recently
designed by Wilson Eyre, Jr., a member of the executive committee of the
club. The president, Walter Cope, presided, while the fifty-four members
present lubricated their supper with 158 steins of old musty ale.

The meeting which followed was of unusual interest, as the double
programme brought forth a great many designs.

In the competition for a chapel located on the terrace of a wealthy
gentleman's country house, Albert Kelsey, who submitted two sets of
drawings, was fortunate enough to win both first and second mentions,
while E. S. Powers was voted third place.

The competition for a pedestal for a monument was well contested, but
the winner of the first place failed to claim his design. Mr. A. C.
Munoz, a former winner of the McKim Travelling Scholarship, won second
place; and Chas. Z. Klauder, third.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the list of Architectural Clubs contained in our February issue
should be added the following:--

Baltimore Architectural Club; secretary, Louis E. Simon, Builders'
Exchange Building.

Cincinnati Architectural Club; secretary, John E. Zettel, 227 Main St.




Society of Beaux-Arts Architects.


The Committee on Education proposes as the subject for its third
competition.

    A LARGE CITY CHURCH

for an Episcopal parish.

The wealth of the congregation has been lavished upon this building to
give it a special character of devotion and beauty, to which the
richness of material and the sedate spirit of its classic architecture
alike contribute.

In addition to the vast body of the church, which is to be so arranged
as to give an impression of amplitude and splendor, provision should be
made for vestry, sacristy, and choir-room, conveniently situated for the
service of the sanctuary. Two small chapels for the celebration of minor
services will be situated so as to be accessible both from the exterior
and from the interior of the church proper.

The plot of ground secured for the building is rectangular, and measures
two hundred feet by four hundred feet, open to streets on all sides.

Sketches of plan, elevation, and section, at a scale of one
thirty-second inch to the foot, will be required of all students wishing
to compete; these sketches should be made on opaque drawing paper, not
tracing paper, and forwarded not later than 22d April, 1895, to Mr. John
E. Howe, 140 West 34th Street, New York City.

For the finished drawings the plan will be rendered at a scale of one
sixteenth inch to the foot, the elevation and section at twice that
scale, and a detail at a quarter of the size of execution. The finished
drawings should in every case be mounted on stretchers. The address to
which they are to be forwarded will be announced later. All drawings
must be sent on or before 24th June, 1895.

(Signed) ERNEST FLAGG, _Chairman_,
         JOHN M. CARRERE,
         JOHN G. HOWARD,
         THOMAS HASTINGS,
         WHITNEY WARREN,
         JOHN E. HOWE, _Secretary, Committee on Education_.

This competition is open to all students of architecture. Conditions of
judgment and jury to be arranged by the committee.

1st April, 1895.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brochure Series of Architectural
Illustration, Volume 01, No. 03, March 1895, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROCHURE SERIES OF ***

***** This file should be named 18852-8.txt or 18852-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/8/5/18852/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sigal Alon and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

