The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tablets of the Divine Plan by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license

This is a _copyrighted_ Project Gutenberg eBook, details below. Please
follow the copyright guidelines in this file.



Title: Tablets of the Divine Plan

Author: ‘Abdu’l-Bahá

Release Date: /September 2006 [Ebook #19296]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TABLETS OF THE DIVINE PLAN***





Tablets of the Divine Plan


by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá




Edition 1, (/September 2006)





                           BAHA’I TERMS OF USE


You have permission to freely make and use copies of the text and any
other information ("Content") available on this Site including printing,
emailing, posting, distributing, copying, downloading, uploading,
transmitting, displaying the Content in whole or in part subject to the
following:

1. Our copyright notice and the source reference must be attached to the
Content;

2. The Content may not be modified or altered in any way except to change
the font or appearance;

3. The Content must be used solely for a non-commercial purpose.

Although this blanket permission to reproduce the Content is given freely
such that no special permission is required, the Bahá’í International
Community retains full copyright protection for all Content included at
this Site under all applicable national and international laws.

For permission to publish, transmit, display or otherwise use the Content
for any commercial purpose, please contact us
(http://reference.bahai.org/en/contact.html).





                                 CONTENTS


Baha’i Terms of Use
1: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE NORTHEASTERN STATES
2: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE SOUTHERN STATES
3: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE CENTRAL STATES
4: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE WESTERN STATES
5: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF CANADA AND GREENLAND
6: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA
7: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA
8: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA
9: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE NORTHEASTERN STATES
10: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE SOUTHERN STATES
11: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE CENTRAL STATES
12: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE WESTERN STATES
13: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF CANADA AND GREENLAND
14: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA






1: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE NORTHEASTERN STATES


_Revealed on March 26, 1916, in ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s room at the house in Bahjí,
addressed to the Bahá’ís of nine Northeastern States of the United States:
Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Connecticut, Vermont,
Pennsylvania, New Jersey and New York. _

1 O ye heavenly heralds:

2 These are the days of Naw-Rúz. I am always thinking of those kind
friends! I beg for each and all of you confirmations and assistance from
the threshold of oneness, so that those gatherings may become ignited like
unto candles, in the republics of America, enkindling the light of the
love of God in the hearts; thus the rays of the heavenly teachings may
begem and brighten the states of America like the infinitude of immensity
with the stars of the Most Great Guidance.

3 The Northeastern States on the shores of the Atlantic—Maine, New
Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, Vermont,
Pennsylvania, New Jersey and New York—in some of these states believers
are found, but in some of the cities of these states up to this date
people are not yet illumined with the lights of the Kingdom and are not
aware of the heavenly teachings; therefore, whenever it is possible for
each one of you, hasten ye to those cities and shine forth like unto the
stars with the light of the Most Great Guidance. God says in the glorious
Qur’án: “The soil was black and dried. Then we caused the rain to descend
upon it and immediately it became green, verdant, and every kind of plant
sprouted up luxuriantly.”(1) In other words, He says the earth is black,
but when the spring showers descend upon it that black soil is quickened,
and variegated flowers are pushed forth. This means the souls of humanity
belonging to the world of nature are black like unto the soil. But when
the heavenly outpourings descend and the radiant effulgences appear, the
hearts are resuscitated, are liberated from the darkness of nature and the
flowers of divine mysteries grow and become luxuriant. Consequently man
must become the cause of the illumination of the world of humanity and
propagate the holy teachings revealed in the sacred books through the
divine inspiration. It is stated in the blessed Gospel: Travel ye toward
the East and toward the West and enlighten the people with the light of
the Most Great Guidance, so that they may take a portion and share of
eternal life.(2) Praise be to God, that the Northeastern States are in the
utmost capacity. Because the ground is rich, the rain of the divine
outpouring is descending. Now you must become heavenly farmers and scatter
pure seeds in the prepared soil. The harvest of every other seed is
limited, but the bounty and the blessing of the seed of the divine
teachings is unlimited. Throughout the coming centuries and cycles many
harvests will be gathered. Consider the work of former generations. During
the lifetime of Jesus Christ the believing, firm souls were few and
numbered, but the heavenly blessings descended so plentifully that in a
number of years countless souls entered beneath the shadow of the Gospel.
God has said in the Qur’án: “One grain will bring forth seven sheaves, and
every sheaf shall contain one hundred grains.”(3) In other words, one
grain will become seven hundred; and if God so wills He will double these
also. It has often happened that one blessed soul has become the cause of
the guidance of a nation. Now we must not consider our ability and
capacity, nay, rather, we must fix our gaze upon the favors and bounties
of God, in these days, Who has made of the drop a sea, and of the atom a
sun.

4 Upon you be greeting and praise!





2: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE SOUTHERN STATES


_Revealed on March 27, 1916, in the garden adjacent to the Shrine of
Bahá’u’lláh, addressed to the Bahá’ís of sixteen Southern States of the
United States: Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi,
Tennessee, Kentucky, Louisiana, Arkansas, Oklahoma and Texas. _

1 O ye heralds of the Kingdom of God:

2 A few days ago an epistle was written to those divine believers, but
because these days are the days of Naw-Rúz, you have come to my mind and I
am sending you this greeting for this glorious feast. All the days are
blessed, but this feast is the national fête of Persia. The Persians have
been holding it for several thousand years past. In reality every day
which man passes in the mention of God, the diffusion of the fragrances of
God and calling the people to the Kingdom of God, that day is his feast.
Praise be to God that you are occupied in the service of the Kingdom of
God and are engaged in the promulgation of the religion of God by day and
by night. Therefore all your days are feast days. There is no doubt that
the assistance and the bestowal of God shall descend upon you.

3 In the Southern States of the United States, the friends are few, that
is, in Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina, South
Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Tennessee, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Arkansas, Oklahoma and Texas. Consequently you must either go
yourselves or send a number of blessed souls to those states, so that they
may guide the people to the Kingdom of Heaven. One of the holy
Manifestations, addressing a believing soul, has said that, if a person
become the cause of the illumination of one soul, it is better than a
boundless treasury. “O ‘Alí! If God guide, through thee, one soul, it is
better for thee than all the riches!” Again He says, “Direct us to the
straight path!”(4) that is, Show us the right road. It is also mentioned
in the Gospel: Travel ye to all parts of the world and give ye the glad
tidings of the appearance of the Kingdom of God.(5)

4 In brief, I hope you will display in this respect the greatest effort
and magnanimity. It is assured that you will become assisted and
confirmed. A person declaring the glad tidings of the appearance of the
realities and significances of the Kingdom is like unto a farmer who
scatters pure seeds in the rich soil. The spring cloud will pour upon them
the rain of bounty, and unquestionably the station of the farmer will be
raised in the estimation of the lord of the village, and many harvests
will be gathered.

5 Therefore, ye friends of God! Appreciate ye the value of this time and
be ye engaged in the sowing of the seeds, so that you may find the
heavenly blessing and the lordly bestowal. Upon you be Bahá’u’l-Abhá!





3: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE CENTRAL STATES


_Revealed on March 29, 1916, outside the house in Bahjí, and addressed to
the Bahá’ís of twelve Central States of the United States: Michigan,
Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, North
Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska and Kansas. _

1 O ye heavenly souls, O ye spiritual assemblies, O ye lordly meetings:

2 For some time past correspondence has been delayed, and this has been on
account of the difficulty of mailing and receiving letters. But because at
present a number of facilities are obtainable, therefore, I am engaged in
writing you this brief epistle so that my heart and soul may obtain joy
and fragrance through the remembrance of the friends. Continually this
wanderer supplicates and entreats at the threshold of His Holiness the One
and begs assistance, bounty and heavenly confirmations in behalf of the
believers. You are always in my thoughts. You are not nor shall you ever
be forgotten. I hope by the favor of His Holiness the Almighty that day by
day you may add to your faith, assurance, firmness and steadfastness, and
become instruments for the promotion of the holy fragrances.

3 Although in the states of Illinois, Wisconsin, Ohio, Michigan and
Minnesota—praise be to God—believers are found who are associating with
each other in the utmost firmness and steadfastness—day and night they
have no other intention save the diffusion of the fragrances of God, they
have no other hope except the promotion of the heavenly teachings, like
the candles they are burning with the light of the love of God, and like
thankful birds are singing songs, spirit-imparting, joy-creating, in the
rose garden of the knowledge of God—yet in the states of Indiana, Iowa,
Missouri, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska and Kansas few of the
believers exist. So far the summons of the Kingdom of God and the
proclamation of the oneness of the world of humanity has not been made in
these states systematically and enthusiastically. Blessed souls and
detached teachers have not traveled through these parts repeatedly;
therefore these states are still in a state of heedlessness. Through the
efforts of the friends of God souls must be likewise enkindled in these
states, with the fire of the love of God and attracted to the Kingdom of
God, so that section may also become illumined and the soul imparting
breeze of the rose garden of the Kingdom may perfume the nostrils of the
inhabitants. Therefore, if it is possible, send to those parts teachers
who are severed from all else save God, sanctified and pure. If these
teachers be in the utmost state of attraction, in a short time great
results will be forthcoming. The sons and daughters of the kingdom are
like unto the real farmers. Through whichever state or country they pass
they display self-sacrifice and sow divine seeds. From that seed harvests
are produced. On this subject it is revealed in the glorious Gospel: When
the pure seeds are scattered in the good ground heavenly blessing and
benediction is obtained.(6) I hope that you may become assisted and
confirmed, and never lose courage in the promotion of the divine
teachings. Day by day may you add to your effort, exertion, and
magnanimity.

4 Upon you be greeting and praise!





4: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE WESTERN STATES


_Revealed on April 1, 1916, in ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s room at the house in Bahjí,
addressed to the Bahá’ís of eleven Western States of the United States:
New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona, Nevada, California, Wyoming, Utah, Montana,
Idaho, Oregon and Washington. _

1

                               _He is God!_

O ye sons and daughters of the Kingdom:

2 Day and night I have no other occupation than the remembrance of the
friends, praying from the depth of my heart in their behalf, begging for
them confirmation from the Kingdom of God and supplicating the direct
effect of the breaths of the Holy Spirit. I am hopeful from the favors of
His Highness the Lord of Bestowals, that the friends of God during such a
time may become the secret cause of the illumination of the hearts of
humanity, breathing the breath of life upon the spirits—whose praiseworthy
results may become conducive to the glory and exaltation of humankind
throughout all eternity. Although in some of the Western States, like
California, Oregon, Washington and Colorado, the fragrances of holiness
are diffused, numerous souls have taken a share and a portion from the
fountain of everlasting life, they have obtained heavenly benediction,
have drunk an overflowing cup from the wine of the love of God and have
hearkened to the melody of the Supreme Concourse—yet in the states of New
Mexico, Wyoming, Montana, Idaho, Utah, Arizona and Nevada, the lamp of the
love of God is not ignited in a befitting and behooving manner, and the
call of the Kingdom of God has not been raised. Now, if it is possible,
show ye an effort in this direction. Either travel yourselves, personally,
throughout those states or choose others and send them, so that they may
teach the souls. For the present those states are like unto dead bodies:
they must breathe into them the breath of life and bestow upon them a
heavenly spirit. Like unto the stars they must shine in that horizon and
thus the rays of the Sun of Reality may also illumine those states.

3 God says in the great Qur’án: “Verily God is the helper of those who
have believed. He will lead them from darkness into light.”(7) This means:
God loves the believers, consequently He will deliver them from darkness
and bring them into the world of light.

4 It is also recorded in the blessed Gospel: Travel ye throughout the
world and call ye the people to the Kingdom of God.(8) Now this is the
time that you may arise and perform this most great service and become the
cause of the guidance of innumerable souls. Thus through this superhuman
service the rays of peace and conciliation may illumine and enlighten all
the regions and the world of humanity may find peace and composure.

5 During my stay in America I cried out in every meeting and summoned the
people to the propagation of the ideals of universal peace. I said plainly
that the continent of Europe had become like unto an arsenal and its
conflagration was dependent upon one spark, and that in the coming years,
or within two years, all that which is recorded in the Revelation of John
and the Book of Daniel would become fulfilled and come to pass. This
matter, in all probability, was published in the San Francisco Bulletin,
October 12, 1912. You may refer to it, so that the truth may become clear
and manifest; thus ye may fully realize that this is the time for the
diffusion of the fragrances.

6 The magnanimity of man must be heavenly or, in other words, it must be
assisted by the divine confirmation, so that he may become the cause of
the illumination of the world of humanity.

7 Upon you be greeting and praise!





5: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF CANADA AND GREENLAND


_Revealed on April 5, 1916, in the garden adjacent to the Shrine of
Bahá’u’lláh, and addressed to the Bahá’ís of Canada—Newfoundland, Prince
Edward Island, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec, Saskatchewan, Manitoba,
Ontario, Alberta, British Columbia, Yukon, Mackenzie, Keewatin, Ungava,
Franklin Islands—and Greenland. _

1

                               _He is God!_

O ye daughters and sons of the Kingdom:

2 Although in most of the states and cities of the United States, praise
be to God, His fragrances are diffused, and souls unnumbered are turning
their faces and advancing toward the Kingdom of God, yet in some of the
states the Standard of Unity is not yet upraised as it should be, nor are
the mysteries of the Holy Books, such as the Bible, the Gospel, and the
Qur’án, unraveled. Through the concerted efforts of all the friends the
Standard of Unity must needs be unfurled in those states, and the divine
teachings promoted, so that these states may also receive their portion of
the heavenly bestowals and a share of the Most Great Guidance. Likewise in
the provinces of Canada, such as Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island, Nova
Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec, Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta,
British Columbia, Ungava, Keewatin, Mackenzie, Yukon, and the Franklin
Islands in the Arctic Circle—the believers of God must become
self-sacrificing and like unto the candles of guidance become ignited in
the provinces of Canada. Should they show forth such a magnanimity, it is
assured that they will obtain universal divine confirmations, the heavenly
cohorts will reinforce them uninterruptedly, and a most great victory will
be obtained. God willing, the call of the Kingdom may reach the ears of
the Eskimos, the inhabitants of the Islands of Franklin in the north of
Canada, as well as Greenland. Should the fire of the love of God be
kindled in Greenland, all the ice of that country will be melted, and its
cold weather become temperate—that is, if the hearts be touched with the
heat of the love of God, that territory will become a divine rose garden
and a heavenly paradise, and the souls, even as fruitful trees, will
acquire the utmost freshness and beauty. Effort, the utmost effort, is
required. Should you display an effort, so that the fragrances of God may
be diffused among the Eskimos, its effect will be very great and
far-reaching. God says in the great Qur’án: A day will come wherein the
lights of unity will enlighten all the world. “The earth will be
irradiated with the light of its Lord.”(9) In other words, the earth will
become illumined with the light of God. That light is the light of unity.
“There is no God but God.” The continent and the islands of Eskimos are
also parts of this earth. They must similarly receive a portion of the
bestowals of the Most Great Guidance.

3 Upon you be greeting and praise!





6: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA


_Revealed on April 8, 1916, in the garden outside the Shrine of
Bahá’u’lláh, and addressed to the Bahá’ís of the United States and Canada.
_

1

                               _He is God!_

O ye blessed souls:

2 I desire for you eternal success and prosperity and beg perfect
confirmation for each one in the divine world. My hope for you is that
each one may shine forth like unto the morning star from the horizon of
the world and in this Garden of God become a blessed tree, producing
everlasting fruits and results.

3 Therefore I direct you to that which is conducive to your heavenly
confirmation and illumination in the Kingdom of God!

4 It is this: Alaska is a vast country; although one of the maidservants
of the Merciful has hastened to those parts, serving as a librarian in the
public library, and according to her ability is not failing in teaching
the Cause, yet the call of the Kingdom of God is not yet raised through
that spacious territory.

5 His Holiness Christ says: Travel ye to the East and to the West of the
world and summon the people to the Kingdom of God.(10) Hence the mercy of
God must encompass all humanity. Therefore do ye not think it permissible
to leave that region deprived of the breezes of the Morn of Guidance.
Consequently, strive as far as ye are able to send to those parts fluent
speakers, who are detached from aught else save God, attracted with the
fragrances of God, and sanctified and purified from all desires and
temptations. Their sustenance and food must consist of the teachings of
God. First they must themselves live in accordance with those principles,
then guide the people. Perchance, God willing, the lights of the Most
Great Guidance will illuminate that country, and the breezes of the rose
garden of the love of God will perfume the nostrils of the inhabitants of
Alaska. Should you be aided to render such a service, rest ye assured that
your heads shall be crowned with the diadem of everlasting sovereignty,
and at the threshold of oneness you will become the favored and accepted
servants.

6 Likewise the republic of Mexico is very important. The majority of the
inhabitants of that country are devoted Catholics. They are totally
unaware of the reality of the Bible, the Gospel and the new divine
teachings. They do not know that the basis of the religions of God is one
and that the holy Manifestations are like unto the Sun of Truth, rising
from the different dawning-places. Those souls are submerged in the sea of
dogmas. If one breath of life be blown over them, great results will issue
therefrom. But it is better for those who intend to go to Mexico to teach,
to be familiar with the Spanish language.

7 Similarly, the six Central American republics, situated south of
Mexico—Guatemala, Honduras, Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama and
the seventh country Belize or British Honduras. The teachers going to
those parts must also be familiar with the Spanish language.

8 Attach great importance to the indigenous population of America. For
these souls may be likened unto the ancient inhabitants of the Arabian
Peninsula, who, prior to the Mission of Muḥammad, were like unto savages.
When the light of Muḥammad shone forth in their midst, however, they
became so radiant as to illumine the world. Likewise, these Indians,
should they be educated and guided, there can be no doubt that they will
become so illumined as to enlighten the whole world.

9 All the above countries have importance, but especially the Republic of
Panama, wherein the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans come together through the
Panama Canal. It is a center for travel and passage from America to other
continents of the world, and in the future it will gain most great
importance.

10 Likewise the islands of the West Indies, such as Cuba, Haiti, Puerto
Rico, Jamaica, the islands of the Lesser Antilles, Bahama Islands, even
the small Watling Island, have great importance; especially the two black
republics, Haiti and Santo Domingo, situated in the cluster of the Greater
Antilles. Likewise the cluster of the islands of Bermuda in the Atlantic
Ocean have importance.

11 In a similar way, the republics of the continent of South
America—Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Brazil, British Guiana, Dutch Guiana,
French Guiana, Bolivia, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay, Venezuela;
also the islands to the north, east and west of South America, such as
Falkland Islands, the Galapagòs, Juan Fernandez, Tobago and Trinidad.
Likewise the city of Bahia, situated on the eastern shore of Brazil.
Because it is some time that it has become known by this name, its
efficacy will be most potent.

12 In short, O ye believers of God! Exalt your effort and magnify your
aims. His Holiness Christ says: Blessed are the poor, for theirs shall be
the Kingdom of Heaven.(11) In other words: Blessed are the nameless and
traceless poor, for they are the leaders of mankind. Likewise it is said
in the Qur’án: “And We desire to show favor to those who were brought low
in the land, and to make them spiritual leaders among men, and to make of
them Our heirs.”(12) Or, we wish to grant a favor to the impotent souls
and suffer them to become the inheritors of the Messengers and Prophets.

13 Now is the time for you to divest yourselves of the garment of
attachment to this world that perisheth, to be wholly severed from the
physical world, become heavenly angels, and travel to these countries. I
swear by Him, besides Whom there is none other God, that each one of you
will become an Isráfíl of Life, and will blow the Breath of Life into the
souls of others.

14 Upon you be greeting and praise!

Supplication

O THOU Incomparable God! O Thou Lord of the Kingdom! These souls are Thy
heavenly army. Assist them and, with the cohorts of the Supreme Concourse,
make them victorious, so that each one of them may become like unto a
regiment and conquer these countries through the love of God and the
illumination of divine teachings.

O God! Be Thou their supporter and their helper, and in the wilderness,
the mountain, the valley, the forests, the prairies and the seas, be Thou
their confidant—so that they may cry out through the power of the Kingdom
and the breath of the Holy Spirit.

Verily, Thou art the Powerful, the Mighty and the Omnipotent, and Thou art
the Wise, the Hearing and the Seeing.





7: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA


_Revealed on April 11, 1916, in ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s room at the house in Bahjí,
and addressed to the Bahá’ís of the United States and Canada. _

1

                               _He is God!_

O ye real Bahá’ís of America:

2 Praise be to His Highness the Desired One that ye have become confirmed
in the promotion of divine teachings in that vast Continent, raised the
call of the Kingdom of God in that region and announced the glad tidings
of the manifestation of the Lord of Hosts and His Highness the Promised
One. Thanks be unto the Lord that ye have become assisted and confirmed in
this aim. This is purely through the confirmations of the Lord of Hosts
and the breaths of the Holy Spirit. The full measure of your success is as
yet unrevealed, its significance still unapprehended. Erelong ye will,
with your own eyes, witness how brilliantly every one of you, even as a
shining star, will radiate in the firmament of your country the light of
divine Guidance, and will bestow upon its people the glory of an
everlasting life.

3 Consider! The station and the confirmation of the apostles in the time
of Christ was not known, and no one looked on them with the feeling of
importance—nay, rather, they persecuted and ridiculed them. Later on it
became evident what crowns studded with the brilliant jewels of guidance
were placed on the heads of the apostles, Mary Magdalene and Mary the
mother of John.

4 The range of your future achievements still remains undisclosed. I
fervently hope that in the near future the whole earth may be stirred and
shaken by the results of your achievements. The hope, therefore, which
‘Abdu’l-Bahá cherishes for you is that the same success which has attended
your efforts in America may crown your endeavors in other parts of the
world, that through you the fame of the Cause of God may be diffused
throughout the East and the West and the advent of the Kingdom of the Lord
of Hosts be proclaimed in all the five continents of the globe.

5 The moment this divine Message is carried forward by the American
believers from the shores of America and is propagated through the
continents of Europe, of Asia, of Africa and of Australasia, and as far as
the islands of the Pacific, this community will find itself securely
established upon the throne of an everlasting dominion. Then will all the
peoples of the world witness that this community is spiritually illumined
and divinely guided. Then will the whole earth resound with the praises of
its majesty and greatness. A party speaking their languages, severed,
holy, sanctified and filled with the love of God, must turn their faces to
and travel through the three great island groups of the Pacific
Ocean—Polynesia, Micronesia and Melanesia, and the islands attached to
these groups, such as New Guinea, Borneo, Java, Sumatra, Philippine
Islands, Solomon Islands, Fiji Islands, New Hebrides, Loyalty Islands, New
Caledonia, Bismarck Archipelago, Ceram, Celebes, Friendly Islands, Samoa
Islands, Society Islands, Caroline Islands, Low Archipelago, Marquesas,
Hawaiian Islands, Gilbert Islands, Moluccas, Marshall Islands, Timor and
the other islands. With hearts overflowing with the love of God, with
tongues commemorating the mention of God, with eyes turned to the Kingdom
of God, they must deliver the glad tidings of the manifestation of the
Lord of Hosts to all the people. Know ye of a certainty that whatever
gathering ye enter, the waves of the Holy Spirit are surging over it, and
the heavenly grace of the Blessed Beauty encompasseth that gathering.

6 Consider ye, that Miss Agnes Alexander, the daughter of the Kingdom, the
beloved maidservant of the Blessed Perfection, traveled alone to the
Hawaiian Islands, to the Island of Honolulu, and now she is gaining
spiritual victories in Japan! Reflect ye how this daughter was confirmed
in the Hawaiian Islands. She became the cause of the guidance of a
gathering of people.

7 Likewise Miss Knobloch traveled alone to Germany. To what a great extent
she became confirmed! Therefore, know ye of a certainty that whosoever
arises in this day to diffuse the divine fragrances, the cohorts of the
Kingdom of God shall confirm him and the bestowals and the favors of the
Blessed Perfection shall encircle him.

8 O that I could travel, even though on foot and in the utmost poverty, to
these regions, and, raising the call of “Yá Bahá’u’l-Abhá” in cities,
villages, mountains, deserts and oceans, promote the divine teachings!
This, alas, I cannot do. How intensely I deplore it! Please God, ye may
achieve it.

9 At this time, in the Hawaiian Islands, through the efforts of Miss
Alexander, a number of souls have reached the shore of the sea of faith!
Consider ye, what happiness, what joy is this! I declare by the Lord of
Hosts that had this respected daughter founded an empire, that empire
would not have been so great! For this sovereignty is eternal sovereignty
and this glory is everlasting glory.

10 Likewise, if some teachers go to other islands and other parts, such as
the continent of Australia, New Zealand, Tasmania, also to Japan, Asiatic
Russia, Korea, French Indochina, Siam, Straits Settlements, India, Ceylon
and Afghanistan, most great results will be forthcoming. How good would it
be were there any possibility of a commission composed of men and women,
to travel together through China and Japan—so that this bond of love may
become strengthened, and through this going and coming they may establish
the oneness of the world of humanity, summon the people to the Kingdom of
God and spread the teachings.

11 Similarly, if possible, they should travel to the continent of Africa,
Canary Islands, Cape Verde Islands, Madeira Islands, Réunion Islands, St.
Helena, Zanzibar, Mauritius, etc., and in those countries summon the
people to the Kingdom of God and raise the cry of “Yá Bahá’u’l-Abhá!” They
must also upraise the flag of the oneness of the world of humanity in the
island of Madagascar.

12 Books and pamphlets must be either translated or composed in the
languages of these countries and islands, to be circulated in every part
and in all directions.

13 It is said that in South Africa, a diamond mine is discovered. Although
this mine is most valuable, yet after all it is stone. Perchance, God
willing, the mine of humanity may be discovered and the brilliant pearls
of the Kingdom be found.

14 In brief, this world-consuming war has set such a conflagration to the
hearts that no word can describe it. In all the countries of the world the
longing for universal peace is taking possession of the consciousness of
men. There is not a soul who does not yearn for concord and peace. A most
wonderful state of receptivity is being realized. This is through the
consummate wisdom of God, so that capacity may be created, the standard of
the oneness of the world of humanity be upraised, and the fundamental of
universal peace and the divine principles be promoted in the East and the
West.

15 Therefore, O ye believers of God! Show ye an effort and after this war
spread ye the synopsis of the divine teachings in the British Isles,
France, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Russia, Italy, Spain, Belgium,
Switzerland, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Holland, Portugal, Rumania, Serbia,
Montenegro, Bulgaria, Greece, Andorra, Liechtenstein, Luxemburg, Monaco,
San Marino, Balearic Isles, Corsica, Sardinia, Sicily, Crete, Malta,
Iceland, Faroe Islands, Shetland Islands, Hebrides and Orkney Islands.

16 In all these countries, like unto the morning stars shine ye forth from
the horizon of guidance. Thus far ye have been untiring in your labors.
Let your exertions henceforth increase a thousandfold. Summon the people
in these countries, capitals, islands, assemblies and churches to enter
the Abhá Kingdom. The scope of your exertions must needs be extended. The
wider its range, the more striking will be the evidence of divine
assistance.

17 You have observed that while ‘Abdu’l-Bahá was in the utmost bodily
weakness and feebleness, while he was indisposed, and had not the power to
move—notwithstanding this physical state he traveled through many
countries, in Europe and America, and in churches, meetings and
conventions was occupied with the promotion of the divine principles and
summoned the people to the manifestation of the Kingdom of Abhá. You have
also observed how the confirmations of the Blessed Perfection encompassed
all. What result is forthcoming from material rest, tranquillity, luxury
and attachment to this corporeal world? It is evident that the man who
pursues these things will in the end become afflicted with regret and
loss.

18 Consequently, one must close his eyes wholly to these thoughts, long
for eternal life, the sublimity of the world of humanity, the celestial
developments, the Holy Spirit, the promotion of the Word of God, the
guidance of the inhabitants of the globe, the promulgation of universal
peace and the proclamation of the oneness of the world of humanity! This
is the work! Otherwise like unto other animals and birds one must occupy
himself with the requirements of this physical life, the satisfaction of
which is the highest aspiration of the animal kingdom, and one must stalk
across the earth like unto the quadrupeds.

19 Consider ye! No matter how much man gains wealth, riches and opulence
in this world, he will not become as independent as a cow. For these
fattened cows roam freely over the vast tableland. All the prairies and
meadows are theirs for grazing, and all the springs and rivers are theirs
for drinking! No matter how much they graze, the fields will not be
exhausted! It is evident that they have earned these material bounties
with the utmost facility.

20 Still more ideal than this life is the life of the bird. A bird, on the
summit of a mountain, on the high, waving branches, has built for itself a
nest more beautiful than the palaces of the kings! The air is in the
utmost purity, the water cool and clear as crystal, the panorama charming
and enchanting. In such glorious surroundings, he expends his numbered
days. All the harvests of the plain are his possessions, having earned all
this wealth without the least labor. Hence, no matter how much man may
advance in this world, he shall not attain to the station of this bird!
Thus it becomes evident that in the matters of this world, however much
man may strive and work to the point of death, he will be unable to earn
the abundance, the freedom and the independent life of a small bird. This
proves and establishes the fact that man is not created for the life of
this ephemeral world—nay, rather, is he created for the acquirement of
infinite perfections, for the attainment to the sublimity of the world of
humanity, to be drawn nigh unto the divine threshold, and to sit on the
throne of everlasting sovereignty!

21 Upon you be Bahá’u’l-Abhá!

Whoever sets out on a teaching journey to any place, let him recite this
prayer day and night during his travels in foreign lands:

O GOD, my God! Thou seest me enraptured and attracted toward Thy glorious
kingdom, enkindled with the fire of Thy love amongst mankind, a herald of
Thy kingdom in these vast and spacious lands, severed from aught else save
Thee, relying on Thee, abandoning rest and comfort, remote from my native
home, a wanderer in these regions, a stranger fallen upon the ground,
humble before Thine exalted threshold, submissive toward the heaven of
Thine omnipotent glory, supplicating Thee in the dead of night and at the
break of dawn, entreating and invoking Thee at morn and at eventide to
graciously aid me to serve Thy Cause, to spread abroad Thy teachings and
to exalt Thy Word throughout the East and the West.

O Lord! Strengthen my back, enable me to serve Thee with the utmost
endeavor, and leave me not to myself, lonely and helpless in these
regions.

O Lord! Grant me communion with Thee in my loneliness, and be my companion
in these foreign lands.

Verily, Thou art the Confirmer of whomsoever Thou willest in that which
Thou desirest, and, verily, Thou art the All-Powerful, the Omnipotent.





8: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA


_Revealed on April 19, 1916, in ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s room at the house in Bahjí;
on April 20, in the pilgrims’ quarters of the house in Bahjí; on April 22,
in the garden adjacent to the Shrine of Bahá’u’lláh, and addressed to the
Bahá’ís of the United States and Canada. _

1

_He is God!_
O ye Apostles of Bahá’u’lláh!
May my life be sacrificed for you!

2 The Blessed Person of the Promised One is interpreted in the Holy Book
as the Lord of Hosts—the heavenly armies. By heavenly armies those souls
are intended who are entirely freed from the human world, transformed into
celestial spirits and have become divine angels. Such souls are the rays
of the Sun of Reality who will illumine all the continents. Each one is
holding in his hand a trumpet, blowing the breath of life over all the
regions. They are delivered from human qualities and the defects of the
world of nature, are characterized with the characteristics of God, and
are attracted with the fragrances of the Merciful. Like unto the apostles
of Christ, who were filled with Him, these souls also have become filled
with His Holiness Bahá’u’lláh; that is, the love of Bahá’u’lláh has so
mastered every organ, part and limb of their bodies, as to leave no effect
from the promptings of the human world.

3 These souls are the armies of God and the conquerors of the East and the
West. Should one of them turn his face toward some direction and summon
the people to the Kingdom of God, all the ideal forces and lordly
confirmations will rush to his support and reinforcement. He will behold
all the doors open and all the strong fortifications and impregnable
castles razed to the ground. Singly and alone he will attack the armies of
the world, defeat the right and left wings of the hosts of all the
countries, break through the lines of the legions of all the nations and
carry his attack to the very center of the powers of the earth. This is
the meaning of the Hosts of God.

4 Any soul from among the believers of Bahá’u’lláh who attains to this
station will become known as the Apostle of Bahá’u’lláh. Therefore strive
ye with heart and soul so that ye may reach this lofty and exalted
position, be established on the throne of everlasting glory, and crown
your heads with the shining diadem of the Kingdom, whose brilliant jewels
may irradiate upon centuries and cycles.

5 O ye kind friends! Uplift your magnanimity and soar high toward the apex
of heaven so that your blessed hearts may become illumined more and more,
day by day, through the rays of the Sun of Reality, that is, His Holiness
Bahá’u’lláh; at every moment the spirits may obtain a new life, and the
darkness of the world of nature may be entirely dispelled; thus you may
become incarnate light and personified spirit, become entirely unaware of
the sordid matters of this world and in touch with the affairs of the
divine world.

6 Behold the portals which Bahá’u’lláh hath opened before you! Consider
how exalted and lofty is the station you are destined to attain; how
unique the favors with which you have been endowed. Should we become
intoxicated with this cup, the sovereignty of this globe of earth will
become lower in our estimation than children’s play. Should they place in
the arena the crown of the government of the whole world, and invite each
one of us to accept it, undoubtedly we shall not condescend, and shall
refuse to accept it.

7 To attain to this supreme station is, however, dependent on the
realization of certain conditions:

8 The first condition is firmness in the Covenant of God. For the power of
the Covenant will protect the Cause of Bahá’u’lláh from the doubts of the
people of error. It is the fortified fortress of the Cause of God and the
firm pillar of the religion of God. Today no power can conserve the
oneness of the Bahá’í world save the Covenant of God; otherwise
differences like unto a most great tempest will encompass the Bahá’í
world. It is evident that the axis of the oneness of the world of humanity
is the power of the Covenant and nothing else. Had the Covenant not come
to pass, had it not been revealed from the Supreme Pen and had not the
Book of the Covenant, like unto the ray of the Sun of Reality, illuminated
the world, the forces of the Cause of God would have been utterly
scattered and certain souls who were the prisoners of their own passions
and lusts would have taken into their hands an axe, cutting the root of
this Blessed Tree. Every person would have pushed forward his own desire
and every individual aired his own opinion! Notwithstanding this great
Covenant, a few negligent souls galloped with their chargers into the
battlefield, thinking perchance they might be able to weaken the
foundation of the Cause of God: but praise be to God all of them were
afflicted with regret and loss, and erelong they shall see themselves in
poignant despair. Therefore, in the beginning the believers must make
their steps firm in the Covenant so that the confirmations of Bahá’u’lláh
may encircle them from all sides, the cohorts of the Supreme Concourse may
become their supporters and helpers, and the exhortations and advices of
‘Abdu’l-Bahá, like unto the pictures engraved on stone, may remain
permanent and ineffaceable in the tablets of all hearts.

9 The second condition: Fellowship and love amongst the believers. The
divine friends must be attracted to and enamored of each other and ever be
ready and willing to sacrifice their own lives for each other. Should one
soul from amongst the believers meet another, it must be as though a
thirsty one with parched lips has reached to the fountain of the water of
life, or a lover has met his true beloved. For one of the greatest divine
wisdoms regarding the appearance of the holy Manifestations is this: The
souls may come to know each other and become intimate with each other; the
power of the love of God may make all of them the waves of one sea, the
flowers of one rose garden, and the stars of one heaven. This is the
wisdom for the appearance of the holy Manifestations! When the most great
bestowal reveals itself in the hearts of the believers, the world of
nature will be transformed, the darkness of the contingent being will
vanish, and heavenly illumination will be obtained. Then the whole world
will become the Paradise of Abhá, every one of the believers of God will
become a blessed tree, producing wonderful fruits.

10 O ye friends! Fellowship, fellowship! Love, love! Unity, unity!—so that
the power of the Bahá’í Cause may appear and become manifest in the world
of existence. My thoughts are turned towards you, and my heart leaps
within me at your mention. Could ye know how my soul glows with your love,
so great a happiness would flood your hearts as to cause you to become
enamored with each other.

11 The third condition: Teachers must continually travel to all parts of
the continent, nay, rather, to all parts of the world, but they must
travel like ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, who journeyed throughout the cities of America.
He was sanctified and free from every attachment and in the utmost
severance. Just as His Holiness Christ says: Shake off the very dust from
your feet.(13)

12 You have observed that while in America many souls in the utmost of
supplication and entreaty desired to offer some gifts, but this servant,
in accord with the exhortations and behests of the Blessed Perfection,
never accepted a thing, although on certain occasions we were in most
straitened circumstances. But on the other hand, if a soul for the sake of
God, voluntarily and out of his pure desire, wishes to offer a
contribution (toward the expenses of a teacher) in order to make the
contributor happy, the teacher may accept a small sum, but must live with
the utmost contentment.

13 The aim is this: The intention of the teacher must be pure, his heart
independent, his spirit attracted, his thought at peace, his resolution
firm, his magnanimity exalted and in the love of God a shining torch.
Should he become as such, his sanctified breath will even affect the rock;
otherwise there will be no result whatsoever. As long as a soul is not
perfected, how can he efface the defects of others? Unless he is detached
from aught else save God, how can he teach severance to others?

14 In short, O ye believers of God! Endeavor ye, so that you may take hold
of every means in the promulgation of the religion of God and the
diffusion of the fragrances of God.

15 Amongst other things is the holding of the meetings for teaching so
that blessed souls and the old ones from amongst the believers may gather
together the youths of the love of God in schools of instruction and teach
them all the divine proofs and irrefragable arguments, explain and
elucidate the history of the Cause, and interpret also the prophecies and
proofs which are recorded and are extant in the divine books and epistles
regarding the manifestation of the Promised One, so that the young ones
may go in perfect knowledge in all these degrees.

16 Likewise, whenever it is possible a committee must be organized for the
translation of the Tablets. Wise souls who have mastered and studied
perfectly the Persian, Arabic, and other foreign languages, or know one of
the foreign languages, must commence translating Tablets and books
containing the proofs of this Revelation, and publishing those books,
circulate them throughout the five continents of the globe.

17 Similarly, the magazine, the Star of the West, must be edited with the
utmost regularity, but its contents must be the promulgation of the Cause
of God that both East and West may become informed of the most important
events.

18 In short, in all the meetings, whether public or private, nothing
should be discussed save that which is under consideration, and all the
articles be centered around the Cause of God. Promiscuous talk must not be
dragged in and contention is absolutely forbidden.

19 The teachers traveling in different directions must know the language
of the country in which they will enter. For example, a person being
proficient in the Japanese language may travel to Japan, or a person
knowing the Chinese language may hasten to China, and so forth.

20 In short, after this universal war, the people have obtained
extraordinary capacity to hearken to the divine teachings, for the wisdom
of this war is this: That it may become proven to all that the fire of war
is world-consuming, whereas the rays of peace are world-enlightening. One
is death, the other is life; this is extinction, that is immortality; one
is the most great calamity, the other is the most great bounty; this is
darkness, that is light; this is eternal humiliation and that is
everlasting glory; one is the destroyer of the foundation of man, the
other is the founder of the prosperity of the human race.

21 Consequently, a number of souls may arise and act in accordance with
the aforesaid conditions, and hasten to all parts of the world, especially
from America to Europe, Africa, Asia and Australia, and travel through
Japan and China. Likewise, from Germany teachers and believers may travel
to the continents of America, Africa, Japan and China; in brief, they may
travel through all the continents and islands of the globe. Thus in a
short space of time, most wonderful results will be produced, the banner
of universal peace will be waving on the apex of the world and the lights
of the oneness of the world of humanity may illumine the universe.

22 In brief, O ye believers of God! The text of the divine Book is this:
If two souls quarrel and contend about a question of the divine questions,
differing and disputing, both are wrong. The wisdom of this
incontrovertible law of God is this: That between two souls from amongst
the believers of God, no contention and dispute may arise; that they may
speak with each other with infinite amity and love. Should there appear
the least trace of controversy, they must remain silent, and both parties
must continue their discussions no longer, but ask the reality of the
question from the Interpreter. This is the irrefutable command!

23 Upon you be Bahá’u’l-Abhá!

Supplication

O GOD, my God! Thou seest how black darkness is enshrouding all regions,
how all countries are burning with the flame of dissension, and the fire
of war and carnage is blazing throughout the East and the West. Blood is
flowing, corpses bestrew the ground, and severed heads are fallen on the
dust of the battlefield.

O Lord! Have pity on these ignorant ones and look upon them with the eye
of forgiveness and pardon. Extinguish this fire, so that these dense
clouds which obscure the horizon may be scattered, the Sun of Reality
shine forth with the rays of conciliation, this intense gloom be dispelled
and the resplendent light of peace shed its radiance upon all countries.

O Lord! Draw up the people from the abyss of the ocean of hatred and
enmity, and deliver them from this impenetrable darkness. Unite their
hearts, and brighten their eyes with the light of peace and
reconciliation. Deliver them from the depths of war and bloodshed, and
free them from the darkness of error. Remove the veil from their eyes, and
enlighten their hearts with the light of guidance. Treat them with Thy
tender mercy and compassion, and deal not with them according to Thy
justice and wrath which cause the limbs of the mighty to quake.

O Lord! Wars have persisted. Distress and anxiety have waxed great and
every flourishing region is laid waste.

O Lord! Hearts are heavy, and souls are in anguish. Have mercy on these
poor souls and do not leave them to the excesses of their own desires.

O Lord! Make manifest in Thy lands humble and submissive souls, their
faces illumined with the rays of guidance, severed from the world,
extolling Thy Name, uttering Thy praise, and diffusing the fragrance of
Thy holiness amongst mankind.

O Lord! Strengthen their backs, gird up their loins, and enrapture their
hearts with the most mighty signs of Thy love.

O Lord! Verily, they are weak, and Thou art the Powerful and the Mighty;
they are impotent, and Thou art the Helper and the Merciful.

O Lord! The ocean of rebellion is surging, and these tempests will not be
stilled save through Thy boundless grace which hath embraced all regions.

O Lord! Verily, the people are in the abyss of passion, and naught can
save them but Thine infinite bounties.

O Lord! Dispel the darkness of these corrupt desires, and illumine the
hearts with the lamp of Thy love through which all countries will erelong
be enlightened. Confirm, moreover, Thy loved ones, those who, leaving
their homelands, their families and their children, have, for the love of
Thy Beauty, traveled to foreign countries to diffuse Thy fragrances and
promulgate Thy teachings. Be Thou their companion in their loneliness,
their helper in a strange land, the remover of their sorrows, their
comforter in calamity. Be Thou a refreshing draught for their thirst, a
healing medicine for their ills and a balm for the burning ardor of their
hearts.

Verily, Thou art the Most Generous, the Lord of grace abounding, and,
verily, Thou art the Compassionate and the Merciful.





9: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE NORTHEASTERN STATES


_Revealed on February 2, 1917, in Ismá’íl Áqá’s room at the house of
‘Abdu’l-Bahá in Haifa, and addressed to the Bahá’ís of the nine
Northeastern States of the United States: Maine, Massachusetts, New
Hampshire, Rhode Island, Connecticut, Vermont, Pennsylvania, New Jersey
and New York. _

1

                               _He is God!_

O ye real friends:

2 All countries, in the estimation of the one true God, are but one
country, and all cities and villages are on an equal footing. Neither
holds distinction over another. All of them are the fields of God and the
habitation of the souls of men. Through faith and certitude, and the
precedence achieved by one over another, however, the dweller conferreth
honor upon the dwelling, some of the countries achieve distinction, and
attain a preeminent position. For instance, notwithstanding that some of
the countries of Europe and of America are distinguished by, and surpass
other countries in, the salubrity of their climate, the wholesomeness of
their water, and the charm of their mountains, plains and prairies, yet
Palestine became the glory of all nations inasmuch as all the holy and
divine Manifestations, from the time of Abraham until the appearance of
the Seal of the Prophets (Muḥammad), have lived in, or migrated to, or
traveled through, that country. Likewise, Mecca and Medina have achieved
illimitable glory, as the light of Prophethood shone forth therein. For
this reason Palestine and Ḥijáz have been distinguished from all other
countries.

3 Likewise, the continent of America is, in the eyes of the one true God,
the land wherein the splendors of His light shall be revealed, where the
mysteries of His Faith shall be unveiled, where the righteous will abide
and the free assemble. Therefore, every section thereof is blessed: but
because these nine states have been favored in faith and assurance, hence
through this precedence they have obtained spiritual privilege. They must
realize the value of this bounty; because they have obtained such a favor
and in order to render thanksgiving for this most great bestowal, they
must arise in the diffusion of divine fragrances so that the blessed verse
of the Qur’án, “God is the light of heaven and earth: the similitude of
His light is a niche in a wall, wherein a lamp is placed, and the lamp
enclosed in a case of glass; the glass appears as if it were a shining
star. It is lighted with the oil of a Blessed Tree, an olive neither of
the East, nor of the West; it wanteth little but that the oil thereof
would give light, although no fire touched it. This is the light added
unto light. God will direct unto His light whom He pleaseth”(14)—may be
realized.

4 He says: The world of nature is the world of darkness, because it is the
origin of a thousand depravities; nay, rather, it is darkness upon
darkness. The illumination of the world of nature is dependent upon the
splendor of the Sun of Reality. The grace of guidance is like unto the
candle which is enkindled in the glass of knowledge and wisdom and that
glass of knowledge and wisdom is the mirror of the heart of humanity. The
oil of that luminous lamp is from the fruits of the Blessed Tree and that
oil is so refined that it will burn without light. When the intensity of
the light and the translucency of the glass and the purity of the mirror
are brought together, it will become light upon light.

5 In brief, in these nine blessed states ‘Abdu’l-Bahá journeyed and
traveled from place to place, explained the wisdom of the heavenly books
and diffused the fragrances. In most of these states he founded the divine
Edifice and opened the door of teaching. In those states he sowed pure
seeds and planted blessed trees.

6 Now the believers of God and the maidservants of the Merciful must
irrigate these fields and with the utmost power engage themselves in the
cultivation of these heavenly plantations so that the seeds may grow and
develop, prosperity and blessing be realized and many rich and great
harvests be gathered in.

7 The Kingdom of God is like unto a farmer who comes into possession of a
piece of pure and virgin soil. Heavenly seeds are scattered therein, the
clouds of divine providence pour down and the rays of the Sun of Reality
shine forth.

8 Now all these bounties exist and appear in full in these nine states.
The divine Gardener passed by that holy ground and scattered pure seeds
from the lordly teachings in that field; the rain of the bounties of God
poured down and the heat of the Sun of Reality—that is, the merciful
confirmations—shone with the utmost splendor. It is my hope that each one
of those blessed souls may become a peerless and unique irrigator and the
East and the West of America may become like unto a delectable paradise so
that all of you may hear from the Supreme Concourse the cry of “Blessed
are you, and again blessed are you!”

9 Upon you be greeting and praise!

The following supplication is to be read by the teachers and friends
daily:

O THOU kind Lord! Praise be unto Thee that Thou hast shown us the highway
of guidance, opened the doors of the kingdom and manifested Thyself
through the Sun of Reality. To the blind Thou hast given sight; to the
deaf Thou hast granted hearing; Thou hast resuscitated the dead; Thou hast
enriched the poor; Thou hast shown the way to those who have gone astray;
Thou hast led those with parched lips to the fountain of guidance; Thou
hast suffered the thirsty fish to reach the ocean of reality; and Thou
hast invited the wandering birds to the rose garden of grace.

O Thou Almighty! We are Thy servants and Thy poor ones; we are remote and
yearn for Thy presence, are athirst for the water of Thy fountain, are
ill, longing for Thy healing. We are walking in Thy path and have no aim
or hope save the diffusion of Thy fragrance, so that all souls may raise
the cry: O God, “Guide us to the straight path.”(15) May their eyes be
opened to behold the light, and may they be freed from the darkness of
ignorance. May they gather around the lamp of Thy guidance. May every
portionless one receive a share. May the deprived become the confidants of
Thy mysteries.

O Almighty! Look upon us with the glance of mercifulness. Grant us
heavenly confirmation. Bestow upon us the breath of the Holy Spirit, so
that we may be assisted in Thy service and, like unto brilliant stars,
shine in these regions with the light of Thy guidance.

Verily, Thou art the Powerful, the Mighty, the Wise and the Seeing.





10: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE SOUTHERN STATES


_Revealed on February 3, 1917, in Haifa in Ismá’íl Áqá’s room, and
addressed to the Bahá’ís of the sixteen Southern States of the United
States: Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina, South
Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Tennessee, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Arkansas, Oklahoma and Texas. _

1 O ye blessed, respected souls:

2 The philosophers of the ancients, the thinkers of the Middle Ages and
the scientists of this and the former centuries have all agreed upon the
fact that the best and the most ideal region for the habitation of man is
the temperate zone, for in this belt the intellects and thoughts rise to
the highest stage of maturity, and the capability and ability of
civilization manifest themselves in full efflorescence. When you read
history critically and with a penetrating eye, it becomes evident that the
majority of the famous men have been born, reared and have done their work
in the temperate zone, while very, very few have appeared from the torrid
and frigid zones.

3 Now these sixteen Southern States of the United States are situated in
the temperate zone, and in these regions the perfections of the world of
nature have been fully revealed. For the moderation of the weather, the
beauty of the scenery and the geographical configuration of the country
display a great effect in the world of minds and thoughts. This fact is
well demonstrated through observation and experience.

4 Even the holy, divine Manifestations have had a nature in the utmost
equilibrium, the health and wholesomeness of their bodies most perfect,
their constitutions endowed with physical vigor, their powers functioning
in perfect order, and the outward sensations linked with the inward
perceptions, working together with extraordinary momentum and
coordination.

5 Therefore in these sixteen states, because they are contiguous to other
states and their climate being in the utmost of moderation, unquestionably
the divine teachings must reveal themselves with a brighter effulgence,
the breaths of the Holy Spirit must display a penetrating intensity, the
ocean of the love of God must be stirred with higher waves, the breezes of
the rose garden of the divine love be wafted with higher velocity, and the
fragrances of holiness be diffused with swiftness and rapidity.

6 Praise be to God that the divine outpourings are infinite, the melody of
the lordly principles is in the utmost efficacy, the most great Orb
shining with perfect splendor, the cohorts of the Supreme Concourse are
attacking with invincible power, the tongues are sharper than the swords,
the hearts are more brilliant than the light of electricity, the
magnanimity of the friends precedes all the magnanimities of the former
and subsequent generations, the souls are divinely attracted, and the fire
of the love of God is enkindled.

7 At this time and at this period we must avail ourselves of this most
great opportunity. We must not sit inactive for one moment; we must sever
ourselves from composure, rest, tranquillity, goods, property, life and
attachment to material things. We must sacrifice everything to His
Highness, the Possessor of existence, so that the powers of the Kingdom
may show greater penetration and the brilliant effulgence in this New
Cycle may illumine the worlds of minds and ideals.

8 It is about twenty-three years that the fragrances of God have been
diffused in America, but no adequate and befitting motion has been
realized, and no great acclamation and acceleration has been witnessed.
Now it is my hope that through the heavenly power, the fragrances of the
Merciful, the attraction of consciousness, the celestial outpourings, the
heavenly cohorts and the gushing forth of the fountain of divine love, the
believers of God may arise and in a short time the greatest good may
unveil her countenance, the Sun of Reality may shine forth with such
intensity that the darkness of the world of nature may become entirely
dispelled and driven away; from every corner a most wonderful melody may
be raised, the morning birds may break into such a song that the world of
humanity may be quickened and moved, the solid bodies may become
liquefied, and the souls who are like unto adamantine rocks may open their
wings and through the heat of the love of God fly heavenward.

9 Nearly two thousand years ago, Armenia was enveloped with impenetrable
darkness. One blessed soul from among the disciples of Christ hastened to
that part, and through his effort, erelong that province became illumined.
Thus it has become evident how the power of the Kingdom works!

10 Therefore, rest ye assured in the confirmations of the Merciful and the
assistance of the Most High; become ye sanctified above and purified from
this world and the inhabitants thereof; suffer your intentions to work for
the good of all; cut your attachment to the earth and like unto the
essence of the spirit become ye light and delicate. Then with a firm
resolution, a pure heart, a rejoiced spirit, and an eloquent tongue,
engage your time in the promulgation of the divine principles so that the
oneness of the world of humanity may pitch her canopy in the apex of
America and all the nations of the world may follow the divine policy.
This is certain, that the divine policy is justice and kindness toward all
mankind. For all the nations of the world are the sheep of God, and God is
the kind shepherd. He has created these sheep. He has protected them,
sustained and trained them. What greater kindness than this? And every
moment we must render a hundred thousand thanksgivings that, praise be to
God, we are freed from all the ignorant prejudices, are kind to all the
sheep of God, and our utmost hope is to serve each and all, and like unto
a benevolent father educate every one.

11 Upon you be greeting and praise!

Every soul who travels through the cities, villages and hamlets of these
states and is engaged in the diffusion of the fragrances of God, should
peruse this commune every morning:

O MY God! O my God! Thou seest me in my lowliness and weakness, occupied
with the greatest undertaking, determined to raise Thy word among the
masses and to spread Thy teachings among Thy peoples. How can I succeed
unless Thou assist me with the breath of the Holy Spirit, help me to
triumph by the hosts of Thy glorious kingdom, and shower upon me Thy
confirmations, which alone can change a gnat into an eagle, a drop of
water into rivers and seas, and an atom into lights and suns? O my Lord!
Assist me with Thy triumphant and effective might, so that my tongue may
utter Thy praises and attributes among all people and my soul overflow
with the wine of Thy love and knowledge.

Thou art the Omnipotent and the Doer of whatsoever Thou willest.





11: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE CENTRAL STATES


_Revealed on February 8, 1917, in Bahá’u’lláh’s room at the house of Abbúd
in Akká, and addressed to the Bahá’ís of the twelve Central States of the
United States: Michigan, Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Minnesota,
Iowa, Missouri, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska and Kansas. _

1

                               _He is God!_

O ye old believers and intimate friends:

2 God says in the great Qur’án: “He specializes for His Mercy whomsoever
He willeth.”(16)

3 These twelve Central States of the United States are like unto the heart
of America, and the heart is connected with all the organs and parts of
man. If the heart is strengthened, all the organs of the body are
reinforced, and if the heart is weak all the physical elements are
subjected to feebleness.

4 Now praise be to God that Chicago and its environs from the beginning of
the diffusion of the fragrances of God have been a strong heart.
Therefore, through divine bounty and providence it has become confirmed in
certain great matters.

5 First: The call of the Kingdom was in the very beginning raised from
Chicago. This is indeed a great privilege, for in future centuries and
cycles, it will be as an axis around which the honor of Chicago will
revolve.

6 Second: A number of souls with the utmost firmness and steadfastness
arose in that blessed spot in the promotion of the Word of God and even to
the present moment, having purified and sanctified the heart from every
thought, they are occupied with the promulgation of the teachings of God.
Hence the call of praise is raised uninterruptedly from the Supreme
Concourse.

7 Third: During the American journey ‘Abdu’l-Bahá several times passed
through Chicago and associated with the friends of God. For some time he
sojourned in that city. Day and night he was occupied with the mention of
the True One and summoned the people to the Kingdom of God.

8 Fourth: Up to the present time, every movement initiated in Chicago, its
effect was spread to all parts and to all directions, just as everything
that appears in and manifests from the heart influences all the organs and
limbs of the body.

9 Fifth: The first Ma_sh_riqu’l-A_dh_kár in America was instituted in
Chicago, and this honor and distinction is infinite in value. Out of this
Ma_sh_riqu’l-A_dh_kár, without doubt, thousands of Ma_sh_riqu’l-A_dh_kárs
will be born.

10 Likewise (were instituted in Chicago) the general Annual Conventions,
the foundation of the Star of the West, the Publishing Society for the
publication of books and Tablets and their circulation in all parts of
America, and the preparations now under way for the celebration of the
Golden Centenary Anniversary of the Kingdom of God. I hope that this
Jubilee and this Exhibition may be celebrated in the utmost perfection so
that the call to the world of unity, “There is no God but One God, and all
the Messengers, from the beginning to the Seal of the Prophets (Muḥammad)
were sent on the part of the True One!” may be raised; the flag of the
oneness of the world of humanity be unfurled, the melody of universal
peace may reach the ears of the East and the West, all the paths may be
cleared and straightened, all the hearts may be attracted to the Kingdom
of God, the tabernacle of unity be pitched on the apex of America, the
song of the love of God may exhilarate and rejoice all the nations and
peoples, the surface of the earth may become the eternal paradise, the
dark clouds may be dispelled and the Sun of Truth may shine forth with the
utmost intensity.

11 O ye friends of God! Exert ye with heart and soul, so that association,
love, unity and agreement be obtained between the hearts, all the aims may
be merged into one aim, all the songs become one song and the power of the
Holy Spirit may become so overwhelmingly victorious as to overcome all the
forces of the world of nature. Exert yourselves; your mission is
unspeakably glorious. Should success crown your enterprise, America will
assuredly evolve into a center from which waves of spiritual power will
emanate, and the throne of the Kingdom of God will, in the plentitude of
its majesty and glory, be firmly established.

12 This phenomenal world will not remain in an unchanging condition even
for a short while. Second after second it undergoes change and
transformation. Every foundation will finally become collapsed; every
glory and splendor will at last vanish and disappear, but the Kingdom of
God is eternal and the heavenly sovereignty and majesty will stand firm,
everlasting. Hence in the estimation of a wise man the mat in the Kingdom
of God is preferable to the throne of the government of the world.

13 Continually my ear and eye are turned toward the Central States;
perchance a melody from some blessed souls may reach my ears—souls who are
the dawning-places of the love of God, the stars of the horizon of
sanctification and holiness—souls who will illumine this dark universe and
quicken to life this dead world. The joy of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá depends upon
this! I hope that you may become confirmed therein.

14 Consequently, those souls who are in a condition of the utmost
severance, purified from the defects of the world of nature, sanctified
from attachment to this earth, vivified with the breaths of eternal
life—with luminous hearts, with heavenly spirit, with attraction of
consciousness, with celestial magnanimity, with eloquent tongues and with
clear explanations—such souls must hasten and travel through all parts of
the Central States. In every city and village they must occupy themselves
with the diffusion of the divine exhortations and advices, guide the souls
and promote the oneness of the world of humanity. They must play the
melody of international conciliation with such power that every deaf one
may attain hearing, every extinct person may be set aglow, every dead one
may obtain new life and every indifferent soul may find ecstasy. It is
certain that such will be the consummation.

Let the spreaders of the fragrances of God recite this prayer every
morning:

O LORD, my God! Praise and thanksgiving be unto Thee for Thou hast guided
me to the highway of the kingdom, suffered me to walk in this straight and
far-stretching path, illumined my eye by beholding the splendors of Thy
light, inclined my ear to the melodies of the birds of holiness from the
kingdom of mysteries and attracted my heart with Thy love among the
righteous.

O Lord! Confirm me with the Holy Spirit, so that I may call in Thy Name
amongst the nations, and give the glad tidings of the manifestation of Thy
kingdom amongst mankind.

O Lord! I am weak, strengthen me with Thy power and potency. My tongue
falters, suffer me to utter Thy commemoration and praise. I am lowly,
honor me through admitting me into Thy kingdom. I am remote, cause me to
approach the threshold of Thy mercifulness. O Lord! Make me a brilliant
lamp, a shining star and a blessed tree, adorned with fruit, its branches
overshadowing all these regions. Verily, Thou art the Mighty, the Powerful
and Unconstrained.





12: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE WESTERN STATES


_Revealed on February 15, 1917, in Bahá’u’lláh’s room at the house of
Abbúd in Akká, and addressed to the Bahá’ís of the eleven Western States
of the United States: New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona, Nevada, California,
Wyoming, Utah, Montana, Idaho, Oregon and Washington. _

1

                               _He is God!_

O ye friends and the maidservants of the Merciful, the chosen ones of the
Kingdom:

2 The Blessed state of California bears the utmost similarity to the Holy
Land, that is, the country of Palestine. The air is of the utmost
temperance, the plain very spacious, and the fruits of Palestine are seen
in that state in the utmost of freshness and delicacy. When ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
was traveling and journeying through those states, he found himself in
Palestine, for from every standpoint there was a perfect likeness between
this region and that state. Even the shores of the Pacific Ocean, in some
instances, show perfect resemblance to the shores of the Holy Land—even
the flora of the Holy Land have grown on those shores—the study of which
had led to much speculation and wonder.

3 Likewise, in the state of California and other Western states, wonderful
scenes of the world of nature, which bewilder the minds of men, are
manifest. Lofty mountains, deep canyons, great and majestic waterfalls,
and giant trees are witnessed on all sides, while its soil is in the
utmost fertility and richness. That blessed state is similar to the Holy
Land and that region and that country like unto a delectable paradise, is
in many ways identical with Palestine. Now just as there are natural
resemblances, heavenly resemblances must also be acquired.

4 The lights of the divine traces are manifest in Palestine. The majority
of the Israelitish Prophets raised the call of the Kingdom of God in this
holy ground. Having spread the spiritual teachings, the nostrils of the
spiritually-minded ones became fragrant, the eyes of the illumined souls
became brightened, the ears were thrilled through this song, the hearts
obtained eternal life from the soul-refreshing breeze of the Kingdom of
God and gained supreme illumination from the splendor of the Sun of
Reality. Then from this region the light was spread to Europe, America,
Asia, Africa and Australia.

5 Now California and the other Western States must earn an ideal
similarity with the Holy Land, and from that state and that region the
breaths of the Holy Spirit be diffused to all parts of America and Europe,
that the call of the Kingdom of God may exhilarate and rejoice all the
ears, the divine principles bestow a new life, the different parties may
become one party, the divergent ideas may disappear and revolve around one
unique center, the East and the West of America may embrace each other,
the anthem of the oneness of the world of humanity may confer a new life
upon all the children of men, and the tabernacle of universal peace be
pitched on the apex of America; thus Europe and Africa may become vivified
with the breaths of the Holy Spirit, this world may become another world,
the body politic may attain to a new exhilaration, and just as in the
state of California and other Western States the marvelous scenes of the
world of nature are evident and manifest, the great signs of the Kingdom
of God may also be unveiled so that the body may correspond with the
spirit, the outward world may become a symbol of the inward world, and the
mirror of the earth may become the mirror of the Kingdom, reflecting the
ideal virtues of heaven.

6 During My journey and traveling in those parts, I beheld wonderful
scenes and beautiful panoramas of nature, orchards and rivers; national
parks and general conclaves; deserts, plains, meadows and prairies; and
the grains and fruits of that region greatly attracted My attention; even
to the present moment they are in My mind.

7 Particularly was I greatly pleased with the meetings in San Francisco
and Oakland, the gatherings in Los Angeles, and the believers who came
from the cities of other states. Whenever their faces cross My memory,
immediately infinite happiness is realized.

8 Therefore I hope that the divine teachings like unto the rays of the sun
may be diffused in all the Western States, and the blessed verse of the
Qur’án, “It is a good City and the Lord is the Forgiver!”(17) may become
realized. Likewise, the significance of another Qur’anic verse, “Do ye not
travel through the land?”(18) and of the verse, “Behold the traces of the
Mercy of God!”(19) become revealed in the utmost effulgence.

9 Praise be to God that through the divine bounty and providence, in that
region the field of service is vast, the minds are in the utmost degree of
intelligence and progress, sciences and arts are being promoted, the
hearts like unto mirrors are in the utmost state of purity and
translucency, and the friends of God are in perfect attraction. Therefore
it is hoped that meetings for teaching will be organized and instituted,
and for the diffusion of the fragrances of God wise teachers may be sent
to cities, even to villages.

10 The teachers of the Cause must be heavenly, lordly and radiant. They
must be embodied spirit, personified intellect, and arise in service with
the utmost firmness, steadfastness and self-sacrifice. In their journeys
they must not be attached to food and clothing. They must concentrate
their thoughts on the outpourings of the Kingdom of God and beg for the
confirmations of the Holy Spirit. With a divine power, with an attraction
of consciousness, with heavenly glad tidings and celestial holiness they
must perfume the nostrils with the fragrances of the Paradise of Abhá.

The following commune is to be read by them every day:

O GOD! O God! This is a broken-winged bird and his flight is very
slow—assist him so that he may fly toward the apex of prosperity and
salvation, wing his way with the utmost joy and happiness throughout the
illimitable space, raise his melody in Thy Supreme Name in all the
regions, exhilarate the ears with this call, and brighten the eyes by
beholding the signs of guidance.

O Lord! I am single, alone and lowly. For me there is no support save
Thee, no helper except Thee and no sustainer beside Thee. Confirm me in
Thy service, assist me with the cohorts of Thine angels, make me
victorious in the promotion of Thy Word and suffer me to speak out Thy
wisdom amongst Thy creatures. Verily, Thou art the helper of the weak and
the defender of the little ones, and verily Thou art the Powerful, the
Mighty and the Unconstrained.





13: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF CANADA AND GREENLAND


_Revealed on February 21, 1917, in Bahá’u’lláh’s room at the house of
Abbúd in Akká, and addressed to the Bahá’ís of Canada—Newfoundland, Prince
Edward Island, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec, Saskatchewan, Manitoba,
Ontario, Alberta, British Columbia, Yukon, Mackenzie, Keewatin, Ungava,
Franklin Islands—and Greenland. _

1

                               _He is God!_

O ye kind friends and the maidservants of the Merciful:

2 In the great Qur’án, God says: “Thou shalt see no difference in the
creatures of God.”(20) In other words, He says: From the ideal standpoint,
there is no variation between the creatures of God, because they are all
created by Him. From the above premise, a conclusion is drawn, that there
is no difference between countries. The future of the Dominion of Canada,
however, is very great, and the events connected with it infinitely
glorious. It shall become the object of the glance of providence, and
shall show forth the bounties of the All-Glorious.

3 ‘Abdu’l-Bahá during his journey and sojourn through that Dominion
obtained the utmost joy. Before My departure, many souls warned Me not to
travel to Montreal, saying, the majority of the inhabitants are Catholics,
and are in the utmost fanaticism, that they are submerged in the sea of
imitations, that they have not the capability to hearken to the call of
the Kingdom of God, that the veil of bigotry has so covered the eyes that
they have deprived themselves from beholding the signs of the Most Great
Guidance, and that the dogmas have taken possession of the hearts
entirely, leaving no trace of reality. They asserted that should the Sun
of Reality shine with perfect splendor throughout that Dominion, the dark,
impenetrable clouds of superstitions have so enveloped the horizon that it
would be utterly impossible for anyone to behold its rays.

4 But these stories did not have any effect on the resolution of
‘Abdu’l-Bahá. He, trusting in God, turned his face toward Montreal. When
he entered that city he observed all the doors open, he found the hearts
in the utmost receptivity and the ideal power of the Kingdom of God
removing every obstacle and obstruction. In the churches and meetings of
that Dominion he called men to the Kingdom of God with the utmost joy, and
scattered such seeds which will be irrigated with the hand of divine
power. Undoubtedly those seeds will grow, becoming green and verdant, and
many rich harvests will be gathered. In the promotion of the divine
principles he found no antagonist and no adversary. The believers he met
in that city were in the utmost spirituality, and attracted with the
fragrances of God. He found that through the effort of the maidservant of
God Mrs. Maxwell a number of the sons and daughters of the Kingdom in that
Dominion were gathered together and associated with each other, increasing
this joyous exhilaration day by day. The time of sojourn was limited to a
number of days, but the results in the future are inexhaustible. When a
farmer comes into the possession of a virgin soil, in a short time he will
bring under cultivation a large field. Therefore I hope that in the future
Montreal may become so stirred, that the melody of the Kingdom may travel
to all parts of the world from that Dominion and the breaths of the Holy
Spirit may spread from that center to the East and the West of America.

5 O ye believers of God! Be not concerned with the smallness of your
numbers, neither be oppressed by the multitude of an unbelieving world.
Five grains of wheat will be endued with heavenly blessing, whereas a
thousand tons of tares will yield no results or effect. One fruitful tree
will be conducive to the life of society, whereas a thousand forests of
wild trees offer no fruits. The plain is covered with pebbles, but
precious stones are rare. One pearl is better than a thousand wildernesses
of sand, especially this pearl of great price, which is endowed with
divine blessing. Erelong thousands of other pearls will be born from it.
When that pearl associates and becomes the intimate of the pebbles, they
also all change into pearls.

6 Again I repeat that the future of Canada, whether from a material or a
spiritual standpoint, is very great. Day by day civilization and freedom
shall increase. The clouds of the Kingdom will water the seeds of guidance
which have been sown there. Consequently, rest ye not, seek ye no
composure, attach not yourselves to the luxuries of this ephemeral world,
free yourselves from every attachment, and strive with heart and soul to
become fully established in the Kingdom of God. Gain ye the heavenly
treasures. Day by day become ye more illumined. Draw ye nearer and nearer
unto the threshold of oneness. Become ye the manifestors of spiritual
favors and the dawning-places of infinite lights! If it is possible, send
ye teachers to other portions of Canada; likewise, dispatch ye teachers to
Greenland and the home of the Eskimos.

7 As regards the teachers, they must completely divest themselves from the
old garments and be invested with a new garment. According to the
statement of Christ, they must attain to the station of rebirth—that is,
whereas in the first instance they were born from the womb of the mother,
this time they must be born from the womb of the world of nature. Just as
they are now totally unaware of the experiences of the fetal world, they
must also forget entirely the defects of the world of nature. They must be
baptized with the water of life, the fire of the love of God and the
breaths of the Holy Spirit; be satisfied with little food, but take a
large portion from the heavenly table. They must disengage themselves from
temptation and covetousness, and be filled with the spirit. Through the
effect of their pure breath, they must change the stone into the brilliant
ruby and the shell into pearl. Like unto the cloud of vernal shower, they
must transform the black soil into the rose garden and orchard. They must
make the blind seeing, the deaf hearing, the extinguished one enkindled
and set aglow, and the dead quickened.

8 Upon you be greeting and praise!

PRAISE be to Thee, O my God! These are Thy servants who are attracted by
the fragrances of Thy mercifulness, are enkindled by the fire burning in
the tree of Thy singleness, and whose eyes are brightened by beholding the
splendors of the light shining in the Sinai of Thy oneness.

O Lord! Loose their tongues to make mention of Thee amongst Thy people,
suffer them to speak forth Thy praise through Thy grace and
loving-kindness, assist them with the cohorts of Thine angels, strengthen
their loins in Thy service, and make them the signs of Thy guidance
amongst Thy creatures.

Verily, Thou art the All-Powerful, the Most Exalted, the Ever-Forgiving,
the All-Merciful.

The spreaders of the fragrances of God should recite this prayer every
morning:

O GOD, my God! Thou beholdest this weak one begging for celestial
strength, this poor one craving Thy heavenly treasures, this thirsty one
longing for the fountain of eternal life, this afflicted one yearning for
Thy promised healing through Thy boundless mercy which Thou hast destined
for Thy chosen servants in Thy kingdom on high.

O Lord! I have no helper save Thee, no shelter besides Thee, and no
sustainer except Thee. Assist me with Thine angels to diffuse Thy holy
fragrances and to spread abroad Thy teachings amongst the choicest of Thy
people.

O my Lord! Suffer me to be detached from aught else save Thee, to hold
fast to the hem of Thy bounty, to be wholly devoted to Thy Faith, to
remain fast and firm in Thy love and to observe what Thou hast prescribed
in Thy Book.

Verily, Thou art the Powerful, the Mighty, the Omnipotent.





14: TABLET TO THE BAHÁ’ÍS OF THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA


_Revealed on March 8, 1917, in the summerhouse (Ismá’íl Áqá’s room) at
‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s house in Haifa, and addressed to the Bahá’ís of the United
States and Canada. _

1

                               _He is God!_

         O ye heavenly souls, sons and daughters of the Kingdom:

2 God says in the Qur’án: “Take ye hold of the Cord of God, all of you,
and become ye not disunited.”(21)

3 In the contingent world there are many collective centers which are
conducive to association and unity between the children of men. For
example, patriotism is a collective center; nationalism is a collective
center; identity of interests is a collective center; political alliance
is a collective center; the union of ideals is a collective center, and
the prosperity of the world of humanity is dependent upon the organization
and promotion of the collective centers. Nevertheless, all the above
institutions are, in reality, the matter and not the substance, accidental
and not eternal—temporary and not everlasting. With the appearance of
great revolutions and upheavals, all these collective centers are swept
away. But the Collective Center of the Kingdom, embodying the institutions
and divine teachings, is the eternal Collective Center. It establishes
relationship between the East and the West, organizes the oneness of the
world of humanity, and destroys the foundation of differences. It
overcomes and includes all the other collective centers. Like unto the ray
of the sun, it dispels entirely the darkness encompassing all the regions,
bestows ideal life, and causes the effulgence of divine illumination.
Through the breaths of the Holy Spirit it performs miracles; the Orient
and the Occident embrace each other, the North and South become intimates
and associates, conflicting and contending opinions disappear,
antagonistic aims are brushed aside, the law of the struggle for existence
is abrogated, and the canopy of the oneness of the world of humanity is
raised on the apex of the globe, casting its shade over all the races of
men. Consequently, the real Collective Center is the body of the divine
teachings, which include all the degrees and embrace all the universal
relations and necessary laws of humanity.

4 Consider! The people of the East and the West were in the utmost
strangeness. Now to what a high degree they are acquainted with each other
and united together! How far are the inhabitants of Persia from the
remotest countries of America! And now observe how great has been the
influence of the heavenly power, for the distance of thousands of miles
has become identical with one step! How various nations that have had no
relations or similarity with each other are now united and agreed through
this divine potency! Indeed to God belongs power in the past and in the
future! And verily God is powerful over all things!

5 Consider the flowers of a garden. Though differing in kind, color, form,
and shape, yet, inasmuch as they are refreshed by the waters of one
spring, revived by the breath of one wind, invigorated by the rays of one
sun, this diversity increaseth their charm, and addeth unto their beauty.
How unpleasing to the eye if all the flowers and plants, the leaves and
blossoms, the fruits, the branches and the trees of that garden were all
of the same shape and color! Diversity of hues, form and shape, enricheth
and adorneth the garden, and heighteneth the effect thereof. In like
manner, when divers shades of thought, temperament and character, are
brought together under the power and influence of one central agency, the
beauty and glory of human perfection will be revealed and made manifest.
Naught but the celestial potency of the Word of God, which ruleth and
transcendeth the realities of all things, is capable of harmonizing the
divergent thoughts, sentiments, ideas, and convictions of the children of
men.

6 Therefore, the believers of God throughout all the republics of America,
through the divine power, must become the cause of the promotion of
heavenly teachings and the establishment of the oneness of humanity. Every
one of the important souls must arise, blowing over all parts of America
the breath of life, conferring upon the people a new spirit, baptizing
them with the fire of the love of God, the water of life, and the breaths
of the Holy Spirit so that the second birth may become realized. For it is
written in the Gospel: “That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that
which is born of the Spirit is spirit.”(22)

7 Therefore, O ye believers of God in the United States and Canada! Select
ye important personages, or else they by themselves, becoming severed from
rest and composure of the world, may arise and travel throughout Alaska,
the republic of Mexico, and south of Mexico in the Central American
republics, such as Guatemala, Honduras, Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica,
Panama and Belize; and through the great South American republics, such as
Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay, Brazil, French Guiana, Dutch Guiana, British
Guiana, Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia and Chile; also in the group of
the West Indies islands, such as Cuba, Haiti, Puerto Rico, Jamaica and
Santo Domingo, and the group of islands of the Lesser Antilles, the
Islands of Bahama and the Islands of Bermuda; likewise to the islands to
the east, west and north of South America, such as Trinidad, Falkland
Islands, Galapagòs Islands, Juan Fernandez and Tobago. Visit ye especially
the city of Bahia, on the eastern shore of Brazil. Because in the past
years this city was christened with the name, BAHIA, there is no doubt
that it has been through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit.

8 Consequently, the believers of God must display the utmost effort,
upraise the divine melody throughout those regions, promulgate the
heavenly teachings and waft over all the spirit of eternal life, so that
those republics may become so illumined with the splendors and the
effulgences of the Sun of Reality that they may become the objects of the
praise and commendation of all other countries. Likewise, ye must give
great attention to the Republic of Panama, for in that point the Occident
and the Orient find each other united through the Panama Canal, and it is
also situated between the two great oceans. That place will become very
important in the future. The teachings, once established there, will unite
the East and the West, the North and the South.

9 Hence the intention must be purified, the effort ennobled and exalted,
so that you may establish affinity between the hearts of the world of
humanity. This glorious aim will not become realized save through the
promotion of divine teachings which are the foundations of the holy
religions.

10 Consider how the religions of God served the world of humanity! How the
religion of Torah became conducive to the glory and honor and progress of
the Israelitish nation! How the breaths of the Holy Spirit of His Holiness
Christ created affinity and unity between divergent communities and
quarreling families! How the sacred power of His Holiness Muḥammad became
the means of uniting and harmonizing the contentious tribes and the
different clans of Peninsular Arabia—to such an extent that one thousand
tribes were welded into one tribe; strife and discord were done away with;
all of them unitedly and with one accord strove in advancing the cause of
culture and civilization, and thus were freed from the lowest degree of
degradation, soaring toward the height of everlasting glory! Is it
possible to find a greater Collective Center in the phenomenal world than
this? In comparison to this divine Collective Center, the national
collective center, the patriotic collective center, the political
collective center and the cultural and intellectual collective center are
like child’s play!

11 Now strive ye that the Collective Center of the sacred religions—for
the inculcation of which all the Prophets were manifested and which is no
other than the spirit of the divine teachings—be spread in all parts of
America, so that each one of you may shine forth from the horizon of
reality like unto the morning star, divine illumination may overcome the
darkness of nature, and the world of humanity may become enlightened. This
is the most great work! Should you become confirmed therein, this world
will become another world, the surface of the earth will become the
delectable paradise, and eternal Institutions be founded.

Let whosoever travels to different parts to teach, peruse over mountain,
desert, land and sea this supplication:

O GOD! O God! Thou seest my weakness, lowliness and humility before Thy
creatures; nevertheless, I have trusted in Thee and have arisen in the
promotion of Thy teachings among Thy strong servants, relying on Thy power
and might.

O Lord! I am a broken-winged bird and desire to soar in Thy limitless
space. How is it possible for me to do this save through Thy providence
and grace, Thy confirmation and assistance.

O Lord! Have pity on my weakness, and strengthen me with Thy power. O
Lord! Have pity on my impotence, and assist me with Thy might and majesty.

O Lord! Should the breath of the Holy Spirit confirm the weakest of
creatures, he would attain all to which he aspireth and would possess
anything he desireth. Indeed, Thou hast assisted Thy servants in the past
and, though they were the weakest of Thy creatures, the lowliest of Thy
servants and the most insignificant of those who lived upon the earth,
through Thy sanction and potency they took precedence over the most
glorious of Thy people and the most noble of mankind. Whereas formerly
they were as moths, they became as royal falcons, and whereas before they
were as brooks, they became as seas, through Thy bestowal and Thy mercy.
They became, through Thy most great favor, stars shining on the horizon of
guidance, birds singing in the rose gardens of immortality, lions roaring
in the forests of knowledge and wisdom, and whales swimming in the oceans
of life.

Verily, Thou art the Clement, the Powerful, the Mighty, and the Most
Merciful of the merciful.






FOOTNOTES


    1 Qur’án 22:5.

    2 Cf. Mark 16:15.

    3 Cf. Qur’án 2:261.

    4 Qur’án 1:6.

    5 Cf. Mark 16:15.

    6 Cf. Matthew 13:23.

    7 Qur’án 2:257.

    8 Cf. Mark 16:15.

    9 Qur’án 39:69.

   10 Cf. Mark 16:15.

   11 Cf. Matthew 5:3.

   12 Qur’án 28:5.

   13 Cf. Matthew 10:14.

   14 Qur’án 24:35.

   15 Qur’án 1:6.

   16 Qur’án 2:105, 3:74.

   17 Qur’án 34:15.

   18 Qur’án 30:9, 40:82, 47:10.

   19 Qur’án 30:50.

   20 Qur’án 67:3.

   21 Qur’án 3:103.

   22 John 3:6.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TABLETS OF THE DIVINE PLAN***



CREDITS


June 2006

            Converted from Microsoft Word document format to TEI master
            format.
            Joshua Hutchinson



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 19296-0.txt or 19296-0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/2/9/19296/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder. Information on the
copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by
the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this
work.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***
