The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brochure Series of Architectural
Illustration, Volume 01, No. 05, May 1895, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Brochure Series of Architectural Illustration, Volume 01, No. 05, May 1895
       Two Florentine Pavements

Author: Various

Release Date: September 24, 2006 [EBook #19364]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROCHURE SERIES OF ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sigal Alon and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE BROCHURE SERIES

OF ARCHITECTURAL ILLUSTRATION.


VOL. I. MAY, 1895. No. 5.

TWO FLORENTINE PAVEMENTS.


The church of San Miniato al Monte, just outside the walls southeast of
Florence, and the Baptistery, or church of San Giovanni Battista, in
Florence, are among the finest examples of the Tuscan Romanesque style,
and both probably date from about the same time--the early part of the
twelfth century--although the date of San Miniato has until recently
been referred several centuries further back.

These two churches have many points of similarity, although entirely
different in plan. San Miniato was referred to in the article upon the
Byzantine-Romanesque doorways of Southern Italy in our February number,
and Fergusson's classification of Byzantine-Romanesque was, for the time
being, adopted for lack of better authority. Later writers have,
however, generally agreed that there is little or no Byzantine influence
in these two churches; that the delicate and refined treatment of
classic forms here found is not the result of Byzantine or Greek
influence, but is due entirely to the natural refinement of the Tuscan
race. The same characteristic was again shown later in the treatment of
Gothic detail, and is evident in the Renaissance work of this locality.

The dimensions of San Miniato were given in the February number referred
to above. The interior of this church is generally considered one of the
most beautiful interiors of Italy on account of its effective basilican
plan with a crypt opening from the nave, its beautiful and rich detail,
and its fine mosaics and decorations. The pavement is not the least of
its attractions.

The Baptistery will be remembered for its famous bronze doors, the work
of Ghiberti, which have given occasion for so much discussion, favorable
and unfavorable. It is octagonal in plan, and 108 feet in diameter
externally. It was erected originally for the cathedral of the city, but
in the eleventh and twelfth centuries was so thoroughly remodeled that
no recognizable features of the old building remain.

The pavements, in point of design, appear quite independent of the other
ornamental work in the two buildings we are considering.

The motives of ornament are those commonly found in the stuffs,
especially silks, of Sicily and the East, and their use here could
easily be accounted for through connection with Sicily. It is known that
the Hotel de Tiraz at Palermo, the great royal manufactory of stuffs,
artistic metal work, mosaics, etc., established in the sixth century,
and which continued until the sixteenth, supplied not only much of the
finest textile products for all of Europe in that time, but also
furnished workmen who carried with them the designs and methods of
Sicilian textile manufacture to other countries. Such manufactories were
established in several Italian cities, among them Lucca.

The relationship seems clear, as the forms are perfectly similar. The
beasts and birds set in balancing pairs facing each other and repeated
in an all-over pattern, as in a woven fabric, strongly suggest the
Sicilian silks. Eug. Muentz in his work, "La Tapisserie," speaks of this
evident relationship. The internal evidence of the design itself would
be quite sufficient if we had no other means of tracing it.

These two pavements are practically unique, as far as we are able to
learn. They are marble inlay, the pattern having been cut out in a slab
of white marble and pieces of black marble carefully fitted in to form
the figure. This is not true mosaic, and differs essentially in design
from the mosaic work of the same period which was derived from the Roman
mosaics made up of small pieces of marble or other material. Most of the
floor mosaics in Italy have suffered from wear and tear, and have in
many cases been very poorly restored; but these two pavements appear to
be in nearly their original condition.

The design does not have the merit of belonging distinctively to the
material in all cases, and might just as well be applied to wood
parquetry as stone. In fact, it might be even more effective in this
material if the colors were judiciously chosen.




[Illustration: XXXIII. Portion of the Pavement in the Baptistery,
Florence, Italy.]

[Illustration: XXXIV. Portion of the Pavement in the Baptistery,
Florence, Italy.]

[Illustration: XXXV. Portion of the Pavement in the Baptistery,
Florence, Italy.]

[Illustration: XXXVI. Portion of the Pavement in the Baptistery,
Florence, Italy.]

[Illustration: XXXVII. Portion of the Pavement in the Baptistery,
Florence, Italy.]


XXXIII to XXXVII.

PORTIONS OF THE PAVEMENT IN THE BAPTISTERY, FLORENCE, ITALY.

One exception should be made to the remarks above in relation to true
mosaic. The lower left-hand portion of plate XXXVI is without doubt made
up of small pieces put together after the manner of the old Roman
mosaics, and it is possible that the portion shown in the upper
left-hand corner of the same plate is made in the same way. There are
several parts of the floor laid in this manner, but they are distinctly
secondary in interest to the inlaid portions.

The pavement is divided irregularly by squares and rectangles, the
portion especially rich in ornament being that between the door and the
altar. The rectangular patterns are irregularly cut into by special
pavements, placed before several of the monumental tombs in the walls.




[Illustration: XXXVIII. Portion of the Pavement in the Church of San
Miniato al Monte, Florence, Italy.]

[Illustration: XXXIX. Portion of the Pavement in the Church of San
Miniato al Monte, Florence, Italy.]

[Illustration: XL. Portion of the Pavement in the Church of San Miniato
al Monte, Florence, Italy.]


XXXVIII to XL.

PORTIONS OF THE PAVEMENT IN THE CHURCH OF SAN MINIATO AL MONTE,
FLORENCE, ITALY.

In the first of these plates there is a suggestion of the mosaic
treatment commonly seen in the pavements of Rome, Venice, and Siena.
The sort of guilloche of interlacing circles was very generally used.

Plate XL on the other hand is as plainly reminiscent of textile designs
as it well might be; and in plate XXXIII from the Baptistery the same
characteristic can be seen.




Wood Floors.


The addition which a fine hardwood floor makes to the attractiveness of
a room is appreciated by some architects, but good floors are not by any
means as common as they should be. The expense of hard wood is not so
much more than that of a cheap floor as to stand in the way of its use
when the final result is considered.

It is generally admitted that a floor entirely covered with a carpet is
in many ways undesirable, especially from a sanitary point of view;
while a hardwood floor, wholly or partly covered with rugs, has every
advantage. Furthermore, the fashion, which has a great deal to do with
what shall be used, aside from any question of intrinsic merit, has set
strongly in this direction, and in many cases old floors are replaced
with new ones of hard wood for the sole purpose of giving a chance for
the use of rugs in place of carpets. This is one, even if it be a rare
instance of the agreement of fashion and good taste. In working over an
old floor a plain or ornamental border can usually be laid at no great
expense by using the thin wood carpet, manufactured by all the best
makers of parquetry, and the centre can be laid with a pattern or with
narrow strips such as the "roll goods" which are manufactured by S. C.
Johnson of Racine, which are made up of strips usually one and
three-eighths inches wide and five sixteenths of an inch thick, glued to
a backing of canvas.

Patterns of all descriptions made from all the best foreign and domestic
woods can be obtained, as the designs of the best manufacturers include
an almost unlimited choice, and there is no end to the combinations
which can be made from the stock patterns. As an instance of this, the
catalogue of J. W. Boughton of Philadelphia contains a remarkably fine
selection of borders which can be combined and adapted to almost any
requirement, while the designs for the field or centre of the floor are
fully as varied and usable. These designs are made in such shape that
they can be easily adapted to any shape of room and fitted to all sorts
of irregular niches and jogs at slight extra expense.

Owing to the economy of manufacturing floors made from pieces which can
be put together on a system of squares, hexagons, or octagons, most of
the patterns in common use are made up of these units, or of triangles
or rectangles combining to form these figures. Curved forms cannot be
used to good advantage in this way as it is difficult and expensive to
cut or join them properly. Nevertheless, all the principal manufacturers
will execute to order any design desired.

When placed in a new house floors of 7/8 inch or 1-1/4 inch are usually
to be preferred, and are made in sections of convenient size for
shipment at the factory, and finished after they are in place.

Most of the makers nail thin parquetry work through from the surface and
fill the nail holes with putty, although in some cases blind nailing is
used.

Western manufacturers have in the last few years been making rapid
progress in this industry. While J. W. Boughton, who is one of the
oldest and best known makers of ornamental flooring, is still doing a
large and increasing business, Western houses are catering to and
obtaining a great deal of the best trade. The Interior Hardwood Company
of Indianapolis, under the business management of its vice-president,
Mr. Charles Hinman Comstock, has doubled its capacity in the last year
and shows commendable energy in pushing its business. S. C. Johnson of
Racine, Wis., is also in the front rank in first-class trade. The
Wood-Mosaic Company of Rochester should also be considered as one of the
leading and reliable houses. Its collection of designs is full and
varied and its work of the best.

Architects will find the catalogues of these firms most valuable
reference books.

The finishing of a good floor requires care and attention as well as
special knowledge. Oil, varnish, shellac, and wax are the finishes
ordinarily used, but wax is usually the most satisfactory.

The floor should be carefully and thoroughly smoothed, so that no waves
or plane-marks will be seen, and then filled if the wood is at all
porous or open grained. This is done with preparations manufactured by
any of the firms mentioned above, or with fillers specially made for the
purpose such as those sold by Harrison Brothers & Company of
Philadelphia, or the Chicago Wood Finishing Company of Chicago. The wood
filler made by the latter firm is especially adapted for this purpose
and will give excellent results. The finish is then applied in one or
more coats as required, oil and shellac finishes usually requiring more
than one application and an intermediate rubbing down with fine
sandpaper. Shellac and ordinary varnish are usually unsatisfactory from
their tendency to wear unevenly. The Chicago Varnish Company of Chicago
supplies a varnish under the name of "Supremis," which has proved by
years of use under trying conditions, such as those of asylums,
hospitals, and public buildings, to be of exceptional merit. It is
elastic, tough, and gives a fine waxy surface which can be rubbed and
will preserve its finish. It has the additional merit of being easily
applied. It dries quickly and is remarkably durable. Wax should be
carefully applied and then polished to the required finish with a
weighted brush.

Of wax finishes one very largely used is that made by the Butcher Polish
Company of Boston. It has all the best qualities of other wax finishes
and has stood the test of time and experience.

There are numerous variations in the products referred to above suited
for different purposes. The Wood-Mosaic Company makes end-wood mosaic
7/8 inch thick made of small blocks joined by means of a lead tongue;
wood carpet similar to that of S. C. Johnson; and thick and thin
parquetry. S. C. Johnson also makes a flooring of 1/4 inch face glued to
a backing of pine to make 7/8 inch, 1 inch, or 1-1/4 inch stock which is
found to stand the changes of temperature in American houses remarkably
well. The thicker floors of 7/8 inch and upwards are frequently made
with tongued and grooved joints and blind nailed.

These patterns when properly chosen are just as appropriate for stairs,
walls, or even ceilings, as for floors, and are frequently used for
these places.




Modern Mosaic Floors.


The use of mosaic floors, especially for corridors and entrances of
public and business buildings and in some positions of private
residences, is rapidly increasing, and every specimen of work gives this
art impetus. The laying of a mosaic floor is not so simple a matter as
it appears to many architects, and the fact that anyone cannot do it is
proven by the bad work one constantly runs across. It is, therefore,
advisable that work of this sort be entrusted to a concern that can be
found after the job has been finished and paid for, and that has a
reputation to maintain and a willingness to make good any imperfection
that a few months' wear will bring to light. As this number of THE
BROCHURE SERIES will often be referred to where ornamental floors are
being designed, we take pleasure not particularly in recommending a
house for executing such floors, but rather in calling attention to some
of the work executed, inspection of which will be the strongest
endorsement possible. We refer to the Murdock Parlor Grate Company of
Boston, a house known by name at least to every architect and builder of
New England.

Organized over forty years ago, and with prospects of active existence
for as many or more years to come, their contracts contain the element
of responsibility that is the best guarantee an architect can have that
his client's interests are in good hands.

The mosaic and terrazzo flooring department of the Murdock Parlor Grate
Company already has a list of over fifty public buildings in which
important work has been done. The terrazzo floors so much admired in the
new Public Library, covering a surface of 60,000 square feet, the mosaic
floor of the Members' corridor in the Massachusetts State House, and
especially the entrance to the Members' vestibule, a part of this floor,
and the lobbies to the Bowdoin Square and Keith's Theatres, Boston, also
mosaic, are examples easily inspected by Boston architects.

Other public buildings in New England in which this company have done
admirable mosaic work are the new McLean Asylum buildings, the Arlington
(Mass.) Public Library, the Exchange Club, Boston, and a number of bank
buildings.

Throughout the Back Bay district there are numberless vestibule and
hall floors in fine residences, many of which are gems in color and
design.

We have mentioned only a few examples, but almost every New England
architect can, by writing to the Murdock Parlor Grate Company, be
referred to examples of their work in his neighborhood, and we think he
will find their estimates as low as it is safe to accept, and their
responsibility is beyond all question.




Books.


_A Handbook of Architectural Styles_: Translated from the German of A.
Rosengarten by W. Collett-Sandars. New edition, 639 illustrations. New
York: C. Scribner's Sons. 1895. For sale by Bates & Guild, Boston.
$2.50.

A review of the contents of this work is scarcely necessary, as it is
already recognized as a standard by all who are at all familiar with
architectural literature. As compared with other books upon the history
of architecture, the point of view from which the subject has been
looked at furnishes the main distinction. This cannot be better stated
than in the words of the editor of the present edition, Professor T.
Roger Smith. He says: "It is essentially that of an academic and
classical professor, and one brought up not only in familiarity with the
best examples of ancient art, but with the habit of mind which recurs to
classic and especially to Greek originals, both as a standard of taste
and as models for treatment of modern works. This feeling, which held
sway in England in the day of Chambers, of Soane, and of Cockerell, has
now almost died out from our practice and our literature. The works of
the contemporary English and French writers on architecture, which are
now widely known and read, proceed avowedly and unmistakably on a
different basis. Such writings as those of Street or Scott,
Viollet-le-Duc, and Ruskin breathe a totally different inspiration;
while even the valuable series of architectural writings which we owe to
the pen of Mr. Fergusson are too cosmopolitan in range and too impartial
in tone for such a peculiarity as is here traceable to be visible in
them."

The illustrations show some of the wear and tear of former editions, but
are still of great value.




The Brochure Series

of Architectural Illustration.

PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY

BATES & GUILD,

6 BEACON STREET, BOSTON, MASS.


Subscription Rates per year 50 cents, in advance Special Club Rates for
five subscriptions $2.00

Entered at the Boston Post Office as Second-class Matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has been called to our attention that some of our subscribers object
to duplicating, or at least object to paying for duplicating plates or
photographs which they already have in some other form. This is of
course perfectly natural and was a point which we had fully in mind in
formulating the plan of THE BROCHURE SERIES. And this was one of the
main considerations which influenced us in making the subscription price
so low. At the price of fifty cents a year, if only a dozen out of the
hundred plates are worth buying to a subscriber his year's subscription
is justified and is a good investment.

Of necessity it will be found that we shall occasionally include
subjects which some of our subscribers already have, but the importance
of this duplication is liable to be exaggerated in the minds of those
who might notice it when the number of other desirable plates is not
kept in view. It should be remembered that the classification, which we
are following, and the complete reference index which will be published
at the end of each year, and the advantage of a compact and uniform
collection which a set of the BROCHURES will give, render it much more
usable than a collection of miscellaneous plates or photographs can
possibly be. While it is not to be expected that we can choose subjects
which are entirely new to all of our thousands of subscribers, it will
be our aim to select those which will appeal to the greatest number, and
when familiar subjects are given the best obtainable photographs will be
used, and those which are least likely to be already found in American
collections.

It is now too late for those who have not already subscribed to obtain a
complete set of THE BROCHURE SERIES as our supply of the first three
numbers is exhausted, and no attempt will be made in future to carry in
stock any back numbers. Only enough copies of each issue will be printed
to supply immediate demands. On this account those who wish for the
current numbers must subscribe at once in order to make sure of them.
Less than one hundred copies of the April number are now in stock and
these are fast disappearing. Subscriptions in future will only be taken
to date from the next succeeding issue.

We wish especially to call attention to the arrangement by which clubs
of five subscriptions may be made up for $2, or 40 cents for each
subscription. A very little inquiry among one's friends will bring to
light four who are ready to combine at this price.

       *       *       *       *       *

The large circulation of THE BROCHURE SERIES among the younger members
of the profession furnishes an excellent opportunity for the interchange
of ideas with men who are all working with the same end in view--the
advancement of the profession of architecture. There may be a wide
difference in their aims, influenced by personal considerations, the
various differences of training and environment; but all are looking
forward to increased opportunities and a wider field of usefulness. The
experience of many young men will be found of value in shaping the
course of those who have not yet won their spurs. It is the purpose of
THE BROCHURE SERIES to furnish information as far as possible on
everything relating to the profession which will help to make the course
of such men an easy one. The articles upon the sketch clubs,
scholarships, and other educational work, have all been intended to
serve this purpose, and the cooperation of all who are working to this
end is earnestly solicited. Our pages will always be open for the
discussion of subjects of vital interest to young architects, and we
shall hope to see the opportunity largely taken advantage of.




American School of Architecture, Rome.


A recent circular issued by the committee of the American School of
Architecture at Rome contains a general description of the organization
of the school and its work. On the twelfth of last June, at a meeting
held in New York, it was decided to found such a school, and a committee
of control was selected including the chiefs of the schools of
architecture at the different American colleges where such exist. We
give below some quotations from this circular which will be found of
interest.

The school is founded for the benefit of advanced students only, and is
designed to further the more disciplinary work of other institutions by
opening to young men, already well trained by them in drawing and
design, certain special lines of study, which at present can be pursued
only under great disadvantages. Beginners, accordingly, will not be
received. Such work is not suitable to their condition, and it would be
a mistake to encourage them to devote their time to it. But to the
holders of traveling scholarships, to those who have acquitted
themselves with distinction in the competitions for these scholarships,
and to members of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts of at least three years'
standing, it offers opportunities for the completion of their
professional training which students thus equipped will, it is believed,
find of inestimable value. Other well-accredited students may be
admitted to certain hospitalities of the school, at the discretion of
the secretary.

Hitherto the holders of traveling scholarships have followed very
largely their own judgment as to their travel and study, and have
produced, as required, a certain number of carefully measured drawings,
which have borne testimony to the diligence of their authors, their
facility with pen, pencil, and brush, and the evident seriousness of
their intentions; but the work has necessarily shown no common purpose
and little consistent prosecution along carefully chosen lines. This
being their common experience, the past holders of traveling
scholarships are general in their approval of the effort to direct
foreign travel and study hereafter to more definite and specific
courses.

The school is one of observation and research rather than of design,
aiming to form a correct taste and to impress upon the mind, by daily
contact with great examples, those principles which are essential to the
enduring quality in architecture, be the style what it may. To this end
the founders of the school believe it to be of the utmost importance for
an architect, before he begins his professional career, to study
thoroughly and on the spot the monuments of ancient architecture and
such works of the Italian Renaissance as are worthy of being considered
their successors. The monuments best suited to this purpose are those of
Greece and Italy, and the headquarters of the school are established at
Rome rather than at Athens, because of the greater amount of material
there at hand of use to the modern student not only in the art of
architecture itself, but in that of mural painting and in the decorative
arts, including architectural sculpture.

The school was formally opened under the charge of Mr. Austin W. Lord,
as secretary, on the first of November last, in temporary quarters in
the upper story of the Palazzo Torlonia, on the southwest corner of the
Via dei Condotti and the Via Bocca di Leone, between the Corso and the
Piazza di Spagna; but a permanent home has now been secured in the
building known as the Casino dell'Aurora, occupying a part of the
grounds formerly belonging to the Villa Ludovisi. This building is
situated upon an isolated plot of ground, raised fifteen or twenty feet
above the surrounding streets, and comprising about eighty thousand
square feet, which is the size of the enclosed space in Gramercy Park in
the city of New York. It is on the Pincian Hill, not far from the French
Academy in the Villa Medici. The building contains about thirty rooms;
some of these are decorated with well-known frescoes, among which is the
Aurora of Guercino. The grounds, which were laid out by Lenôtre, are
well covered with trees and shrubs, and afford ample space for the
erection of additional one story buildings, should such be required at
any time for workrooms or studios.




Personal.


Mr. A. L. Nicholson, formerly with Davis & Von Storch, architects,
Scranton, Pa., has accepted a position with De Lemos & Cordes, Fulton
Building, Fulton and Nassau Streets, New York.

Mr. Dwight H. Perkins, of the firm of Perkins & Selby, Marshall Field
Building, Chicago, opened a new office on May 1 at 1107 Steinway Hall
Building, Chicago.

Mr. Myron H. Hunt, recently returned from an extended trip abroad, has
gone into the office of Shepley, Rutan & Coolidge in Chicago.

Mr. F. N. Reed, who has distinguished himself in the Rotch Scholarship
competition, having been given second place each time in the last three
years, is now with Cabot, Everett & Mead of Boston.




Brochure Series Competition No. 1.


[Illustration]

Program: The Henry F. Miller Piano Company of Boston, with the idea of
turning the attention of designers to the problem of artistic piano
cases, has placed in the hands of publishers of THE BROCHURE SERIES $50,
to be awarded for sketches of piano cases. Three prizes of $25, $15, and
$10 will be given for the three best designs submitted, the judges to be
the officers, of the company, assisted by an architect who shall be
appointed by the publishers.

It is not the idea of the Henry F. Miller Piano Company to secure
designs for actual use, as their work in special case design is almost
entirely to order, carrying out designs for architects and decorators.
Therefore, only sketches are required which may be executed in any
medium the designer may choose, although due regard should be paid to
the reproductive character of the drawing. A perspective sketch, showing
the right end and front of the case, is required to be made on paper,
not exceeding 8x12 in. in size.

The diagram above gives the necessary dimensions. In designing the end
the only thing to be borne in mind is the construction of the case, the
front telescoping into the back or frame, as shown by the plan of the
end. The quarter round finish of the back is not necessary, the
treatment of the end being optional so long as dimensions and
construction are regarded.

The arm or end of the keyboard (_c_), the foot (_a_), the "truss" (_b_),
which supports the keyboard, are all left entirely to the designer, the
only dimensions to be regarded being the height of keyboard from the
floor (2 ft. 1 in.), the top of the keys (4-1/2 in. higher), and the
space (4 ft.) occupied by the keys. The arm projects 1 ft. 1 in. beyond
the front.

Drawings must be sent carriage paid so as to reach the editor of THE
BROCHURE SERIES on or before July 15, 1895.

The prize designs will become the property of the Henry F. Miller Piano
Company. The other designs will be returned to their authors. It is to
be understood, however, that any or all designs may be exhibited or
published, and that they may be retained a reasonable time after
judgment for these purposes.

The details and management of the competition are left entirely to the
publishers of THE BROCHURE SERIES, and it is hoped that this, the first
of a number of competitions they will endeavor to arrange, will bring
out the work of the best designers. If there is any portion of this
program not clearly understood, the publishers will explain more in
detail upon request.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brochure Series of Architectural
Illustration, Volume 01, No. 05, May 1895, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROCHURE SERIES OF ***

***** This file should be named 19364-8.txt or 19364-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/3/6/19364/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sigal Alon and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

