The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brochure Series of Architectural
Illustration, Volume 01, No. 06, June 1895, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Brochure Series of Architectural Illustration, Volume 01, No. 06, June 1895
       Renaissance Panels from Perugia

Author: Various

Release Date: October 2, 2006 [EBook #19444]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROCHURE SERIES OF ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sigal Alon and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE BROCHURE SERIES

OF ARCHITECTURAL ILLUSTRATION.


VOL. I. JUNE, 1895. No. 6.

RENAISSANCE PANELS FROM PERUGIA.


The carved walnut panels from the choir stalls of the Church of San
Pietro de' Casinense in Perugia, designed by Stefano da Bergamo in 1535,
which are given as illustrations in this number, are excellent examples
of the ornament of the later period of the Italian Renaissance. This
form of ornament was first used in flat painted panels upon pilasters,
such as the well-known work of Raphael in the Loggia of the Vatican,
suggested by the Roman work discovered in his time upon the Palatine. It
was afterwards applied to all sorts of objects where rectangular spaces
were to be decorated. Its characteristics can hardly be better described
than in the following extract from Mr. C. Howard Walker's articles upon
the Study of Decoration in _The Technology Architectural Review_:--

"The motives on the pilasters were of two kinds: the continuous scroll,
starting from a strong base leaf and rising in equal volutes, with
alternating direction to right and to left, and filling the panel. This
motive needed always to be balanced by its opposite, and was
consequently seldom used. It had its prototype in the magnificent scroll
from the Forum of Trajan. The other motive was that usually used, and
capable of infinite variety, that of a central axis, the ornament
diverging from it symmetrically on either side. This motive was borrowed
from colored decorations on the Roman walls. It is a most difficult
class of ornament to handle, as so much depends upon relative
distribution, proportion, and relief of modeling. The motive usually
starts at the bottom and grows continuously to the top, with the base,
whether a mass of leafage, a vase, or other unit of ornament, well
defined and the crowning unit strong and rich. The central axis can be
actual or merely evidenced by the symmetry of the sides, preferably
actual. To prevent an effect of absolute perpendicular division or of
stringiness, this axis, between its base and crown, is divided either by
knots of ornament, concentrated masses, or horizontal motives. In making
these divisions the rules of cadence need to be carefully observed; the
divisions should be made equal in length, or alternate, or in sequence,
and the same method should be observed in the units of ornament marking
the divisions. In most cases there is more ground than ornament, which
always demands that the lines of the ornament should be most carefully
studied, and that the units used as terminals for these lines should be
exactly disposed, in relation to the axis, to each other, and to the
border of the panel. When one considers the number of factors which can
enter into the composition of one of these panels, it can be readily
conceived that their variety is wellnigh infinite; absolute symmetry on
either side of a central axis on which are threaded units of ornament,
and which starts from a mass of detail and terminates in a mass of
detail; systems of radial lines diverging from the central axis and
terminating in centres of ornaments of greater or less size, arranged in
all sorts of groupings; garlands, pendants, and ribbons, vases,
trophies, shields, birds, beasts, and nondescript combinations, foliage,
conventional and natural, forms, human and superhuman, all in varying
scales, all in surfaces undulating, now rising into sharp relief with
clear-cut edges, now sinking and melting into the background; and the
whole so carefully balanced, so exactly distributed, that no portion
should be too strong for another, no detail but should be equally
refined. It is not an easy matter to succeed in a design of such
requirements."

"It is well into the latter part of the fifteenth century before this
pilaster treatment is prevalent. The Quattrocento work contains much
less of it than the Cinquecento. The garlands and trophies, lions' and
bulls' heads, dolphins and griffins, tridents and shells and rosettes,
and numberless familiar forms appear in a new guise; the new forms
being, for the most part, heraldic motives or town arms, such as the
fleur-de-lis of Florence, the Biscione or viper of Milan, and lions
which are rampant, a condition unknown to their classic prototypes.
Shields, though used before, have a new form, and ribbons are developed
into all sorts of knots and waving ends, the loops having the same
cadences in relative size as other decorative compound motives."




[Illustration: XLI. Panel from the Choir Stalls, Church of S. Pietro,
Perugia, Italy.]

[Illustration: XLII. Panel from the Choir Stalls, Church of S. Pietro,
Perugia, Italy.]

[Illustration: XLIII. Panel from the Choir Stalls, Church of S. Pietro,
Perugia, Italy.]

[Illustration: XLIV. Panel from the Choir Stalls, Church of S. Pietro,
Perugia, Italy.]

[Illustration: XLV. Panel from the Choir Stalls, Church of S. Pietro,
Perugia, Italy.]

[Illustration: XLVI. Panels from the Choir Stalls, Church of S. Pietro,
Perugia, Italy.]

[Illustration: XLVII. Panels from the Choir Stalls, Church of S. Pietro,
Perugia, Italy.]


XLI to XLVII.

PANELS FROM THE CHOIR STALLS, CHURCH OF S. PIETRO, PERUGIA, ITALY.

The principles governing the design of these panels so well explained in
the foregoing quotation can all be seen exemplified in the plates. They
are all built upon a central axis, and the proportion and distribution
of the various motives most carefully studied and beautifully carried
out. Although all are shorter than the usual pilaster, the design is
exactly similar to that usually employed for this purpose. Even the
horizontal panels in plates XLVI and XLVII follow precisely the same
rules of design.




[Illustration: XLVIII. Panel from the Chamber of Commerce, Perugia,
Italy.]


XLVIII.

PANEL FROM THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, PERUGIA, ITALY.

This panel, although from a different building, is so similar in
treatment to the ones in the Church of S. Pietro that it can be classed
with them, and all that has been said of them applies as well to this.




Architectural Schools.


It is not many years since there was but one school in America to which
a young man could go with the expectation of getting instruction in
architecture, or at least where a special course of training was laid
out for this purpose. At present there are six well-equipped
architectural schools connected with as many colleges, each with its own
corps of instructors and each presenting special advantages to students.
In addition to these principal institutions there are a number of others
in which instruction in architecture is given, either independently or
in connection with other courses. To a young man intending to take up
the study of architecture this array of opportunities may not appear in
exactly the light of an embarrassment of riches, but it furnishes a wide
field from which to choose, and it may not be an easy matter to
determine which under the special circumstances connected with each case
presents the greatest advantages. For this reason a general statement of
the main features and practical equipment of the principal schools may
be of service in enabling intending students to choose intelligently
among them.


MASS. INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY.

The oldest, the most thoroughly appointed, and largest architectural
school in the country is the Department of Architecture at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Boston. It is in charge of
Professor Francis W. Chandler, with a corps of ten professors,
assistants, and special lecturers. The regular course consists of four
years' study. Special students are admitted after satisfying the faculty
by examination or otherwise that they are proficient in the preparatory
studies required and are qualified to pursue to advantage the special
work chosen.

The instruction in this department comprises the study of construction
and materials, the study of building processes, and of professional
practice, as well as that of composition and design, and of the history
of architecture. It is arranged to meet the wants both of those who
commence their professional studies at the beginning, and to some extent
of experienced draughtsmen who desire to make up deficiencies in their
training, or to qualify themselves for undertaking the responsibilities
of practice.

The more strictly professional work begins with the study of the five
orders and their applications, and of architectural history. During each
year there is regular instruction in freehand drawing, the last year
being from life. There is also a special class in pen-and-ink drawing
under Mr. D. A. Gregg. Instruction is given in watercolor drawing by Mr.
Ross Turner. The students are familiarized with the material elements of
their future work by a course in practical construction, illustrated by
lectures, problems, and by visits to buildings. The subject of
specifications and contracts is discussed. Problems in construction of
all kinds are given, to fix in the memory the principles already
learned.

For two and one-half years the students are continually engaged upon
architectural design under the charge of Professor Despradelle and Mr.
S. W. Mead. Each student's work is examined and criticized before the
classes by a jury from the Boston Society of Architects.

The Boston Society of Architects has established two prizes of the value
of fifty dollars each in books for students who at the end of the year
exhibit the best work.

Several thousand photographs, prints, drawings, and casts were
originally collected for the Department by means of a special fund
raised for the purpose. To these collections large additions have been
made, at first mostly by gifts, but later by regular appropriations.
Models and illustrations of architectural detail and materials are
arranged in the rooms of the department. The chief part of the
collection of casts of architectural sculpture and detail belonging to
the department has been deposited in the Museum of Fine Arts, together
with the architectural collection belonging to the museum. The students
of the Department have free access to the museum at all times; as the
building is close at hand no inconvenience results from the change, and
some of the advanced exercises in drawing are held there. The museum of
sanitary and building appliances contains models of plumbing apparatus,
specimens of metal work, tile work, glass work, and wood work, partly
purchased, but mostly deposited with the Department by the
manufacturers. The architectural library contains a large and carefully
selected collection of technical works and the leading periodicals, both
American and foreign. The resources of the Department have been much
enlarged by the erection of a special building devoted entirely to its
uses.

In 1894 a summer school of architecture was held in Salem and Portsmouth
for the study of colonial work. The courtesy of owners of houses built
at this epoch allowed the students to measure and sketch the best work
of this interesting locality, and in the future it is proposed to make
an exhaustive study of colonial architecture.

Both men and women are admitted to all departments of the Institute.
Candidates for admission must be at least seventeen years of age, and
must pass satisfactory examinations in algebra, plane geometry, either
French or German, English, history, and either advanced algebra or solid
geometry. A detailed account of these requirements and the general
conditions of the entrance examinations, which are held the last of June
and middle of September, can be found in the catalogue of the Institute,
which will be sent upon application by the secretary. The tuition fee is
$200.00 a year divided into two payments, $125.00 due in October and
$75.00 due in January.

During a number of years a special course of two years was maintained in
the school, which attracted many students who did not find it possible
to spend the time required for the full course of four years. This
arrangement has now been discontinued and no special provision is at
present made for other than regular students.

The Institute has from the beginning modeled its instruction very
largely upon that of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, and has ranked until the
last few years as the only American school in which a thorough academic
training in architectural design was attempted. Its professors of design
Professor E. Letang, who died in 1892, and Professor D. Despradelle,
both Frenchmen, have devoted their whole time to this branch of
instruction, and have maintained a standard which until recently other
schools have not approached.

Although the graduates from the full four years' course are
comparatively few, no other school can count so many of its former
students in prominent positions in the profession, and the Institute is
deservedly proud of its record in this direction.




The Brochure Series

of Architectural Illustration.

PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY

BATES & GUILD,

6 BEACON STREET, BOSTON, MASS.


Subscription Rates per year 50 cents, in advance Special Club Rates for
five subscriptions $2.00

Entered at the Boston Post Office as Second-class Matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Until the present year no American student of architecture has ever been
honored with the diploma of the Paris Ecole des Beaux-Arts, but on June
14 the degree of the school was conferred on three Americans--Messrs. J.
Van Pelt, J. H. Friedlander, and D. Hale. The first diplomas were
awarded in 1869, before that date there being no official recognition of
the completion of any required course in the school, except the awards
in the various _concours_, all leading up to the Grand Prize of Rome.

There are a number of Americans now in Paris who intend to present
theses for the diploma, and doubtless other awards will follow those
already made. Any present or former student of the school who has
reached the required standard in his work is allowed to submit a thesis
in competition for the diploma.

At the entrance examination of the Ecole this year sixteen American
students of architecture were received. Last year there were but eight,
which up to that time was the largest number recorded.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chicago Architectural Club has given evidence this year of very
great activity, and its work has been directed in many channels and with
good effect. Its lectures, classes, competitions, smokers, Bohemian
nights, receptions, ladies' nights, expeditions to places of interest,
and finally its exhibition of last month have all been excellently
chosen to instruct, interest, and amuse its members, and incidentally
promote the general cause of architectural education. The long list of
attractions has held the interest of its members without flagging. In
the classwork it has had the services and advice of the best and most
competent men connected with the profession; and in all directions it is
to be congratulated upon the good work done.




Books.


_Æsthetic Principles_: By Henry Rutgers Marshall, M. A. Macmillan & Co.
1895. 201 pages. $1.25.

Probably many readers of THE BROCHURE SERIES have struggled as has the
writer (and possibly some are still in an unsettled state of mind in
consequence) over the abstruseness of the current works upon the
philosophy of art, trying to find some obscure foundation on which to
build for themselves a theory of æsthetics. To such, and to all others
who have any wish to reason connectedly on art matters, Mr. Marshall's
little book will be interesting and instructive reading. It is
remarkably clear and understandable even to a reader with no special
training in metaphysical reasoning, and in point of literary style and
carefully considered use of language it is a genuine treat. Its object
is to explain, in as direct and simple language as possible, the nature
and origin of our ideas of the beautiful, and the logical deduction to
be made from the premises, which will guide us in the practice of the
fine arts, or the production of beauty of some special type.

As Mr. Marshall is an architect, many of his illustrative examples are
drawn from architecture, and the book on this account is especially
interesting to architects.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Rational Building_: Being a translation of the article "Construction"
in the _Dictionnaire Raisonnè de l'Architecture Française_ of M.
Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc. By George Martin Huss, Architect. New
York: Macmillan & Co. 1895. 367 pages. Illustrated. $3.00.

This book, although confined entirely to the consideration of the French
Gothic, will be found of great value to students. Many of our readers
are of course familiar with it in its original form, while others may
have followed the translation as it has appeared from time to time in
the pages of the _American Architect_.

It will be mainly useful from its historical and theoretical bearing, as
all that is here included which is of practical value for application
to modern uses can be found elsewhere in more available shape. The
illustrations form a most important feature in the usefulness of the
book. The remarkable diagrammatic drawings of Viollet-le-Duc are famous
for their clearness and the amount of information which they convey.

The table of contents includes the following headings: Discussion of
General Conditions and Principles; Roman and Romanesque Vaults; Origin
of the Pointed Arch; Development of Principles; Vaults; Materials;
Thirteenth Century Developments; Civil and Military Construction.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Catalogue of the Premiated Drawings of the Department of Architecture,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1895._ Published by the
Architectural Society. Forty-four illustrations.

The work of the Department of Architecture at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology is without doubt the most fully developed
students' work in architecture now done in this country, and the
drawings shown in this catalogue, giving a selection of the best designs
from the year's work just finished, do credit alike to the system
followed at the school, the fidelity of the instructors, and the
earnestness and talent of the students. The premiated designs in the
competitions of the Society of Beaux-Arts Architects made in the course
of regular school work are reproduced in this catalogue, and also the
first-mentioned designs in the regular monthly problems forming the
drill in design of the school. The program for the latter is given in
each case. These problems make up a graded series of considerable
interest, and are worth careful study and comparison.




Building Exhibit.


The many recent developments in the building arts have rendered it
practically impossible for those not directly connected with them to
keep informed of the latest and most improved methods of construction,
or, in fact, to easily obtain information when desired. To architects,
whose business it is to be familiar with the best and most economical
method of solving any building problem, it is often difficult to find
the information desired, as the field is so wide and the inventions and
improvements multiply so rapidly. To meet the requirements of intending
builders, as well as architects, permanent exhibits of building
materials have been established in several of the principal cities of
the United States, where it is possible to see specimens of the actual
materials, appliances, and latest inventions used in modern
construction. There are such exhibits in Chicago, Philadelphia, New
York, and Brooklyn; and all are proving indispensable in their special
fields.

The Chicago exhibit, known as the Institute of Building Arts, located at
from 63 to 69 Washington Street, is owned and managed directly by the
Illinois Chapter of the American Institute of Architects, and has been
controlled in this way for the past five years.

It was established for the purpose of centralizing information relating
to buildings, and collecting in a permanent exhibition all materials,
appliances, or inventions of a practical or ornamental character. Its
advantages are: First, educational, by placing before the interested
public an aggregation of building intelligence in the form of exhibits
of the actual materials, appliances, and inventions employed in modern
construction. Second, that in the fact of such centralization of
materials, a vast amount of time is saved to the public concerned in
building interests. For those who desire to build, information is not
only gained regarding a large variety of improvements, but obtained in a
minimum quantity of time.

The Institute of Building Arts is free to the visiting public, who are
welcome to all its advantages of information and to the inspection of
the numerous exhibits it contains. It furnishes gratuitously, to any one
who may inquire, information relating to building improvements. It
maintains a series of tests of materials, the results of which may be
obtained by anyone asking for them. Courses of lectures given by skilful
specialists instructive in the many sciences and arts of Architecture
are given under its auspices.

The management of the Institute is strictly impartial as to the merits
of the exhibits, having no financial interest in any sale. The purchaser
has perfect liberty to examine the exhibits and negotiate with any
exhibitor. It is the duty of the management to protect each and every
display from any impositions or trespasses on their several rights, and
to explain to any inquirer the qualities and merits of the material or
invention, as claimed by the exhibitor, but to give no individual
expression of views for or against any exhibit. The examiners are to be
left perfectly free to judge and accept from their own standpoint.

The important work of the Institution has made of it a central point of
great interest to all connected with or interested in architecture and
its kindred arts, and those who are identified with the work will not
fail to be amply repaid for their interest or their labor in its
upbuilding.

It became necessary a year ago to increase the floor space, and nearly
one half as much more space was secured and the rooms are crowded with
beautiful and instructive exhibits. The Illinois Chapter, A. I. A., has
fitted up a fine library and meeting-room in the Institute, which it
throws open to the interested public, who find the many pictures and
books therein a great enjoyment and benefit.

The other exhibits above referred to are strictly commercial in
character, and conducted in the interests of the exhibitors, and
consequently may not command the prestige possessed by the Chicago
Institute. Nevertheless they are important educational factors in their
special localities and are a great convenience to all connected with the
building trades. Every large commercial centre should be thus supplied.
The success of those already established will doubtless lead to the
early establishment of others. Architects and manufacturers both need
only to observe the workings of any of the exhibits which we have
mentioned to be convinced of their great practical value, and each
individual will be enhancing his own interest while contributing to the
success of all the others concerned by lending whatever assistance he
can to this most praiseworthy enterprise.




Notes.


An architect cannot work to the best advantage without the best and most
convenient appliances. It is true that sometimes the cleverest and most
skilful draughtsmen appear least concerned about their instruments and
materials, and often produce work showing wonderful dexterity and
mastery of technique with the most imperfect working materials. But this
is exceptional. After years of study and practice one may be able to
produce with the sharpened end of a match, or with a toothpick, drawings
which it would tax the skill of an ordinary draughtsman to approach with
the best brushes and colors, but it is easy to see that this is no
argument why the latest and most improved methods should not be
employed.

[Illustration]

Most architects still hold to the old-fashioned drawing boards supported
upon trestles, and mostly from the simple inertia of custom. The
improved Morse Universal Drawing Table, which is made in all sizes, with
a single or double support, is conceded to be more convenient and
ship-shape in all respects than the ordinary drawing board, and is only
slightly more expensive in its first cost. The size which is shown in
the accompanying illustration which has a board 30x36 inches, costs only
$15 and is by far the cheapest and best device of its kind that we have
seen. All of these tables are made to fold so as to occupy as little
space as possible when not in use; will revolve or incline at any angle,
and independently of the attachments below. They are built of the best
materials (iron, brass, and wood) and are finely finished. The board can
be made of either polished chestnut or unfinished pine if desired, and
various additional attachments can be had for further convenience.

Architects and draughtsmen will be surprised to find what a saving can
be made in time and trouble by the use of this most essential article of
furniture, as well as the remarkably low price at which it can be
bought.

Many other articles of furniture which are necessary for the proper
equipment of an architect's office are also manufactured by the Morse
Machine Company of Rochester, such as cabinets of various descriptions,
desks, special drawing boards with a steel edge (a _sine qua non_ for
the production of fine, accurate drawings), and special furniture of all
descriptions. Architects will find it greatly to their profit, both in
money and saving of trouble, to take advantage of the experience and
facilities for manufacturing the best goods furnished by this company.

There are very few manufacturers of sanitary goods that keep up with the
Dalton-Ingersoll Company in genuine improvements and novelties. Scarcely
a month passes without something in the way of improvement emanating
from this house; and the remarkable thing is the care and attention
bestowed upon the minutest details, nothing about a sanitary fixture
being considered too insignificant to command their best inventive
genius. Their monthly announcement preceding our frontispiece is worth
watching.

The palatial Jefferson Hotel at Richmond, Va., of which Carrère &
Hastings are the architects, is built of a very fine _white clay_ brick
manufactured by the Powhatan Clay Manufacturing Company of Richmond. The
strong point of this particular brick is that it is made of a natural
white clay, and is not subject to the discoloration of some bricks made
by artificially whitening the clay.

The great success of the "Giant" Metal Sash Chain made by the Smith &
Egge Manufacturing Company, has of course led to imitation and
infringement of their patented methods of manufacture. Nothing is saved
by specifying "cheaper" goods, for there really are no cheaper goods
than the best; and when heavy sashes are to be hung "Giant" metal chain
is the proper specification.

The expense of getting up a working model, bronze finish sash lock
mounted on a base, for a paper weight, and sending this free to any
architect who desires one would deter most manufacturers from taking
this method of advertising. But the Ives Lock is such "a good thing"
that it well repays "pushing." The model works so perfectly and is so
simple and durable in construction that its introduction to architects
throughout the country, occupying a prominent place on their desks, is
securing the almost universal specification of the lock. Architects who
haven't one of these paper weights will be well repaid for asking Hobart
B. Ives & Co. of New Haven, Conn., to send them one. In this connection
let us add that this lock secured the medal and highest award at the
Columbian Exposition.




Personal.


Among the Americans who will return from abroad this summer are: Mr.
Walter H. Kilham, the holder of the Rotch Scholarship, who has now been
abroad two years; Mr. F. E. Perkins, who has been abroad three years;
and Mr. W. Atherton,--all of Boston. Messrs. D. Hale, W. W. Knowles,
G. O. Totten, Laflin, and Ramond, of New York, and Mr. A. D. Koch, of
Milwaukee, also return this summer.

Mr. J. Greenleaf Thorp announces his removal to the Constable Building,
111 Fifth Avenue, New York.

In bringing the affairs of the Architect Department of the city of
Boston to a final settlement pending its abolishment on July 1, Mr. Edw.
H. Hoyt has been acting as City Architect Wheelwright's assistant, in
place of Mr. Matthew Sullivan, now abroad, who has most acceptably
filled that position during the whole of Mr. Wheelwright's term of
office. In future the work of the city will be distributed among private
architects.

Mr. Frank E. Wallis has gone into partnership with Frank E. Freeman, and
opened an office on West Twentieth Street, New York City.

Mr. Harold Magonigle, the Rotch scholar who has now been abroad a year,
has during the last few months been doing important work in the way of
measuring and drawing Roman and Renaissance monuments in and near Rome.
Some of his later drawings will presently be published in _The
Architectural Review_.




NOTICE TO ADVERTISERS


  The letter below was written
  after a three months'
  trial advertisement

                                       Rochester, N. Y., July 27, 1895.

     BATES & GUILD,
         6 Beacon Street, Boston, Mass.

     _Dear Sirs_: Yours of the 26th received. In reply will say that we
     desire our advertisement to continue in the Brochure Series, and
     will state that this advertisement has given us better returns than
     any other we are carrying. We think that a magazine similar to
     yours is very much better than a trade journal, because the
     Brochure Series will be preserved, and will therefore be permanent.

     We were tempted recently to put an advertisement in the
     Architectural Review on account of the good results received from
     the Brochure Series. Please send us the bill for our account for
     the first quarter, so that we can have it audited and send you a
     check.

                                Very truly yours,

     Dic. W. F. M.                                   MORSE MACHINE CO.

  The advertisement which
  brought these results
          _is on page XV_

  It costs $72.00 a year






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brochure Series of Architectural
Illustration, Volume 01, No. 06, June 1895, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROCHURE SERIES OF ***

***** This file should be named 19444-8.txt or 19444-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/4/4/19444/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sigal Alon and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

