The Project Gutenberg EBook of The International Monthly Magazine - Volume
V - No II by Various



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: The International Monthly Magazine - Volume V - No II

Author: Various

Release Date: December 13, 2006 [Ebook #20102]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INTERNATIONAL MONTHLY MAGAZINE - VOLUME V - NO II***





THE INTERNATIONAL MAGAZINE


                     Of Literature, Art, and Science.


Vol. V.
NEW-YORK, FEBRUARY 1, 1852.
No. II.

        [Illustration: THE LATE MARSHAL SOULT, DUKE OF DALMATIA.]

                THE LATE MARSHAL SOULT, DUKE OF DALMATIA.





CONTENTS


MARSHAL SOULT, DUKE OF DALMATIA.
THE HOMES OF COWLEY AND FOX.
CHERTSEY AND ITS FAMOUS CHARACTERS.
TRAUGOTT BROMME ON THE UNITED STATES OF NORTH AMERICA, TEXAS AND THE
COLONIES.
A VISIT TO THE FIRE WORSHIPPERS’ TEMPLE AT BAKU.
A NEW PORTRAIT OF CICERO.
LORD MAHON’S HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION.
FAUST OF WITTENBERG AND FUST OF MENTZ.
SOME SMALL POEMS.
MR. JUSTICE STORY, WITH SOME REMINISCENT REFLECTIONS.
COLUMBUS AT THE GATES OF GENOA.
FEATHERTOP: A MORALIZED LEGEND.
SMILES AND TEARS.
FREEDOM OF THOUGHT AND THE LATEST MIRACLES.
THE SONG QUEEN.
LOVE SONG.
AUTUMN LINES.
THE PUNISHMENT OF GINA MONTANI.
   III.
   IV.
   V.
   VI.
   VII.
VISION OF CHARLES XI.
DIVINATION, WITCHCRAFT, AND MESMERISM.
A CHAPTER OF EPITAPHS.
THE GOOD OLD TIMES IN PARIS.
THE LEGEND OF THE WEEPING CHAMBER.
THE BULL FIGHT OF MADRID.
THE LADY AND THE FLOWER.
AN OLD MAID’S FIRST LOVE.
MADEMOISELLE DE CAMARGO.
MY NOVEL:
   BOOK IX. - INITIAL CHAPTER.
   CHAPTER II.
   CHAPTER III.
   CHAPTER IV.
   CHAPTER V.
   CHAPTER VI.
   CHAPTER VII.
   CHAPTER VIII.
REMINISCENCES OF PRINTERS, AUTHORS, AND BOOKSELLERS IN NEW-YORK.
Noctes Amicæ.
Authors and Books
THE FINE ARTS
Historical Review of the Month
Scientific Discoveries and Proceedings of Learned Societies.
Recent Deaths.
Ladies’ Fashions for February.






MARSHAL SOULT, DUKE OF DALMATIA.


On the preceding page is a portrait, and under the head of Recent Deaths,
in another part of this magazine, is a sketch of the history of NICHOLAS
JEAN-DE-DIEU SOULT, the last of the great Marshals created by the Emperor
Napoleon. He was unquestionably possessed of extraordinary abilities,
fitting him for eminence in many and diverse capacities, but it cannot be
said that he was of the first rank of illustrious generals, as the world
has been led to suppose, chiefly by the masterly but partial delineations
of his career in the Peninsula by General Napier. He had a genius for war
which qualified him for every position in connection with it but that of
leader in the field. The subtle and irreversible decisions of Napoleon
followed his astonishingly quick apprehensions of facts, as suddenly as
the thunderbolt follows lightning; but Soult, profoundly familiar with all
the arts of war, and surpassing any of the great commanders with whom he
was associated except only his chief, in the wisdom of his judgments, was
yet so slow in his intellectual operations, so destitute of the
enthusiasm, passion, and fire, which in high circumstance give an almost
miraculous activity to the minds of the first order of men, that he could
never have entitled himself to all the precedences he has received in
history. Napoleon understood him, and in a few pregnant words addressed to
O’Meara, gave that measure of his character which will be adopted as the
final opinion of the world. "He is," said Napoleon, "an excellent minister
at war, or major-general of an army, one who knows much better how to
manage an army than to command in chief."

The course of Soult as a citizen, a legislator, and a minister, was not
one upon which his best biographers will linger with much satisfaction.
The glory he had achieved as one of the lieutenants of Napoleon, in that
turbulent and grand career which has no parallel for interest or
importance in human history, was his only claim to distinction in
politics. His master had an ambition as fair in its proportions as it was
vast in its extent, and brought to every purpose the same forces of
character and preternatural energy of intelligence; but Soult had no love
for civil duties, but little capacity for them, and he accepted place as a
gratification of vanity or a means of success in mercenary aims. We see in
all his private and political life "the soilure of his revolutionary
origin,"—proofs that he loved money and power far more than he loved
honor, and himself far more than his country or mankind.

The last of the imperial marshals, the last of that gigantic race who
filled the world with a red glory like the gloom which will precede the
judgment, closed his stormy life peacefully in the place where he was
born, and thence was borne to the Invalides, to "sleep well" with his old
companions."





THE HOMES OF COWLEY AND FOX.


We have in the last _Art Journal_ another of the pleasant gossipping
_Pilgrimages to English Shrines_, by Mrs. S. C. HALL, and the following
abridgement of it will please all who have perused the previous papers of
the series. In Chertsey and its neighborhood are memorials of some of the
noblest men of England.

                     [Illustration: ABRAHAM COWLEY.]

                             ABRAHAM COWLEY.





CHERTSEY AND ITS FAMOUS CHARACTERS.


The county of Surrey is rich to overflowing in memories, both of persons
and events, and the little quaint and quiet town of Chertsey could tell of
the gorgeous and gloomy past as much as many of its ancient neighbors
within a day’s drive of the city. Had its old abbey stones but tongues,
how they could discourse of years when a visit to Chertsey was an
undertaking; though now the distance is but half an hour.

Nowhere within twenty miles of London does the Thames appear more queenly,
or sweep with greater grace through its fertile dominions, than it does at
Chertsey. It is, indeed, delightful to stand on the bridge in the glowing
sunset of a summer evening, and turning from the refreshing green of the
Shepperton Range, look into the deep clear blue of the flowing river,
while the murmur of the waters rushing through Laleham Lock give a sort of
spirit music to the scene. On the right, as you leave Chertsey, the river
bends gracefully towards the double bridge of Walton, and to the left, it
undulates smoothly along, having passed Runnymede and Staines, while the
almost conical hill of St. Anne’s attracts attention by its abrupt and
singular form when viewed from the vale of the Thames.

About a mile, on the Walton side, from our favorite bridge (Old Camden
tells us so), is the spot where Cæsar crossed the Thames. Were the
peasantry as imaginative as their brethren of Killarney, what legends
would have grown out of this tradition; how often would the "noblest Roman
of them all" have been seen by the pale moonlight leading his steed over
the waters of the rapid river—how many would have heard Cassivelaunus
himself during the stillness of some particular Midsummer night working at
the rude defence which can still be traced beneath the blue waters of the
Thames. What hosts of pale and ghastly spectres would have risen from
those tranquil banks, and from the deepest hollows of the rushing current,
and—like the Huns, who almost live on the inspired canvas of
Kaulbach,—fought their last earthly battle, again and again, in the spirit
world, amid the stars! But ours is no region of romance; even remnants of
history, which go beyond the commonest capacity, are rejected as dreams,
or put aside as legends. But history has enough to tell to interest us
all; and we may be satisfied with the abundant enjoyment we have in
delicious rambles through the lanes and up the hills, along the fair
river’s banks, and among the many traditional ruins of ancient and
beautiful Surrey.

Never was desolation more complete than in the ruin of the Mitred Abbey of
Chertsey; hardly one stone remains above another to tell where this
stately edifice—since the far-away year 664—grew and flourished, lording
it with imperial sway over, not only the surrounding villages, but
extending its paternal wings into Middlesex and even as far as London. The
abbey was of the Benedictine order, and founded, almost as soon as the
Saxons were converted from Paganism; but it was finished and chiefly
endowed by Frithwald, Earl of Surrey. The endowment prospered rarely; the
establishment increased in the reputation of wealth and sanctity; that it
was "thickly populated" is certain, for when the abbey was sacked and
burnt by the Danes, in the ninth century, the abbot, and ninety monks,
were barbarously murdered by the invaders.

Standing upon the site of their now obliterated cloisters and towers,
their aisles and dormitories, cells and confessionals, seeing nothing but
the dank, damp grass, and the tracings of the fish-ponds—stagnant pools in
our day—it is almost impossible to realize the onslaught of these wild
barbarians panting for plunder, the earnest defence of men who fought (the
monks of old could wield either sword or crosier) for life or death, the
terrible destruction, the treasures and relics, and painted glass, and
monuments, the plunder of the secret almerys, the intoxicated triumph of
those rude northern hordes let loose in our fair and lovely island; what
scenes of savagery, where now the jackdaw builds, and the blackbird
whistles, and the wild water-rat plays with her brood amongst the tangled
weeds!

The fierce sea-kings being driven back to their frozen land, King Edgar,
willing to serve God after the fashion of his times, refounded the Abbey
of Chertsey, dedicating it to St. Peter, and vying with Pope Alexander in
augmenting its privileges and its wealth.

Some of the abbots took great interest in home improvements, planting
woods, conducting streams, enlarging ponds—building, now a mill, now a
dove-cot, according to the wants of the abbey or their own fancies. Henry
I. granted them permission to keep dogs, that, according to the old
chronicle, they might take "hare, fox, and cats." King John, in the first
year of his reign, gave them ample confirmation of all their privileges,
which, it would seem, they had somewhat abused, for we find that the
sovereign seized their manors of Egham and "Torp" (Thorp) on account of a
servant of the abbot’s having killed "Hagh de Torp." Oh, rare "old times!"
The abbot was mulcted in a heavy fine. Then, while Bartholomew de
Winchester was abbot, from 1272 until 1307, during the reign of our first
Edward, complaints were made to Pope Gregory X. that the possessions of
the abbey were alienated to civilians and laymen, whereupon the pope
issued a bull ordering such grants to be revoked.

It is worthy of note, that the Chertsey monastery sheltered, for a time,
the remains of the pious, but unfortunate, Henry VI.

  "Poor key-cold figure of a Holy King,
  Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster."

And the reader of Shakespeare will recall the scene in which Richard meets
the Lady Anne on her way to Chertsey with her husband’s body. This poor
king’s remains had a claim to be well received by the monks of Chertsey
Abbey, for he had granted to the abbot the privilege of holding a fair on
St. Anne’s-hill, then called Mount Eldebury, on the feast of St. Anne’s
(the 26th of July): the fair has changed its time and quarters as well as
its patron, and is held in the town on the 6th of August, and called Black
Cherry Fair. Manning, in his history of Surrey, says, that the tolls of
this fair were taken by the abbot, and are now taken by the owner of the
site of the Abbey House; thus the memory of King Henry VI. is commemorated
in the town of Chertsey to this day, by the sale of black cherries in the
harvest month of August!

                    [Illustration: "THE NUN’S WELL."]

                            "THE NUN’S WELL."


Centuries passed over those magnificent abbeys, whose ruins in many places
add so much beauty to our fertile landscapes; they grew and grew, and
added acre to acre, and stone to stone, and knowledge to knowledge; but
most they cherished the knowledge which blazed like a lamp under a bushel,
and kept all but themselves in darkness; they preached no freedom in
Christ to the Christian world, they abolished no serfdom, they taught no
liberty, they enslaved even those who in their turn enslaved their "born
thralls," and saw no evil in it. Oh, rare old times! Better it is for us
that the site of Chertsey Abbey should be scarcely traceable now-a-days
than that it should be as it was, with its proud pageants and pent-up
learning!—Yet we have neither sympathy no respect for that foul king, who,
to serve his own carnal purposes, overthrew the very faith which had
hallowed his throne. But he did not attack and storm the Abbey of
Chertsey, as he did other religious houses. He came to them, this Eighth
Harry, with a fair show of kindness, saying that "to the honor of God, and
for the health of his soul, he proposed and most nobly intended to refound
the late Monastery, Priory, or Abbey of Bisham in Berks, and to
incorporate and establish the Abbot and Convent of Chertsey, as Abbot and
Convent of Bisham, and to endow them with all the Manors late belonging to
Bisham." How the then Abbot John Cordrey, and his brethren, must have
shivered at the conditions; how they must have grieved at quitting their
cherished home, their stews and fish-ponds, their rich meadows of Thorpe,
overlooked by the woods of Eldebury hill, their nursing ground where their
calves and young lambs were stowed in luxurious safety in the pleasant
farm of Simple Marsh at Addlestone!

But their star was setting, and they were forced to "give, sell, grant and
confirm, to the king their house and all manors belonging to them."

The total destruction of the Abbey must have amazed the whole country. An
earthquake could hardly have obliterated it more entirely. Aubrey, writing
in the year 1673, says "of this great Abbey, scarce any thing of the old
building remains, except the out walls about it. Out of this ruin, is
built a ’fair house,’ which is now in possession of Sir Nicholas Carew,
master of the Buckhounds." Dr. Stukeley alludes to this house, in a letter
written in 1752; he speaks of the inveterate destruction, and of "the
gardener" carrying him through a "court" where he saw the remains of the
church of the Abbey. He says the "east end reached up to an artificial
mount along the garden wall; that mount and all the terraces of the
pleasure garden, to the back front of the house, are entirely made up of
the sacred _rudera_ or rubbish of continual devastations. Bones of abbots,
monks, and great personages, who were buried in large numbers in the
church and cloisters which lay on the south side of the church, were
spread thick all over the garden, _so that one may pick up whole handsfull
of them every where amongst the garden stuff_." Brayley mentions in his
pleasant History of Surrey, that this artificial mount was levelled in
1810, and its materials employed to fill up a pond. Many human skulls and
bones were found intermixed with the chalk and mortar of which it had been
formed. Fragments of old tiles were also frequently found, and are still
sometimes turned up. No trace even of the "Abbey house" is left; it was
purchased in 1809 by a stock-broker, who in the following year sold the
materials—and so ends the great monastic history of Chertsey. Where are
now its spiritualities in Surrey?—its temporalities in Berkshire and
Hampshire?—its revenues of Stanwell, and rents of assize?—its
spiritualities in Cardiganshire? Alas! they have left no sign, except on
the yellow parchment—of rare value to the antiquary.

Those who desire, like ourselves, to investigate what tradition has
sanctified, will do well to turn down a lane beyond Chertsey Church, which
leads directly to the Abbey bridge, and there, amid tangled hedge rows and
orchards, stands the fragment of an arch, partly built up, and so to say,
disfigured by brick-work, and an old wall, both evidently portions of the
Abbey. In the wall are a great number of what the people call "_black
stones_," a geological formation, making them seem fused by fire. Layers
of tiles were also inserted in this wall, and where the cement has dropped
away they can be distinctly traced; there is also an ivy, very aged
indeed; it is so knotted and thick that it seems to grow through the
stones, the soil has so evidently encroached on the wall that it is most
probably rooted at the foundation. The pleasant market garden of Mr. Roake
covers the actual ground on which the Abbey stood. The workmen frequently
turn up broken tiles and human bones, and there is no doubt that by
digging deeper much would be discovered that might elucidate the history
of the past. At the farther end of the market garden a vault has been
discovered which is of considerable length and breadth; but the water
rises so high in it (except after a long continuance of dry weather has
sealed the land springs) that it is impossible to get to the end without
wading. An enormous quantity of richly-colored and decorated encaustic
tiles have been found here; some are preserved in our local museum. But
the most interesting remains in this place are the "stews," or fish-ponds,
which run parallel to each other like the bars of a gridiron; these ponds
do not communicate one with the other, nor has the water any outlet: a
little care and attention might make them valuable for their old purposes;
but they are deplorably neglected. Occasionally you see the fin of some
huge fish, whose slow movement partakes of the character of the stagnant
water he has inhabited for years;—who can tall how many?

                   [Illustration: "THE GOLDEN GROVE."]

                           "THE GOLDEN GROVE."


"The Abbey River," as it is still called, travels slowly along its way,
fertilizing the meadows and imparting life and freshness to the placid
scene. The denizens of Chertsey have planted orchards, and in a few
instances gardens on its banks. One, the garden of Mr. Herring, is a model
of neatness, almost concealed by its roses and carefully tended shrubs. We
wandered from orchard to orchard, amid the trees and over the uneven
ground; all was so still and lonely that it required the suggestions of an
active imagination to believe it had ever been the scene of contention by
flood and field. From the Abbey Bridge the richness of the meadow scenery
is exceedingly refreshing, the grass is deep and verdant, as it cannot
fail to be, lying so low, and fertilized by perpetual moisture.

During their wide-spreading magnificence, the abbots of Chertsey erected a
picturesque chapel on the lovely hill of St. Anne: this was done somewhat
about the year 1334. Orleton, Bishop of Winchester, granted an indulgence
of forty days to such persons as should repair to, and contribute to the
fabric and its ornaments.

There is nowhere a more delightful road, than that which leads from the
"Golden Grove," rendered picturesque by its old tree, the plantations of
Monksgrove on one side, and those of the once residence of Charles James
Fox on the other. The road is perfectly embowered, and so close is the
foliage that you have no idea of the beautiful view which awaits you,
until leaving the statesman’s house to the left, you pass through a sort
of wicket gate on the right, and follow a foot-path to where two
magnificent trees crown the hill; it is wisest to wait until passing along
the level ridge you arrive at the "view point," and there, spread around
you in such a panorama as England only can show, and show against the
world for its extreme richness. On the left is Cooper’s Hill, which
Denham, that high-priest of "Local poetry," long ago made famous; in the
bend just where it meets the plain, you see the towers of Windsor Castle;
there is Harrow Hill, the sun shining brightly on its tall church; a deep
pall hovers over London, but you can see the dome of St. Paul’s looming
through the mist; nay, we have heard of those who have told the hour of
the day upon its broad-faced clock, with the assistance of a good glass.
How beautifully the Thames winds! Ay! there is the grand stand at Epsom,
and there Twickenham, delicious, soft, balmy Twickenham; and Richmond
Hill—a very queen of beauty!

                [Illustration: REMAINS OF CHERTSEY ABBEY.]

                        REMAINS OF CHERTSEY ABBEY.


Yonder, beyond the valley, are Foxes Hills crowned with lofty pines—and
that is the church at Staines, and as you turn, there again is Cooper’s
Hill; Laleham seems spread as a tribute at your feet, and there is no end
to the villages and mansions—the parks, and cottages like snow-drops in a
parterre, and church spires more than we can number; while close behind us
are the stones piled thickly one on the other—the only relics of the holy
Chapel of St. Anne.

How grandly the promontory of St. George’s Hill stands out—sheltering
Weybridge, and forming a beautiful back-ground to Byfleet and the banks of
the Way; not forgetting its ruins—a Roman encampment of two thousand years
age, and its modern ornaments of rare trees, of which a generous nobleman
has made common property, to be enjoyed daily by all who choose. At the
foot of this richly planted hill, is the beautiful park of Oatlands—on the
eve of becoming an assemblage of villa-grounds. How pleasant to feel that
we can account, by our own knowledge of that glowing mount, for all the
shades formed by the hills and hollows, and different growths of trees in
the depths or heights of "the encampment," which forms the delight of many
a toilsome antiquary. Beyond are the more distant eminences of the North
Downs, and a tract of country extending into Kent. But we have not yet
explored the beauties of this our own hill of Chertsey; truly, to do so,
would take a day as long as that of its own black cherry fair.

A path to the left, among the fern and heather, leads to a well, famed for
its healing properties—it is called the Nun’s Well; even now, the peasants
believe that its waters are a cure for diseases of the eye; the path is
steep and dangerous, and it is far pleasanter to walk round the brow of
the hill and overlook the dense wood which conceals the well, fringing the
meadows of Thorpe, than to seek its tangled hiding-place in the dell. The
monks of old would be sorely perplexed if they could arise, to account for
the long line of smoke which marks the passage of the different trains
along their railroads. But we turn from them to enjoy a ramble round the
brow of St. Anne’s Hill; the coppice which clothes the descent into the
valley, is so thick, that though it is intersected by many paths, you
might lose yourself half-a-dozen times within an hour; if it be evening,
the nightingales in the thickets of Monksgrove have commenced their
chorus, and the town of Chertsey, down below, is seen to its full extent,
its church tower toned into beauty by the rich light of the setting sun,
while through the trees and holly thickets you obtain glimpses of the
Guildford and Leatherhead hills, so softly blue, that they meet and mingle
with the sky.

                   [Illustration: GATE OF FOX’S HOUSE.]

                           GATE OF FOX’S HOUSE.


              [Illustration: SUMMER HOUSE IN FOX’S GARDEN.]

                      SUMMER HOUSE IN FOX’S GARDEN.


                  [Illustration: TEMPLE OF FRIENDSHIP.]

                          TEMPLE OF FRIENDSHIP.


Those who feel no interest in monkish chronicles, may reverence St. Anne’s
Hill, because of its having been the favorite residence of Charles James
Fox, the contemporary of Pitt and Burke and Sheridan and Grattan, at a
period when men felt strongly and spoke eloquently. The site of the house
on the south-eastern site of the hill is extremely beautiful, and it is
much regretted in the neighborhood that it finds so little favor in the
heart of its present noble proprietor. The grounds are laid out with much
taste; there is a noble cedar planted by Mrs. Fox when only the size of a
wand. The statesman’s widow survived her husband more than thirty-six
years, but never outlived her friends or her faculties. There is a temple
dedicated to Friendship, which was erected to perpetuate the coming of age
of one of the late Lords Holland; on a pedestal ornamented by a vase, are
inscribed some verses by General Fitzpatrick; another placed by Mrs. Fox
to mark a favorite spot where Mr. Fox loved to muse, is enriched by a
quotation from the "Flower and the Leaf," concluded by two graceful
stanzas:

  "Cheerful in this sequestered bower,
    From all the storms of life removed;
  Here Fox enjoyed his evening hour,
    In converse with the friends he loved.
  And here these lines he oft would quote,
    Pleased from his favorite poet’s lay;
  When challenged by the warbler’s note,
    That breathed a song from every spray."

At the bottom of the garden is a grotto, which must have once possessed
many attractions, and above it there is a pretty little quaint chamber
that was used as a tea-room, when, according to the custom of the time,
the English drank tea by daylight; it is adorned by painted glass windows;
there are portraits of the Prince of Wales and Mr. Fox, when both were
looking their best, and the balcony in front commands a delicious view of
the surrounding country.

The peasantry are still loud in their praise of "Madam Fox;" and some
remember with gratitude the education they received at her school, and
love to tell how the old lady was drawn there at "feast times," to see how
they all looked in their new dresses. She certainly retained her sympathy
with the young, and put away the feelings and habits of old age with a
determined hand, for it is said, when she was eighty she took lessons on
the harp. The present generation remember personally nothing of the great
statesman; he has become history to us, and we must look to history,
garbled as it always is, and always will be, by the opinions and feelings
of its writers, to determine the position of Charles James Fox in the
annals of his country. Those who were admitted to his society have written
with enthusiasm of his social qualities, and bestow equal praise on his
brilliant talents, his affability of manner, and the generosity of his
disposition. He was the third son of Henry Fox, afterwards Lord Holland,
and his mother was the eldest daughter of Charles, second Duke of
Richmond, and consequently great-granddaughter to Charles II.; the
material descent is one of blotted royalty, of which a man like Fox could
not have been proud. His academic course was unmarked by any of those
honors of which Oxford men are so ambitious, and yet, like his great
rival, William Pitt, he became a statesman before he was of age.

                       [Illustration: FOX’S ARBOR.]

                               FOX’S ARBOR.


At St. Anne’s Hill he enjoyed as many intervals of repose and tranquillity
as could fall to a statesman’s lot; in the time of wars and tumults, how
he must have luxuriated in its delicious quiet, surrounded by friends who
dearly loved him; and swayed only for good by the wife who (although it is
known that her early intimacy with him was such as prevented her general
recognition in society) according to the evidence of all who knew her, was
the minister only to his better thoughts and nobler ambitions, and who
weaned him from nearly all the follies and vices which stained his youth
and earlier manhood. Various causes led to his death, before age had added
infirmities to disease. He died at Chiswick House, and his last words,
addressed to Mrs. Fox were, "I die happy." It is said he wished to be
buried at Chertsey, but his remains were interred in Westminister Abbey.

The brilliant Sheridan pronounced so elegant an eulogium on his character,
that it is pleasant to think of it in those shades where, as we have said,
he so often sought and found repose: "When Mr. Fox ceased to live, the
cause of private honor and friendship lost its highest glory, public
liberty its most undaunted champion, and general humanity its most active
and ardent assertor. In him was united the most amiable disposition with
the most firm and resolute spirit; the mildest manners, with the most
exalted mind. With regard to that great man it might, indeed, be well
said, that in him the bravest heart and most exalted mind sat upon the
seat of gentleness."

                      [Illustration: COWLEY’S SEAT.]

                              COWLEY’S SEAT.


               [Illustration: COWLEY’S HOUSE—STREET FRONT.]

                       COWLEY’S HOUSE—STREET FRONT.


There is, at all events, an imaginary pleasure in turning from the wearing
out turmoil of a statesman’s life, to what the world believes the tranquil
dreams of a poet’s existence. But there are few things the worldling so
little understands as literary industry, or so little sympathizes with as
literary care. We have no inclination to over-rate either its toils or its
pleasures, and perhaps no life is more abundantly supplied with both. Its
toils must be evident to any who have noted the increasing literary labor
which is necessary to produce the ordinary sources of comforts; but its
high and holy enjoyments are not so apparent; they are so different from
those of almost all others as not to be easily explained or understood;
but above all other gifts, the marvellous gift of poesy is a distinction
conferred by the Almighty, and should be acknowledged and treasured as
such. We know little of a poet’s studies except by their imperishable
produce, and it is a common but ill-founded prejudice to imagine
regularity or diligence incompatible with high genius. Genius is neither
above law, nor opposed to it; but as many have a poetic taste and
temperament _without_ the inspiration, the world is apt to mistake the
eccentricity of the pretender for the outward and visible sign of genius.
Whether or not the poet of the Porch-house of Chertsey had the actual
poetic fire we do not venture to determine. Abraham Cowley takes a
prominent position, amongst the poets of our land, and the eventful times
in which he lived, and his participation in their tumults give him
additional interest in all the relations of his anxious and not over-happy
life. It is recorded of him that he became a poet in consequence of
reading the Faery Queene, which chance threw in his way while yet a child.
In allusion to this, Dr. Johnson gave his well-known definition of genius:
"A mind of large general powers, accidentally determined to some
particular direction." We had almost dared to say this is rather the
definition of a philosopher than of one who comprehended the spirituality
of a marvellous gift. Abraham Cowley—the posthumous son of a London
grocer—owed much to his mother. She, by her exertions, procured him a
classical education at Westminster School. She lived to see him loved,
honored, and great, and what was better still, and more uncommon,
grateful. At the age of fifteen he published a volume called "Poetic
Blossoms," which he afterwards described as "commendable extravagancies in
a boy." He obtained a scholarship in Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1686,
and there took his degree; but was ejected by the Parliament, and thence
removed to Oxford. Shortly after, he followed the Queen Henrietta to
Paris, as Secretary to the Earl of St. Albans, and was employed in the
court of the exiles in the most confidential capacity. In 1656 he returned
to England, and was immediately arrested as a suspected spy. He submitted
quietly—the royalists thought too quietly—to the dominion of the
Protector, but his whole life proved that he was no traitor. At the
Restoration, that great national disappointment, his claims upon the
ungrateful monarch were met by a taunt and a false insinuation—he was told
that his pardon was his reward! Wood said, "he lost the place by certain
enemies of the Muses;" certain "friends of the Muses," however, procured
for him the lease of the Porch-house and farm at Chertsey, held under the
Queen, and the great desire of his life—solitude—was obtained.

               [Illustration: COWLEY’S HOUSE—GARDEN FRONT.]

                       COWLEY’S HOUSE—GARDEN FRONT.


The place still seems a meet dwelling for a poet, and is, perhaps, even
more attractive to strangers than St. Anne’s hill. The porch, which caused
his residence to be called "The Porch-house," was taken down during the
last century by the father of its present proprietor, the Rev. John Crosby
Clarke, and the house is now known as "Cowley House."(1) It is situated
near the bridge which crosses a narrow and rapid stream, in a lonely part
of Guildford Street; a latticed window which overhangs the road is the
window of the room in which the poet expired; on the outside wall Mr.
Clarke has recorded his reason for removing the porch. "The porch of this
house, which projected ten feet into the highway, was taken down in the
year 1786, for the safety and accommodation of the public."

  "Here the last accents flowed from Cowley’s tongue."

                [Illustration: STAIRCASE—COWLEY’S HOUSE.]

                        STAIRCASE—COWLEY’S HOUSE.


The appearance of the house from Guildford Street, is no index to its size
or conveniences.(2) You enter by a side gate, and the new front of the
dwelling is that of a comfortable and gentlemanly home; the old part it is
said was built in the reign of James the First, and what remains is
sufficiently quaint to bear out the legend; the old and new are much
mingled, and the modern part consists of one or two bed-rooms, a large
dining-room, and a drawing-room, commanding a delicious garden view, the
meanderings of the stream, and a long tract of luxuriant meadows,
terminated by the high and richly timbered ground of St. Anne’s Hill. A
portion of the old stairway is preserved, the wood is not as has been
stated oak, but sweet chestnut. One of the rooms is panelled with oak, and
Cowley’s study is a small closet-like chamber, the window looking towards
St. Anne’s Hill. It is never difficult to imagine a poet in a _small
chamber_, particularly when his mind may imbibe inspiration from so rich
and lovely a landscape. Beside the group of trees, beneath whose shadow
the poet frequently sat, there is a horse chestnut of such exceeding size
and beauty, that it is worthy a pilgrimage, and no lover of nature could
look upon it without mingled feelings of reverence and affection.

Here then amid such tranquil scenes, and such placid beauty, the
"melancholy Cowley," passed the later days of big anxious existence; here
we may fancy him receiving Evelyn and Denham, the poets and men of letters
of his troubled day, who found the disappointments of courtly life more
than their philosophy could endure. Here his friendly biographer, Doctor
Spratt, cheered his lonely hours.

Cowley was one of those fortunate bards who obtain fame and honor during
life. His learning was deep, his reading extensive, his acquaintance with
mankind large. "To him," says Denham in his famous elegy,

  "To him no author was unknown,
  Yet what he wrote was all his own."

His biographer adds, "There was nothing affected or singular in his habit,
or person, or gesture; _he understood the forms of good breeding enough to
practise them without burdening himself or others_." This indeed is the
perfection of good breeding and good sense.

Having obtained, as we have said, the Porch-house at Chertsey, his mind
dwelt with pleasure—a philosophic pleasure—upon the hereafter, which he
hoped for in this life of tranquillity, and the silent labor he so dearly
loved; but he was destined to prove the reality of his own poesy:

  "Oh life, thou _Nothing’s_ younger brother,
  So _like_ that one might take one for the other."

The career of Abraham Cowley was never sullied by vice,(3) he was loyal
without being servile, and at once modest, independent and sincere. His
character is eloquently drawn by Doctor Spratt. "He governed his passions
with great moderation, his virtues were never troublesome or uneasy to
any, whatever he disliked in others he only corrected by the silent
reproof of a better practice."

He died at Chertsey on the 28th of July, 1667, and was interred in
Westminster Abbey. A throng of nobles followed him to his grave, and the
worthless king who had deserted him is reported to have said, that Mr.
Cowley had not left a better man behind him in England.

It is said the body of Cowley was removed from Chertsey by water, thus
making the Thames he loved so well, the highway to his grave; there is
something highly poetic in this idea of a funeral, so still and solemn,
with the oars dropping noiselessly in the blue water. Pope in allusion to
it, says:

  "What tears the river shed,
  When the sad pomp along his banks was led;"

which rather inclines us to the belief, that in this, as in many other
instances, the poetic reading is not the true one,

  "The muses oft in lands of vision play:"

but the fact that he died at Chertsey, as much respected as a man, as he
was admired as a poet, is certain, and his house is often visited by
strangers, who are permitted to see his favorite haunts by the kindness of
its proprietor, who honors the spot so hallowed by memories of "the
melancholy Cowley:"—he who considered and described "business" as:

  "The contradiction to his fate."

But we must postpone our farther rambles for the present.

                 [Illustration: TREES ON ST ANNE’S HILL.]

                         TREES ON ST ANNE’S HILL.



Chertsey loses half its romantic interest by the intrusion of the
progressive agents of our time—our noisy time, of which the spirit
willingly brooks no souvenirs of monastic repose. The old quaint quiet
town has now its railroad, and the shades of its heroes have departed.





TRAUGOTT BROMME ON THE UNITED STATES OF NORTH AMERICA, TEXAS AND THE
COLONIES.


We have at different times, by reviews or translations, endeavored to give
our readers some idea of what people think of us, in continental Europe.
But there are two sides to every thing—or there is an universal dualism,
as Emerson declares—which is perfectly true as to the method which might
be adopted in the execution of this self-imposed task. One class of
readers understand by the word _people_ the _beau monde_, and would have
us invariably follow the school of the Countesses Hahn-Hahn or Ladies
Blessington or Milords Fitz-Flummery, contented if we have but a fair name
in society. Another and more reasonable class would be satisfied to know
the opinion of the literati, or perhaps the poets, particularly when they
do fit homage to our "grand old woods," and to Niagara. Others regard with
most respect a plain literal account of our branches of industry—our
railroads, factories, and canals. They would have the country judged
purely from a mechanical or practical point of view—contenting themselves
as to other matters with the reflection. "Oh, sensible people care very
little about any thing else. If they know what we produce, and what our
resources are, they’ll understand and respect us sufficiently."

Now the opinion of each of these classes has its weight, and though not of
the _greatest_ ultimate importance, is always to be respected. If we were
questioned as to the views of which of them we yielded full regard, we
should candidly say, "to none." It is the general, universal opinion, of a
nation at large that we deem authoritative, and none other. It is that
popular opinion so readily yet often so falsely formed (at times from
trifles of almost incredible levity), and which when once fairly
developed, is well-nigh ineradicable. In a word, it is to the views of the
people.

We propose, as opportunity shall offer, to make our readers familiar with
the writings of all these different classes of travellers—and in the
present article, we shall make a few extracts from a work interesting, as
having probably contributed more than any other to a general knowledge of
the United States in Germany. It is the book which has had the greatest
currency among all classes, but particularly with the lower order of
readers and emigrants.

Before proceeding, however, to the work itself, it may be as well to
answer a question which has perhaps been suggested to the minds of a
certain class of readers. Of what great use, after all, is this nervous
regard as to the opinion of the world? Is not our character
established—are not our characteristics known, to the uttermost corners of
the earth? To which question we may answer, _Not quite_. In avoiding that
ridiculous sensitiveness which prompts so many Americans to feel
personally insulted by the weak remarks of every wandering ignoramus, we
would by no means fall into the opposite error of attaching no importance
whatever to the good opinion or the degree of consciousness as to our
existence entertained by the world at large.

Should any feel disposed to smile at such an expression, as "the
consciousness of our existence," we will take the liberty of citing a few
curious instances, for the authenticity of which we assume the entire
responsibility—instances which may perhaps astonish a few even of the
better informed. There are in many districts (not altogether provincial)
of Italy and France great numbers, who would not even in America be
classed as _ignorant_ in regard to other matters, who have not the
remotest idea as to the nature or geography of our country. An instance
has come to our knowledge of an intelligent Hungarian who, by intercourse
with the world, had acquired a fluency in five languages, and who inquired
of an American gentleman if his country were not situated somewhere in
England. The late Mr. Cooper, when placing his daughters at a celebrated
seminary on the continent, found a great curiosity had been created by the
rumor that they were coming, some supposing they were black, some that
they were copper-colored, and all unprepared to see American girls looking
for all the world like the young German ladies. We have heard of a similar
instance in which an English _gentleman_—a Cambridge graduate—inquired of
an American what was the current language of the United States. Lastly, we
may cite the case of an English author, well known to our own public, and
favorably mentioned not long since in these pages, who was under the
impression that owing to the great emigration from Germany, the English
language must with us, in a very few years, yield to that of the
_Vaterland_. Now our commercial and industrial relations are seriously
hindered by this absurd ignorance of America, which in a word prevails to
such an extent, that we have known an American, who—probably from having
been over-questioned and speered at in New England—had imbibed such a
wholesome hatred of inquisitiveness, that he wished the French government
would hang up, for the benefit of all concerned, the following list of
questions, with satisfactory answers annexed, in all the _cafés_ of the
politest nation in Europe:

      Whether America is an island or a continent?
      What is the color of its inhabitants?
      What language do they speak?
      Have they a religion and what is it?
      What is the state of their morals and cookery?
      Have they a correct state of feeling as regards the opera?

The reader is not to infer that this is the general state of knowledge
regarding our country. But it is worth nothing as a curious illustration
of the vast number of individuals who derive their ideas, not from what is
going on at the present day, or from available sources of information, but
from the antiquated views of a by-gone generation. And we trust it will
not be deemed inappropriate that we here speak a word of the want of
opportunities of acquiring very general information under which the
ordinary readers of continental Europe suffer. With all their libraries,
all their immense arrays of magazines and journals, we find among them an
apathy in regard to the world without (to the Fan-Qui), which appears
incredible until we reflect on the deadening influences of the censorship,
which views with distrust all information in regard to the Land of
Liberty. We are not aware, throughout the whole of continental Europe, of
a single publication so thoroughly cosmopolite in its character, so
general in the scope of its information, or which is so universally
disseminated among _all_ classes of readers, as _The International_; and
we trust we do not go too far when we assert, that it is to an extended
sale of periodical publications somewhat approaching it in the
concentration and dissemination of news from the world at large, that our
countrymen owe that superior intelligence and citizen-of-the-world
character which distinguish them from the insular Briton, self-important
Frenchman, or abstracted German.

The work from which we propose to make some extracts, is TRAUGOTT BROMME’s
_Hand und Reisebuch für Auswanderer nach den Vereinigten Staaten_ (or
Traugott Bromme’s Journey and Handbook for Emigrants to the United
States). As we have already stated, no work on America is at the present
day more familiarly known to that class of readers to whom it is
addressed. Certain remarks on the present condition of German emigration
with which it is prefaced, may not be devoid of interest to our readers,
though not constituting a part of such observations as we have more
particularly referred to:


    "There is, it appears, implanted in every man an impulse to
    advance and better his condition—an impulse caused by poverty,
    dependent circumstances, or pressure from every side, vexing at
    times even the highest in rank, and which is the cause why
    thousands leave their fatherland, to seek afar a now home, and
    hundreds of thousands cast around them disturbed and anxious
    glances, restrained only by hard poverty, which imprisons them at
    home. Such is very generally the case at present in our own
    country, where—despite the political concessions of March in the
    year 1848, of the published original privileges of the German
    people, and of the promising prospect of a free and united
    Germany, with a concluding general empire—emigration appears to be
    by no means on the decrease." "These emigrants of the present day
    consist not as formerly of poor people of the lower orders, who
    turn their backs on the German fatherland, or liberal declaimers,
    dreaming of an ideal of freedom which could scarcely be realized
    in Utopia, but of sober excellent families of the middle class,
    who, free from all delusive fancies, do not expect to find in the
    western world wealth and honorable offices, but desire only to
    inhabit a land, wherein they may dwell quietly and happily with
    their children." "What the German wants is _room_—a new broad
    field for his abilities—and this America extends to him in
    unbounded space. No one at the present day hopes to obtain hills
    of gold without labor, but every one knows that the far more
    estimable treasure of perfect independence, or to speak more
    correctly, of perfect _self-dependence_, with the prospect of a
    future free from care, may in America be obtained at the cost of a
    few years of earnest, honest industry. And what, to the man
    oppressed in his fatherland by all the cares incident upon the
    obtaining a bare subsistence, is two or three or even _four_ years
    of hard work, when compared to a whole life of poverty and
    misery?"


After accurately sketching the extreme misery and poverty oppressing the
inhabitants of many districts of Germany, of late years sadly increased by
the falling off in manufactures since the political disturbances, our
author proceeds to set forth the advantages offered by America:


    "That most emigrants should rather look to America, than Poland,
    Russia, Servia, or Siebenburgen, is natural enough, since all of
    these countries together cannot offer so many attractions as
    America. Where on earth is there such a vast array of unoccupied
    lands, offered at such a moderate price—land so cheap that in many
    districts twenty or thirty and even more acres, covered with wood,
    are given at a price for which a single acre of similar land is
    sold in Germany?"


The richness of the soil, the excellence of the climate, and the demand
for labor, are then described; to which, as the greatest inducement, he
adds the fact that in _America_ the fullest "liberty of labor and
mechanical calling or trade," is allowed. Also, that the taxes are so
light that an industrious man is able not only to live, but even to lay up
something for his old age, or his children, or to employ in the extension
of his business.


    "For as there exists in America no standing army, its inhabitants
    may retain their children, as the best possible assistants in
    labor, and train, govern, and discipline them as can only properly
    done under the eye of a parent. Furthermore, in that country every
    one is permitted to enjoy the fullest civil and religious liberty.
    These are the advantages to be expected from an emigration to
    America, _and he who anticipates more will find himself bitterly
    deceived_. But a man who can be content with this, and can live
    actively, moderately, and frugally, will here, better than in any
    other land in the world, ultimately attain to happiness and
    fortune. In times like ours, when every branch of industry is
    crowded, when tender parents think with grief and trouble on the
    future prospects of their children, there are for the emigrant no
    other resources save those held out by a full and bountiful
    nature, and no means of livelihood which may be so certainly
    depended upon as those afforded by agriculture. Here it is that
    industry throws open the widest field, and affords the fullest
    opportunity of doing good."


In the following extract, our author proceeds to set forth the national
character of the American:


    "The national character of the American has been greatly
    misunderstood; few travellers seem, in fact, to have understood
    it, since they mention it as something as new and unfounded as the
    country itself, and yet it is so well confirmed—so well
    established in every elevated and noble characteristic of the
    human race, that it may confidently be placed in comparison with
    that of the most celebrated nations of antiquity. Springing
    originally from England, they have the pride and manly confidence
    of the Briton, for through their ancestry they claim an equal
    share of all which gives dignity to those inheriting glory and a
    great name. Their forefathers were those brave religious pilgrims
    who were transferred by British laws (or rather by old German) and
    British genius to the shores of the new world—to there give to
    those laws and genius an immortality. Building still further on
    this new land, they opened the temple of the Lord to all his
    followers, and received with open arms all the unfortunate or
    oppressed exiles of Europe. For the first time in reality in this
    world they flung wide the flag of truth and freedom—fought under
    its folds an unequal fight against the mightiest power in the
    world—and overcame it. And when a second time they armed
    themselves to combat with England, they again came forth
    unconquered from the contest. Reason enough this for the national
    pride of the American, for nothing could more naturally cause a
    certain degree of self-content than to belong to a nation whose
    brilliant deeds in war as in politics, in commerce as in
    manufactures, have astonished the world. A second and not less
    characteristic trait of the American is seen in a certain
    earnestness, which appears to strangers to indicate a want of
    sociable feeling—and yet perhaps in _no_ country is true noble
    sociability as developed in domestic life, so much at home, as in
    America.

    "Accustomed from his cradle to reflect on himself and his
    circumstances, the American from the first instant of his entry
    into active life is ever on the watch to improve their condition.
    Is he rich, and consequently more directly interested in the
    common wealth, then every new law, every change in the personal
    direction of the government, awakes in him a new care for the
    future, while on the other hand, if poor, then every change in the
    state may perhaps afford him a new opportunity of bettering his
    condition. Therefore he is ever wide awake—ever looking out for
    the future, not as a mere spectator, but as one playing a part and
    occupied in maintaining the present state of affairs, or in
    improving them. The entire mass of the population is continually
    in a state of political agitation, and, urged by hope of their aid
    or fear of their power, we see every one continually seeking for
    expressions of public opinion. No man is so rich or powerful that
    he need not fear them—none so wretched and poor but that he may
    venture to entertain the hope of being through them aided and
    relieved. Public opinion is in America the mightiest organ of
    justice—shielding no one, from the president to the simplest
    citizen, and proceeds, mowing, casting down, or grinding to powder
    all things which oppose it and deserve its condemnation.

    "This condition of perpetual agitation gives the American an
    appearance of ceaseless restlessness, but it is in reality the
    true ground of peace and content. _The American has no time to be
    discontented_, and this is the most praiseworthy point of their
    constitution and popular life. The republican has necessarily as
    many severe and arduous duties to fulfil as the inhabitants of any
    monarchy—but their fulfilment is gratifying and consoling—for it
    is allied to the consciousness of power. The American has no
    desire for the quiet temper of the European, and least of all for
    the silent happiness of the German, which last, alas! appears
    since the dissipation of the intoxication of the Revolution of
    March, 1848, to consist, as far as the great mass of the
    population is concerned, merely in the egotistic repose of
    self-sufficiency, weakness, and ignorance. The American finds
    repose only in his house, in his family circle, and among his
    children; all without the walls of that home is an incessant
    working and striving, in politics as in trade—by the streets and
    canals, as in the woods of the West. Different as the elements are
    from which the inhabitants of the United States are formed, and
    different as the circumstances may be under which they live, there
    still prevails among them a certain unity of character, an
    equanimity of feeling, which it would be difficult to parallel,
    resulting perhaps from the very heterogeneousness and mixture of
    elements itself, since no one element allows to another
    pre-eminence. They have all something in common in their
    appearance, which gives them the air almost of relations—something
    in their gait and manners which declares them to be other than
    English, Germans, or French. Through the entire land, through
    every class, there is disseminated a certain refinement of manner,
    an appreciation of decency and nobility of character, which
    springs from a consciousness of their own rights and respect for
    mankind. Even emigrants, in America, soon learn to cast aside
    their rough prejudices as regards caste, for the proud affability
    of the aristocratic, the vanity of the small citizen, the want of
    confidence and ease in the mechanic, the slavish servitude and
    snappish insolence of liveried servants, find in America no place.
    _Man_ is there esteemed only as _man_—only ability gains honor—and
    where _that_ is, and there alone, can true nobility be found. No
    one there inquires who a man is, or who were his parents, but
    ’What can he _do_, what are his capabilities, and what can he
    produce?’ Rank and caste are in America unknown. Every man feels
    his freedom and independence, and expresses himself accordingly.
    Even the servant is a free man, who has, it is true, hired his
    service, but not his entire existence. The American is polite, but
    over-refined, unmeaning compliments form no part of his manners,
    nor does he expect them from others. No man vexes or troubles
    himself for another, in consequence of which we find in American
    society very little stiffness and reserve, yet we find in every
    respect that the very highest regard is there paid to propriety
    and decency—particularly as regards the female sex, since in no
    country, not even in England, do ladies enjoy such respect and
    regard as in the United States. Ever depending upon, and confiding
    in himself, the American is in his manners free, open, and
    unreserved. The mass of the people is possessed of intelligence
    and spirit, though not so scientifically educated as in Europe,
    and a higher degree of intelligence penetrates even the lower
    class, who consequently form a marked and singular contrast with
    those of like rank in Europe. It is not from being versed in the
    higher branches of abstract learning and science, but from the
    great amount of that direct practical knowledge which exerts the
    greatest influence in making life happy, that the Americans are
    distinguished from other nations, and for the acquisition of which
    they have made better provision and preparation than any other
    people. As yet too deeply occupied with the Needful and Important,
    they are compelled to leave the development of the higher branches
    to the care and noble generosity of individuals. But a glance at
    the sums which are annually devoted to the establishment and
    maintenance of schools and universities, will suffice to evidence
    the liberality with which the proper education of the people is
    cared for in the United States. Knowledge is indeed esteemed, but
    only according to its use and applicability to the wants of life;
    so that a practical tanner is there worth more than a learned
    pedant. _Wealth, or rather wealth allied to ability and
    universality of talent, is there more highly esteemed than
    learning,_ while hospitality, patriotism, and toleration, allowing
    every one to think and feel as he likes, are universal
    characteristics. So that in the United States nothing is wanting
    to the attainment of a true civil and social freedom, even though
    the means thereto are not invariably correctly understood or
    admitted (as is indeed the case by us), and though—since men are
    every where subject to the same weaknesses—they measure happiness
    rather by the standard of their own intelligence and virtues, than
    by fortune and nature, which latter, impartially considered, is
    the basis of the physical happiness of the American. That,
    however, which constitutes his _moral_ happiness is this; that in
    his country, domestic life enjoys the true supremacy, _and to
    this, public life and the state are subordinate_. It is true that
    the American statesmen have fallen into the same error as the
    European—_id est_, to believe that without _them_ the people could
    never prosper, and still live in the belief that home-happiness
    hangs on them, their theories and arts of governing; but the most
    superficial glance teaches that if wise laws are able to effect
    more for the happiness of man than they can bring about, still no
    one should _there_ attempt to draw happiness from such a source
    when popular and private life have combined to bestow it. But
    should the happiness of the Americans ever be derived from this
    side, it will be more sensible to assume that the foundation
    thereof will be the release from that which in the recent culture
    has passed for the deepest political wisdom. The true secret of
    all the good fortune of America lies in the favorable condition of
    external things. ’It is not with them as in Europe, where the poor
    can only better their condition or become rich by making the rich
    poor, for therein lies the source of an infinite strife which hath
    been combated for centuries, with the axioms of religion and
    morals. But in America, men when striving to better their
    condition, instead of becoming enemies and turning their arms
    against each other, strive with _Nature_, and wring from her
    boundless stores that wealth which she so bountifully affords!’"


We have made these quotations less on account of any merit which they
possess, than to give our readers an idea of the general opinion
prevailing in Germany in regard to our country; and to confirm an
assertion made in a recent number of the _International_, that in no
country in Europe are we so impartially and favorably judged. There is one
particular, however, in which we find this book worthy of especial praise.
The author highly commends the flourishing state of religion in the United
States, declaring that we are in this respect superior to the Germans, and
that on the Sabbath the churches are filled to a degree unknown in Europe.
It is from our deep-rooted attachment to domestic life, and our observance
of religion, that he correctly deduces our true happiness, as separated
from the natural advantages of the country. It is greatly to be desired
that the majority of his countrymen resident in America, would allow
themselves to be impressed in a similar manner as to the advantages of
piety and Sabbath-keeping. There is in the United States a vast number of
German newspapers—conducted we should imagine for the greater part by
unprincipled and worthless adventurers of the red republican, socialist
stamp, who, despite the protection which they here enjoy, incessantly and
spitefully abuse every institution to which they are really indebted for
their asylum among us, and most of all our observation of the Sabbath, in
a style which entitles them to something severer than mere contempt. But
Herr Bromme is right. Respect for morality and religion, a due regard for
the Sabbath, and a dependence on the home-circle for pleasure and
recreation, are the surest safeguard of peace, happiness, and prosperity.





A VISIT TO THE FIRE WORSHIPPERS’ TEMPLE AT BAKU.


In a recent number of the _Russian Archives for Scientific Information_,
is an account of a visit made by a Russian lady of distinction, in company
with her husband and sons, to a temple of the Indian sect of Gebers, or
Fire Worshippers, near Baku, a city of Georgia, lying on the Caspian Sea.
We translate this interesting narrative for the _International_, as
follows:

In order the better to enjoy the spectacle of the fire, we chose the
evening for our excursion thither; but a thick fog came on, which made the
road difficult and dangerous. When we finally reached the place it was
pitch dark; the flames were rising in beautiful purity to the peaceful sky
of night, and the entire castle, within which was the temple, seemed to be
surrounded by a circle of watch-fires. These were lighted by Persians from
the neighborhood, who were busy burning lime and baking bread, dark forms
like those which worked on the tower of Babel, and burnt lime for it. They
were now brought here by the ease and cheapness of carrying on their
occupations. All that is necessary is to make a hole in the ground, touch
a burning coal to it, and an inexhaustible flame rises forth like a
spring. Behind this range of little flames and fires, rose, in the pale
light, the dirty white walls of the castle, in the centre of which there
flashed from the summit of two lofty pillars great masses of the purest,
clearest, and keenest flame, which were now bent down horizontally and
wreathed like serpents by the force of the wind, and now rose
perpendicularly to the sky, whose dome they lighted up like two vast altar
tapers. We drove around the edifice, and stopped on one side where there
were no flames rising from the earth. A fine rain was falling, but we
remained without while our guide went in to announce us. He came back
immediately with a swarthy Hindoo. The sight of this man impressed me
strangely, and I forgot that he belonged to a remote colony of a few
individuals, and asked myself if we had been suddenly transported to
India, or if India had been brought up to the Caspian.

We went into the court-yard, in which stands the temple, with its two
fire-pillars. About half way up hang a couple of large bells, which the
Hindoo sounded by way of preparing us for what we were to see. There was
something fearful in the loud clangor, and my boys crowded close beside
me. Except our party, no one was to be seen except the swart Geber, in his
white turban and long brown robe, with just enough of a pair of light blue
trowsers visible to bring into distinctness his naked black feet. His
features were noble, and his beard long and black. He looked like a
conjurer, like the lord of an enchanted castle, summoning his spirits. The
hissing fire, as if obeying him, flashed up more brightly at the crash of
the bells; now it was clear as day around us, and now it was twilight as
the wind lowered the flame. My husband and sons and the guide who had
brought us to the place, were all dressed in oriental costume, and I alone
seemed to belong to Europe. A shudder of home-sickness came over me, and
at every moment I expected to see something monstrous, to behold all the
cruelties of a heathenish and barbarous worship.

The interpreter now summoned us to follow the Geber. We were told that the
castle was built by a rich Indian nabob, who was a fire worshipper, and
who, with his followers, long inhabited it. Now, only three Hindoos remain
from that period of splendor. But nature remains eternally the same, and
whether worshipped or not, the flames still shine and awe the
superstitious, and so great is the fame of the place that many pilgrims
come yearly from distant India to pray, and to have prayers said for them,
here in the visible presence of the primeval light.

At last we came to the cell of the priest, and on his invitation entered
it. We passed through a low door, and down a few steps, and found
ourselves in a small, semicircular, low, but very white room, with a floor
of mason-work, and a small altar in the centre. Around the wall were
seats, also of mason-work. In the altar there was an opening as large as a
gun-barrel, from which rose a slender flame that lighted the room very
clearly. There were other little openings on the sides of the altar. The
Hindoo took a wisp of straw, lighted it, and touched these openings, from
which the most beautiful flames at once issued. The children, who had
never seen gas lights, or at least did not remember them, regarded all
this as the most perfect witchery. On a second altar, which, like the
first, was about the height of a common table, lay or stood the idols and
treasures of our priest. Small steps led up to it, which were used to hold
muscles, stones, shells, and other instruments employed in the sacred
rites. The idols were of metal, and ugly and monstrous, like Chinese
images. Beside these figures, we were astonished to see crosses of various
forms and sizes. We asked the Geber about them, and he answered with
oriental emphasis: "There is one God, and no one has seen him; therefore
every one adores him after his own way, and represents him after his own
way." The reply was diplomatic enough, and we could not ascertain how the
crosses had come there.

On the altar and its steps lay a great number of singularly beautiful
Indian stones, which the boys wanted very much, but which, in spite of our
large offers, we could not obtain. They were mementoes from the distant
fatherland, and possibly they served as sacred ornaments for the little
cell. There were also several censers, lamps, and little silver plates and
salvers. The air was stifling from the fumes of gas, and the heat was like
that of a vapor bath. The priest took from the altar some pieces of red
and white candied sugar, held them, praying, before his idols, sprinkled
them with holy water, and handed them to us on a silver plate.

A second Hindoo now came in, a tall old man, whose name, as he told us,
was Amintaas. He invited us into his cell, which was larger and
differently arranged. In the centre was a large kettle, set in mason-work,
with water in it, and a gas flame burning under it; the altar was in
another apartment beyond, and separated from the first by a low wall or
fence, with a passage through. Another apartment, similarly divided off,
was spread with carpets for sleeping. After we had seen the stones,
shells, and idols, which were richer and more numerous than in the former
cell, the Hindoos asked us if they should pray for us. We agreed, and the
ceremony began. A large muscle shell was washed in the kettle, the plates
were set in order at the foot of the altar, a censer began to smoke, the
silver plate with candied sugar was set over a lamp Between two bells,
whose handles were the most monstrous figures of idols. These bells
Amintaas took and began to ring vehemently. The other Hindoos stood behind
him and beat two big cymbals, accompanying this noise with the most
inhuman and frightful howling that a man’s lungs ever produced. Still,
there was method and a regular cadence in it. Finally, they made a pause,
bowed before the images, murmuring softly, after which they arranged the
plates anew, and sprinkled the sugar with holy water. My husband whispered
in my ear a line from the conjuration in "Faust," and the whole of that
scene rushed vividly into my memory.

Meanwhile the lungs of the old Amintaas had recovered their power, for he
now seized a conch shell, held it in both hands, and with incredible
strength blew long wild notes, with scarce any thing like a tune. I grew
dizzy in listening to this clamor, and at once understood what is meant by
the heathen making a "vain noise," This cannibalistic music was kept up
for a long time, and seemed to form the climax of the sacred rites. The
finale was a combination of wild shouting, banging of the cymbals, ringing
and murmuring. At last the concert was over, and we breathed freely.
Amintaas handed us the candied sugar, and my husband laid down two ducats
in its place. They were received with warm expressions of gratitude, and
laid upon the altar. We went out into the open air, but the scene had
changed. The lonely castle was crowded with Persians who had come from
their lime-burning to see the Europeans. Persian women were sitting around
by sundry little ovens of masonry, where, by the help of gas flames, they
baked their _Tsheuks_, thin cakes of unleavened bread. Followed by the
crowd, we were led a couple of hundred steps from the castle to a spring
that was covered over; the cover was taken off, and a bundle of burning
straw thrown in, when, crackling and hissing, sprung up a splendid pillar
of fire, vanishing in sparks like stars. This beautiful spectacle lasted
but for a moment, and a quarter of an hour was necessary to collect gas
enough to repeat the experiment.

We returned to Baku in the rain, more dead than alive. It was the eve of
Easter. The next morning, as I was sitting on the sofa with the children,
there came in a tall, meagre Hindoo, with gray hair; he was dressed in a
white robe, and brought me white and red sugar on a silver plate. He was
the chief priest from the temple of the Gebers, and had come to Baku to
see the Easter festivities. We took a few grains of his sugar, and I laid
a silver rouble on the plate. While he was making his bows for this, my
husband came in and told him, partly in Tartar, partly in Russian, and
partly in pantomime, that we had been to his temple the night before, and
had prayers said there. He asked at once, with eagerness, how much we had
given, and when he learned the sum, asked for a certificate to that
effect, as, without it, the others would give him no part of the money. We
sent him away without granting his request, for the two screamers of the
night previous had earned all we gave them. We learned afterwards that the
gifts of visitors occasioned quarrels, and often blows, in the romantic
fire-castle. This disgusted me, and yet it is not the fault of these poor
fellows. They must necessarily become covetous, since they profane their
most sacred ceremonies as a means of living. They have neither fields nor
gardens, and the only thing like vegetation that I saw was some lone boxes
in the court yard, filled with shrubs and plants, remains, no doubt, from
the time of the Indian nabob, who sought in vain to establish cultivation
in a soil impregnated with inflammable gas. However, I learned to my
sorrow that grass at least grows there, for, in going through it to the
spring, my feet became perfectly wet.

The air of the locality does not seem to be unwholesome for man. At least,
the Geber priests, who had lived there for years, were perfect lions for
health and vigor.





A NEW PORTRAIT OF CICERO.


In the third volume of his _History of the Romans under the Empire_, just
published in London, Mr. MERIVALE gives some elaborate pieces of character
writing, one of which has for its subject CICERO. It is not good for a man
to think harshly of Cicero, and however easy it may seem to be to condemn
manifest faults in his character, it is by no means easy to be fair in the
estimate we make. Mr. Merivale sums up a character which has too often
been roughly put down as that of a great writer and a little man, as
follows:


    "Many writers, it has been remarked, have related the death of
    Cicero, but Plutarch alone has painted it. In the narrative here
    laid before him the reader has the substance of this picturesque
    account, together with some touches introduced from collateral
    sources. In this, as in many other massages of his Lives, the
    Greek biographer has evidently aimed at creating an effect, and
    though he seems to have been mainly guided by the genuine
    narrative of Tiro, Cicero’s beloved freedman, we may suspect him
    of having embellished it to furnish a striking termination to one
    of his favorite sketches. Nevertheless the narrative is mainly
    confirmed by a fragment of Livy’s history, which has fortunately
    been preserved. The Roman author vies with the Greek in throwing
    dignity and interest over the great statesman’s end. But in
    reviewing the uneven tenor of his career, Livy concludes with the
    stern comment, "He bore none of his calamities as a man should,
    except his death." These are grave words. In the mouth of one who
    had cast his scrutinizing glance over the characters and exploits
    of all the heroes of the great republic, and had learnt by the
    training of his life-long studies to discriminate moral qualities
    and estimate desert, they constitute the most important judgment
    on the conduct of Cicero that antiquity has bequeathed to us. Few
    indeed among the Romans ever betrayed a want of resolution in the
    face of impending death. But it was in the endurance of calamity
    rather than the defiance of danger that the courage of Cicero was
    deficient. The orator, whose genius lay in the arts of peace and
    persuasion, exhibited on more than one occasion a martial spirit
    worthy of other habits and a ruder training. In the contest with
    Catilina he displayed all the moral confidence of a veteran
    general: in the struggle with Antonius he threw himself without
    reserve into a position where there was no alternative but to
    conquer or to perish. In the earlier conflict he had still his
    fame to acquire, his proud ascendency to establish; and the love
    of praise and glory inspired him with the audacity which makes and
    justifies its own success. But in the later, he courted danger for
    the sake of retaining the fame he so dearly prized. He had once
    saved his country, and he could not endure that it should be said
    he had ever deserted it. He loved his country; but it wan for his
    own honor, which he could preserve, rather than for his country’s
    freedom, which he despaired of, that he returned to his post when
    escape was still possible. He might have remained silent, but he
    opened the floodgates of his eloquence. When indeed he had once
    launched himself on the torrent he lost all self-command; he could
    neither retrace nor moderate his career; he saw the rocks before
    him, but he dashed himself headlong against them. But another
    grave authority has given us the judgment of antiquity, that
    Cicero’s defect was the want of steadfastness. His courage had no
    dignity because it lacked consistency. All men and all parties
    agreed that he could not be relied upon to lead, to co-operate, or
    to follow. In all the great enterprises of his party, he was left
    behind, except that which the nobles undertook against Catilina,
    in which they rather thrust him before them than engaged with him
    on terms of mutual support. When we read the vehement claims which
    Cicero put forth to the honor of association, however tardy, with
    the glories and dangers of Cæsar’s assassins, we should deem the
    conspirators guilty of a monstrous oversight in having neglected
    to enlist him in their design, were we not assured that he was not
    to be trusted as a confederate either for good or for evil.

    "Of all the characters of antiquity Cicero is undoubtedly that
    with which we are most intimately acquainted; for he alone has
    left to us the record of his thoughts and actions for more than
    half his public career in a voluminous mass of familiar as well as
    political correspondence. No public character probably could pass
    unscathed through the fiery ordeal to which he has thus subjected
    himself. Cicero, it must be avowed, is convicted from his own
    mouth of vanity, inconstancy, sordidness, jealousy, malice,
    selfishness, and timidity. But on the other hand no character,
    public or private, could thus bare its workings to our view
    without laying a stronger claim to our sympathy, and extorting
    from us more kindly consideration than we can give to the mere
    shell of the human being with which ordinary history brings us in
    contact. Cicero gains more than he loses by the confessions he
    pours into our ear. We read in his letters what we should vainly
    search for in the meagre pages of Sallust and Appian, in the
    captious criticism of Dion, and even in the pleasant anecdotes of
    his friendly biographer Plutarch, his amiableness, his refined
    urbanity, his admiration for excellence, his thirst for fame, his
    love of truth, equity, and reason. Much indeed of the patriotism,
    the honesty, the moral courage he exhibited, was really no other
    than the refined ambition of attaining the respect of his
    contemporaries and bequeathing a name to posterity. He might not
    act from a sense of duty, like Cato, but his motives, personal and
    selfish as they in some sense were, coincided with what a more
    enlightened conscience would have felt to be duty. Thus his
    proconsulate is perhaps the purest and most honorable passage in
    his life. His strict and rare probity amidst the temptations of
    office arrests our attention and extorts our praise: yet assuredly
    Cicero had no nice sense of honor, and was controlled by no
    delicacy of sentiment, where public opinion was silent, or a
    transaction strictly private. His courting his ward Publilia for
    her dower, his caressing Dolabella for the sake of getting his
    debt paid, his soliciting the historian Lucceius to color and
    exaggerate the merits of his consulship, display a grievous want
    of magnanimity and of a predominant sense of right. Fortunately
    his instinct taught him to see in the constitution of the republic
    the fairest field for the display of his peculiar talents; the
    orator and the pleader could not fail to love the arena on which
    the greatest triumph of his genius had been or were yet, as he
    hoped, to be acquired. And Cicero indeed was not less ambitious
    than Cæesar or Pompeius, Antonius or Octavius. To the pursuit of
    fame he sacrificed many interests and friendships. He was not less
    jealous of a rival in his chosen career than any of the leaders of
    party and candidates for popular favor. He could not endure
    competition for the throne of eloquence and the sceptre of
    persuasion. It was on this account perhaps that he sought his
    associates among the young, from whose rivalry he had nothing to
    fear, rather than from his own contemporaries, the candidates for
    the same prize of public admiration which he aimed at securing for
    himself. From his pages there flows an incessant stream of abuse
    of all the great masters of political power in his time; of Cæsar
    and Pompeius; of Crassus and Antonius, not to mention his coarse
    vituperation of Piso and Gabinius, and his uneasy sneers at the
    impracticable Cato. We may note the different tone which his
    disparagement assumes towards these men respectively. He speaks of
    Cæsar with awe, of Pompeius with mortification, with dislike of
    Crassus, with bitter malice of Antonius. Cæsar, even when he most
    deeply reprobates him, he personally loves; the cold distrust of
    Pompeius vexes his self-esteem; between him and Crassus there
    subsists a natural antipathy of temperament: but Antonius, the
    hate of his old age, becomes to him the incarnation of all the
    evil his long and bitter experience of mankind have discovered in
    the human heart. While we suspect Cicero of injustice towards the
    great men of his day, we are bound also to specify the gross
    dishonesty with which he magnifies his own merits where they are
    trivial, and embellishes them where they are really important. The
    perpetual recurrence to the topic of his own political deserts
    must have wearied the most patient of friends, and more than
    balanced the display of sordidness and time-serving which Atticus
    doubtless reflected back in his share of the correspondence
    between them.

    "But while Cicero stands justly charged with many grave
    infirmities of temper and defects of principle, while we remark
    with a sigh the vanity, the inconstancy, and the ingratitude he so
    often manifested, while we lament his ignoble subserviencies and
    his ferocious resentments, the high standard by which we claim to
    judge him is in itself the fullest acknowledgment of his
    transcendent merits. For undoubtedly had he not placed himself on
    a higher moral level than the statesmen and sages of his day, we
    should pass over many of his weaknesses in silence, and allow his
    pretensions to our esteem to pass almost unchallenged. But we
    demand a nearer approach to the perfection of human wisdom and
    virtue in one who sought to approve himself the greatest of their
    teachers. Nor need we scruple to admit that the judgment of the
    ancients on Cicero was for the most part unfavorable. The
    moralists of antiquity required in their heroes virtues with which
    we can more readily dispense: and they too had less sympathy with
    many qualities which a purer religion and a wider experience have
    taught us to love and admire. Nor were they capable, from their
    position, of estimating the slow and silent effects upon human
    happiness of the lessons which Cicero enforced. After all the
    severe judgments we are compelled to pass on his conduct, we must
    acknowledge that there remains a residue of what is amiable in his
    character and noble in his teaching beyond all ancient example.
    Cicero lived and died in faith. He has made converts to the belief
    in virtue, and had disciples in the wisdom of love. There have
    been dark periods in the history of man, when the feeble ray of
    religious instruction paled before the torch of his generous
    philanthropy. The praise which the great critic pronounced upon
    his excellence in oratory may be justly extended to the qualities
    of his heart, and even in our enlightened days it may be held no
    mean advance in virtue to venerate the master of Roman
    philosophy."





LORD MAHON’S HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION.


Incomparably the best history of our struggle for independence that has
been written by a foreigner is that of which we have the larger portion in
the just-published fifth and sixth volumes of Lord MAHON’S _History of
England from the Peace of Utrecht_, comprising the period from 1763 to
1780—from the commencement of the popular discontents until the virtual
conclusion of the war.

The character of Lord Mahon as a historian has long been established. When
Sismondi, in 1842, had brought his History of France down to the peace of
Aix-la-Chapelle, he lamented that he could no longer be guided by Lord
Mahon, and expressed a hope that his "brilliant labors" would be
continued. The portion of his work on which the illustrious Frenchman thus
set the seal of his approval has been reprinted in this country by the
Appletons, in two large volumes (embracing the first four of the original
impression), carefully and judiciously edited by Professor Henry Reed, of
Philadelphia. It well indicates the right of its author to a place with
the best British writers in this department. History was never before
written so brilliantly or profoundly as in the last half century. Germany
in this period has boasted her Schiller, Niebuhr, Von Hammer, Heeren,
Ranke, and two Mullers; France her Sismondi, Barrante, Thierrys, Michelet,
Mignet, Guizot, and Thiers; England her Mitford, Arnold, Thirlwall, Grote,
Napier, Hallam, Mackintosh, Macaulay, Palgrave, and Mahon; and we have
ourselves the noble names of Bancroft, Prescott, and Irving, to send to
the next ages. Of the English authors we have mentioned, we regard Lord
Mahon as in many respects the first; Hallam is a laborious and wise
critic; Thirlwall and Grote, in their province, have greatly increased the
fame of British scholarship; and Macaulay, brilliant and picturesque
beyond any of his contemporaries, has an unprecedented popularity, which
will last until the worthlessness of his opinions and the viciousness of
his style are more justly appreciated than they are likely to be by the
mobs of novel readers who in this generation have preferred him to James
and Ainsworth. Lord Mahon is the most legitimate successor of the greatest
historian of his country, David Hume.

Although the chief subject of these new volumes is the American war, the
general political history of England, from the decline of the fortunes of
Bute through the administration of Grenville, Rockingham, Chatham, the
Duke of Grafton, and Lord North, is illustrated and commented on as
largely as the special purpose of the author permitted; and we have many
striking passages respecting Wilkes and his various persecutions, the
Letters of Junius and their authorship, and the common intellectual and
material progress of the British empire. The spirit in which he regards
our Revolution is illustrated by the following paragraph, on the
rejection, by the House of Peers, of the conciliatory Bill by which Lord
Chatham hoped, in 1775, to prevent the threatened separation of the
colonies:


    "It may be proper, or at least pardonable, here to pause for an
    inquiry, what probable issue might have attended an opposite
    decision in the British Parliament? If the ministers had been
    defeated on this Bill, if, in consequence, they had resigned, and
    it had in other hands been carried through, would the Americans
    have accepted the measure cheerfully and readily—would it for a
    long time to come have closed the breach, and cemented the union
    with the Mother Country? From all the facts and testimonies then
    or since made public, I answer without hesitation that it would.
    The sword was then slumbering in its scabbard. On both sides there
    were injuries to redress, but not as yet bloodshed to avenge. It
    was only a quarrel. It was not as yet a war. Even the boldest
    leaders of that war in after years, whether in council or the
    field, were still, in January, 1775, the firm friends of colonial
    subordination. Washington himself (and he at least was no
    dissembler—from him, at least, there never came any promise or
    assurance that did not deserve the most implicit credit) had only
    a few months before presided at a meeting of Fairfax County, in
    Virginia. That meeting, while claiming relief of grievances, had
    also at his instance adopted the following Resolve:—’That it is
    our greatest wish and inclination, as well as interest, to
    continue our connection with, and dependence upon, the British
    Government.’ But further still, although the first Congress was
    praised by Chatham for its moderate counsels, and although the
    calmer voice of history has ratified the praise, we learn that
    these moderate counsels did not lag behind, but rather exceeded
    and outran the prevailing sentiment in many of the colonies. To
    this fact we find an unimpeachable testimony in the letters of
    President Reed, who, writing to a friend in strict confidence,
    laments that ’The proceedings of Congress have been pitched on too
    high a key for some of those middle provinces.’ With such
    feelings, how gladly, how gratefully would they have welcomed the
    hand of reconciliation stretched out by the Parliament of England!
    It may be true, indeed, that such feelings as these did not
    prevail in all, or nearly all, the colonies. It may be true,
    especially, that no amount of good government, of forbearance, or
    of kindness, would have won back Massachusetts. But herein lay, as
    I think, the especial force and efficacy of Lord Chatham’s scheme,
    that it did not refer the questions of parliamentary supremacy and
    colonial taxation to the decision of any one province; but, as the
    Americans themselves desired, to the decision of a Congress
    composed from all the provinces, so that disaffection, however
    firmly rooted here and there, would of course be overpowered by a
    loyal and large majority. Nor do I believe that the proposal of a
    new grant to the Crown, and the consequent necessity of increased
    taxation to the people, would have interposed any serious
    obstacle. The load of taxation on the colonies was at this period
    light indeed: according to a calculation made by Lord North in
    that very year, each inhabitant of England paid in taxes, upon an
    average, not less than twenty-five shillings annually; but each
    inhabitant of British America no more than sixpence. The
    experience of the closely-following Revolutionary war proves how
    easily and readily, when their feelings were involved, the
    Americans could raise far greater supplies. And surely had Lord
    Chatham’s scheme prevailed, their feelings would have been
    involved. They would have been pleased and proud to show that
    their previous refusal to pay taxes sprang from principle, and not
    from inability or disaffection; and that, when once their views of
    principle had been complied with, they could contribute with no
    sparing hand to the exigencies of their countrymen, and to the
    service of their king."


The opinion of Lord Mahon that, even after Burgoyne’s surrender, and the
treaty of alliance between France and America, the colonies might have
been preserved, had Lord Chatham lived and returned to office, we think
entirely erroneous. Our separation from England, though there had been no
stamp act or tea tax, was inevitable.

Lord Mahon is exceedingly fond of personal portraiture, in which he is
sometimes very successful. One of his most carefully-elaborated
performances in this way has for its subject Washington, and in the dozen
pages he devotes to the analysis of the character of the great chief he
has displayed his best abilities, though, we confess, without suggesting
any thing very novel. He dislikes Franklin, and loses no opportunity of
imputing to him personal dishonesty. We think the influence of Mr. William
B. Reed’s Life of President Reed is traceable in almost every allusion
made by Lord Mahon to our philosopher. Without further observation upon
the qualities of the work, we avail ourselves of the possession of an
early copy of it to present our readers with some of the most striking
passages pencilled in a hasty reading.


                               WASHINGTON.

    During many years did Washington continue to enjoy the pleasures
    and fulfil the duties of an independent country gentleman.
    Field-sports divided his time with the cultivation and improvement
    of his land, and the sales of his tobacco; he showed kindness to
    his dependents, and hospitality to his friends; and having been
    elected one of the House of Burgesses in Virginia, he was,
    whenever that House met, exact in his attendance. To that
    well-regulated mind nothing within the course of its ordinary and
    appointed avocations seemed unworthy of its care. His ledgers and
    day-books were kept by himself: he took note of all the houses
    where he partook of hospitality, so that not even the smallest
    courtesies might pass by unremembered; and until his press of
    business in the Revolutionary War he was wont every evening to set
    down the variations of the weather during the preceding day. It
    was also his habit through life, whenever he wished to possess
    himself perfectly of the contents of any paper, to transcribe it
    in his own hand, and apparently with deliberation, so that no
    point might escape his notice. Many copies of this kind were after
    his death found among his manuscripts.

    We may observe, however, that in the mind of Washington
    punctuality and precision did not, as we often find them, turn in
    any degree to selfishness. On the contrary, he was rather careless
    of small points where only his own comfort was concerned. Thus he
    could seldom be persuaded to take any remedy, or desist from any
    business, whenever he caught a cold, but used to say, "let it go
    as it came!"

    Nor yet was his constant regularity of habits attended by undue
    formality of manner. In one of his most private letters there
    appears given incidentally, and as it were by chance, a golden
    rule upon that subject:—"As to the gentlemen you mention I cannot
    charge myself with incivility, or what in my opinion is
    tantamount, ceremonious civility.

    In figure Washington was thin and tall (above six feet high), in
    countenance grave, unimpassioned, and benign. An inborn worth, an
    unaffected dignity, beamed forth in every look as in every word
    and deed. His first appearance and address might not convey the
    idea of superior talents; such at least was the remark of his
    accomplished countryman, Mr. Gallatin; but no man, whether friend
    or enemy, ever viewed without respect the noble simplicity of his
    demeanor, the utter absence in him of every artifice and every
    affectation.

    It has been justly remarked that of General Washington there are
    fewer anecdotes to tell than perhaps of any other great man on
    record. So equally framed were the features of his mind, so
    harmonious all its proportions, that no one quality rose salient
    above the rest. There were none of those chequered ques, none of
    those warring emotions, in which Biography delights. There was no
    contrast of lights and shades, no flickering of the flame; it was
    a mild light that seldom dazzled, but that ever cheered and
    warmed. His contemporaries or his close observers, as Mr.
    Jefferson and Mr. Gallatin, assert that he had naturally strong
    passions, but had attained complete mastery over them. In
    self-control indeed he has never been surpassed. If sometimes on
    rare occasions, and on strong provocation, there was wrung from
    him a burst of anger, it was almost instantly quelled by the
    dominion of his will. He decided surely, though he deliberated
    slowly; nor could any urgency or peril move him from his serene
    composure, his calm and clear-headed good sense. Integrity and
    truth were also ever present in his mind. Not a single instance,
    as I believe, can be found in his whole career when he was
    impelled by any but an upright motive, or endeavored to attain an
    object by any but worthy means. Such are some of the high
    qualities which have justly earned for General Washington the
    admiration even of the country he opposed, and not merely the
    admiration but the gratitude and affection of his own. Such was
    the pure and upright spirit to which, when its toils were over and
    its earthly course had been run, was offered the unanimous homage
    of the assembled Congress, all clad in deep mourning for their
    common loss, as to "the man first in war, first in peace, and
    first in the hearts of his fellow-citizens." At this day in the
    United States the reverence for his character is, as it should be,
    deep and universal, and not confined, as with nearly all our
    English statesmen, to one party, one province, or one creed. Such
    reverence for Washington is felt even by those who wander furthest
    from the paths in which he trod. A President when recommending
    measures of aggression and invasion can still refer to him whose
    rule was ever to arm only in self-defence as to "the greatest and
    best of men!" States which exult in their bankruptcy as a proof of
    their superior shrewdness, and have devised "Repudiation" as a
    newer and more graceful term for it, yet look up to their great
    General—the very soul of good faith and honor—with their reverence
    unimpaired!"


                              PATRICK HENRY.

    The colony of Virginia was the place, and the the year 1736 the
    time, of birth to Patrick Henry. His parents were in easy
    circumstances, but burthened with a numerous family; they resided
    at a country scat to which the ambitious name of Mount Brilliant
    had been given. In childhood Patrick Henry gave little promise of
    distinction. His person is represented as having been coarse, his
    manners extremely awkward, his dress slovenly, and his aversion to
    study invincible. No persuasion could bring him either to read or
    to work. At sixteen his father gave him means to open a small
    shop, which failed, however, in less than one year. Then he tried
    a small farm, and married; then again he entered upon the life of
    a tradesman, but in a few years more was a bankrupt. It was at
    this period that he became acquainted with Mr. Jefferson,
    afterwards President of the United States. "Mr. Henry," says
    Jefferson, "had a little before broken up his store (shop), or
    rather it had broken him up, but his misfortunes were not to be
    traced either in his countenance or conduct. His manners had
    something of coarseness in them; his passion was music, dancing,
    and pleasantry. He excelled in the last, and it attached every one
    to him."

    As a last resource, Patrick Henry now determined to make a trial
    of the law. It cannot be said that his preparatory studies were
    unduly arduous, since, as his biographer informs us, they were all
    comprised in the period of six weeks. Under such unpromising
    circumstances, and in the year 1763, he obtained a brief in the
    long-contested cause then raging in Virginia between the clergy on
    the one side, and the legislature on the other, as regarding the
    stipends which the former claimed. On this occasion Henry, to the
    astonishment of all who knew him, poured forth a strain of such
    impassioned eloquence as not only carried the cause, contrary to
    all previous expectation, but placed him ever afterwards at the
    head of his profession in the colony. To this very day, says Mr.
    Wirt, writing in 1818, the impression remains, and the old people
    of that district think that no higher compliment can be paid to
    any public speaker than to say of him in their homely phrase, "He
    is almost equal to Patrick when he plead (pleaded) against the
    parsons!"

    The natural eloquence which on this occasion flashed forth from
    the coarse and unlettered Henry, as the spark-of fire from the
    flint, continued to distinguished him both as a Member of the
    House of Burgesses at Williamsburg, and afterwards as a member of
    Congress. He took from the first a bold and active part against
    the pretensions of the mother country; indeed Mr. Jefferson goes
    so far as to declare that "Mr. Henry certainly gave the earliest
    impulse to the ball of revolution." His most celebrated burst of
    oratory, or rather turn of phrase, was in this very year 1765,
    when descanting in the House of Burgesses on the tyranny of the
    Stamp Act. "Cæsar—" he cried, in a voice of thunder and with an
    eye of fire—"Cæsar had his Brutus—Charles the First had his
    Cromwell—and George the Third"—"Treason!" here exclaimed the
    Speaker, "Treason! Treason!" re-echoed from every part of the
    House. Henry did not for an instant falter, but fixing his eye
    firmly on the Speaker, he concluded his sentence thus "—may profit
    by their example. If this be treason make the most of it!"

    Indolence and aversion to reading seemed almost as natural to
    Henry’s mind as powers of debate. To the last he never overcame
    them. Thus, at his death, in 1799, his books were found to be
    extremely few, and these too consisting chiefly of odd volumes.
    But his gift of speech was (for his hearers) sufficiently
    supported by his fiery energy, his practical shrewdness, and his
    ever keen glance into the feelings and characters of other. Nor
    were these his only claims to his country’s favor. He retained the
    manners and custom of the common people, with what his friendly
    biographer terms "religious caution.—He dressed as plainly as the
    plainest of them," continues Mr. Wirt, "ate only their homely
    fare, and drank their simple beverage, mixed with them on a
    footing of the most entire and perfect equality, and conversed
    with them even in their own vicious and depraved pronunciation."
    By such means he soon acquired and long retained a large measure
    of popularity, and he applied himself with zeal and success before
    any audience, and on every occasion which arose, to increase and
    perpetuate the estrangement between the North American Colonies
    and England.


                                FRANKLIN.

    Dr. Benjamin Franklin is one of those men who have made the task
    of succeeding biographers more difficult by having been in part
    their own. He was born at Boston in 1706, the youngest of ten
    sons. "My father," he says, "intended to devote me, as the tithe
    of his sons, to the service of the Church;" but on further
    reflection, the charges of a college education were thought too
    burthensome, and young Benjamin became a journeyman printer. From
    a very early age he showed a passionate fondness for reading, and
    much ingenuity in argument, but, as he acknowledges, had at first
    contracted a disputatious and wrangling turn of conversation. "I
    have since observed," he says, "that persons of good sense seldom
    fall into it, except lawyers, University-men, and generally men of
    all sorts who have been bred at Edinburgh."

    Young Franklin was at first bound apprentice to one of his elder
    brothers, a printer at Boston; but some differences arising
    between them, he proceeded to Philadelphia, where he soon obtained
    employment, and ere long set up for himself. His success in life
    was secured by his great frugality, industry, and shrewdness. In
    his own words: "I spent no time in taverns, games, or frolics of
    any kind; reading was the only amusement I allowed myself." His
    knowledge and shrewdness,—great zeal in urging any improvements,
    and great ingenuity in promoting them,—speedily raised him high in
    the estimation of his fellow-townsmen, and enabled him to take a
    forward part in all the affairs of his province. In England, and
    indeed all Europe, he became celebrated by his experiments and
    discoveries in electricity. These may deserve the greater credit
    when we recollect both their practical utility and their
    unassisted progress,—how much the pointed rods which he introduced
    have tended to avert the dangers of lightning, and how far removed
    was Franklin at the time from all scientific society, libraries,
    or patronage.

    It has also been stated by no less an authority in science than
    Sir Humphrey Davy, that "the style and manner of Dr. Franklin’s
    publication on Electricity are almost as worthy of admiration as
    the doctrine it contains." The same remark may indeed be applied
    to all his writings. All of them are justly celebrated for their
    clear, plain, and lively style, free from every appearance of art,
    but, in fact, carefully pointed and nicely poised. In public
    speaking, on the other hand, he was much less eminent. His last
    American biographer observes of him, that he never even pretended
    to the accomplishments of an orator or debater. He seldom spoke in
    a deliberative assembly, except for some special object, and then
    only for a few minutes at a time.

    As a slight instance of Franklin’s humor and shrewdness in all
    affairs of common life I may quote the following: "QUESTION. I am
    about courting a girl I have had but little acquaintance with. How
    shall I come to a knowledge of her faults? ANSWER. Commend her
    among her female acquaintance!"

    Whether in science and study, or in politics and action, the great
    aim of Franklin’s mind was ever practical utility. Here again we
    may quote Sir Humphrey Davy as saying of Franklin that he sought
    rather to make philosophy a useful inmate and servant in the
    common habitations of man, than to preserve her merely as an
    object of admiration in temples and palaces. Thus, also, in
    affairs he had a keen eye to his own interest, but likewise a
    benevolent concern for the public good. Nor was he ever
    indifferent to cases of individual grievance or hardship. In the
    pursuit of his objects, public or private, he was, beyond most
    other men, calm, sagacious, and wary; neither above business nor
    yet below it; never turned aside from it by flights of fancy nor
    yet by bursts of passion.

    Among the good qualities which we may with just cause ascribe to
    Franklin we cannot number any firm reliance on the truths of
    Revelation. Only five weeks before his death we find him express a
    cold approbation of the "system of morals" bequeathed to us by
    "Jesus of Nazareth." In his Memoirs he declares that he always
    believed in the existence of a Deity and a future state of rewards
    and punishments, but he adds that although he continued to adhere
    to his first—the Presbyterian—sect, some of its dogmas appeared to
    him unintelligible, and others doubtful. "I early absented myself
    from the public assemblies of the sect; and I seldom attended any
    public worship; Sunday being my studying day."

    Such being Franklin’s own practice, and such his own description
    of it as to public worship, it seems worthy of note that it was he
    who in the American Convention brought forward a motion for daily
    prayers. "I have lived, Sir," said he, "a long time, and the
    longer I live the more convincing proofs I see of this truth, that
    God governs in the affairs of men. And if a sparrow cannot fall to
    the ground without his notice, is it probable that an empire can
    rise without his aid?" But in spite of this most earnest appeal
    the motion was rejected, since, as we are told, "the Convention,
    except three or four persons, thought prayers unnecessary."

    The accomplished American biographer, by whom this last incident
    is recorded, expresses in the same passage deep regret that Dr.
    Franklin did not bestow more attention than he seems to have done
    on the evidences of Christianity. And indeed there are several
    indications that he was less well acquainted with points of
    Christian faith and discipline than with almost any other subject.
    One of these indications, and surely a most strange one, occurs in
    the Private Diary which he kept at Passy during part of 1784. It
    appears that two young American gentlemen had come over to London
    with the view of entering Holy Orders, but that the Archbishop of
    Canterbury refused them Ordination unless they would take the Oath
    of Allegiance. In this dilemma Franklin actually applied to the
    Pope’s Nuncio at Paris to ascertain whether a Roman Catholic
    Bishop in America might not perform the ceremony for them as
    Protestants, and he transcribes as remarkable the natural reply:
    "The Nuncio says the thing is impossible unless the gentlemen
    become Roman Catholics."

    The religious scepticism or indifference of Franklin, which his
    present biographers justly lament, was, however, in his own day, a
    recommendation and a merit with the French philosophists. On the
    other hand, his hostility to England endeared him to the French
    politicians. On both these grounds, as well as from his high
    scientific attainments, he found himself during his residence of
    several years at Paris in no common measure courted, flattered,
    and caressed. A fine verse, one of the noblest which modern
    Latinity can boast, describes him as having plucked the lightning
    from Heaven and the sceptre from tyrants.

    Descending from such lofty flights to the regions of sober
    reality, we may observe that Franklin in his later years, and
    especially in France, adopted to a great extent the Quaker garb.
    He laid aside the huge wig which he used to wear in England, and
    allowed his long white hair to flow down nearly to his shoulders.
    His clothes were of the plainest cut and of the dunnest color. The
    Parisians of that period, ever swayed by external impressions,
    were greatly struck with, and in their writings frequently refer
    to, his venerable aspect, and they compared him by turns to all
    the sages of antiquity. It is also probable that his Quaker-like
    attire may have tended to invest him in their estimation with the
    other attributes which they assigned to the ideal Quaker
    character, as simplicity, guilelessness, inviolable truth.


                               LA FAYETTE.

    It so chanced that in the summer of 1776, La Fayette, still in his
    teens, and serving as a subaltern with the French army, was
    stationed with his regiment at Metz. It happened also that in the
    course of a foreign tour their Royal Highnesses of Gloucester
    passed a few days in that town. The principal officers entertained
    the Duke at dinner, when the conversation turned to the last news
    from Philadelphia and the new Declaration of Independence. Being
    at that period offended with his Court, from its neglect of the
    Duchess, the Duke indulged in Opposition topics, and, in some
    degree at least, took the part of the Americans. The details were
    new to La Fayette. He listened with eagerness, and prolonged the
    conversation by asking questions of the Royal guest. The cause of
    the colonies that had risen against England seemed to him just and
    noble, even on the showing of one of the English princes; and
    before he left the table, the thought came into his head that he
    would go to America, and offer the Americans his services. He
    determined to return to Paris, and make further inquiries. His
    inquiries being mainly addressed to Silas Deane and other zealous
    friends of the insurgents, could not fail to confirm him in his
    first impressions. He became fired with an ardent zeal for
    Republican principles and the American cause. That zeal continued
    ever afterwards—for well nigh sixty years—the polar star of his
    course. That zeal, favored as it was by fortune, adapted to the
    times that came upon him, and urged forward by great personal
    vanity, laid the foundations of his fame far more, as I conceive,
    than any strength of mind or talents of his own. Few men have ever
    been so conspicuous from afar with so little, when closely viewed,
    of real weight or dimension. As a general, it can scarcely be
    pretended that his exploits were either many or considerable. As
    an orator, we look in vain for any high powers of debate. As a
    statesman, we find only an undistinguishing eagerness to apply the
    Transatlantic examples and to act the part of Washington, without
    duly estimating either the immense superiority of Washington’s
    character above his own, or the manifold points of difference
    between America and Europe.

    It was said by Napoleon at St. Helena, that "La Fayette was a man
    of no ability, either in civil or military life; his understanding
    was confined to narrow bounds; his character was full of
    dissimulation, and swayed by vague ideas of liberty, which, in
    him, were undefined and ill-digested." No doubt there is some
    exaggeration in these words. No doubt the late Emperor, at that
    period, was stirred by personal resentment at the hostile conduct
    of the General in 1815; yet it will perhaps be found more easy by
    any admirer of La Fayette to impugn the good faith of the
    draughtsman than the general accuracy of the portrait.

    The fortune of La Fayette was ample, his yearly income being
    little short of two hundred thousand livres; and his connexions,
    as we have seen, were among the first at Court. Under such
    circumstances, Silas Deane felt the vast importance of securing
    him. An agreement was concluded between them, by the intervention
    of one Mr. Carmichael (for as yet La Fayette spoke no English, and
    Deane little French), according to the terms of which the Marquis
    de La Fayette was to join the American service, and to receive
    from Congress the rank of Major-General—no slight temptation to a
    stripling of nineteen! La Fayette was to be accompanied, or rather
    attended, by the Baron de Kalb and eleven other officers of lower
    rank, seeking service in America. He sent, in secret, an agent to
    Bordeaux, there to purchase and prepare a vessel for their voyage.
    Meanwhile he made an excursion of three weeks to London, where his
    kinsman, the Marquis de Noailles, was ambassador. He was presented
    to the King, and graciously received. He saw at the opera General
    Clinton, who had come home on a winter leave of absence, and who
    was next to meet him on a field of battle in America. But, mindful
    of his own hostile designs, he deemed it proper to forbear from
    prying into the military forces of the kingdom, and declined an
    invitation to visit the naval armament at Portsmouth.

    On his return to France, La Fayette bade farewell to his young
    wife, leaving her four months gone with child, and set out for
    Bordeaux. Thus far all had prospered according to his wishes. But
    at Bordeaux he found that his preparations had been discovered and
    complained of by Lord Stormont, and that a LETTRE DE CACHET for
    his arrest was already issued. Nevertheless, he did not relinquish
    his design. He crossed the Spanish frontier in the disguise of a
    courier, found his vessel at Pasages, and there embarked with his
    companions. Towards the middle of June he landed on the coast of
    Carolina; and after a few days’ rest, pursued his route to
    Philadelphia. His reception by the Congress was not at first a
    warm one; but La Fayette declared that he would accept no pay, and
    was willing to serve as a volunteer; and under these
    circumstances, the Assembly fulfilled the terms of the secret
    agreement, and bestowed on him the rank of Major-General.

    At Philadelphia La Fayette saw the American troops for the first
    time, and, according to his own account, was struck with their
    grotesque appearance—with green boughs fastened to their
    hats—coarse hunting-shirts instead of uniforms—and muskets, many
    wanting bayonets, and all of unequal make and size. But he soon
    learnt to think more favorably of these raw levies, when,
    notwithstanding all their disadvantages, he observed their conduct
    in the field. With regard to their commander, his early
    impressions never changed. It was also at Philadelphia, and at a
    dinner-table, comprising several members of the Congress, that La
    Fayette was introduced to Washington. The boy-general found
    himself warmly welcomed by the chief whom he had long admired.
    "When you come to the army," said Washington, "I shall be pleased
    if you will make my quarters your home, and consider yourself as
    one of my family." The invitation thus frankly tendered was no
    less frankly accepted. Thus did a cordial intimacy arise between
    them, Washington at all times treating La Fayette with fatherly
    kindness, and La Fayette looking up to Washington with filial
    regard.

    La Fayette had already begun to speak a little English, and by
    degrees acquired more. But to the last the difficulties of the
    language were a main obstacle, not only to himself, but to every
    other foreigner who served with, or under, the United States. Thus
    there are still preserved some of the ill-spelled and scarcely
    intelligible notes of Count Pulasky, during the short time that he
    served as general of cavalry. Still worse was the case of Baron
    Steuben, a veteran of the school of Frederick the Second, who
    joined the Americans a few months later than La Fayette, and who
    greatly aided them in the establishment of discipline. The Baron,
    it appears, could not teach and drill, nor even swear and curse,
    but by means of an interpreter! He was, therefore, most fortunate
    in securing as his aid-de-camp Captain Walker of New-York—most
    fortunate, if, as his American biographer assures us, "there was
    not, perhaps, another officer in the army, unless Hamilton be
    excepted, who could speak French and English so as to be well
    understood in both."

    La Fayette did not always confine himself to the bounds of his own
    profession; sometimes, and, perhaps, not greatly to his credit, he
    stepped beyond them. Here is one case recorded with much
    satisfaction by himself. He states, that soon after his arrival in
    America, and while attending on Sunday the service of the Church
    of England, he was displeased with the clergyman, because in his
    sermon he had said nothing at all of politics. "I charged him to
    his face," says La Fayette, "with preaching only about Heaven!...
    But next Sunday," continues the keen young officer, "I heard him
    again, when his loud invectives against ’the execrable House of
    Hanover,’ showed that he was ready and willing to take my good
    advice."


                            JOHN HORNE TOOKE.

    His abilities were ill fitted for the profession of a clergyman,
    which indeed he at last renounced, but they highly qualified him
    for his favorite occupation as a demagogue. Between him and Wilkes
    there now arose a violent animosity and a keen altercation carried
    on in newspapers. Descending to the lowest and most selfish
    details, they were not ashamed thus publicly to wrangle respecting
    a Welsh pony and a hamper of claret! Even before the close of 1770
    might be discerned the growing discord and weakness of Wilkes and
    his city friends. At a meeting which they convened to consider
    their course of action, some proposed a new Remonstrance to the
    King, while others urged an impeachment of Lord North in the House
    of Commons. "What is the use of a new Remonstrance?" cried Wilkes.
    "It would only serve to make another paper kite for His Royal
    Highness the Prince of Wales!"—"What is the use of an
    impeachment?" cried Sawbridge. "Lord North is quite sure of the
    Bishops and the Scotch Peers in the Upper House, and could not
    fail to be acquitted!" But although these ardent patriots might
    differ a little as to the means, they were bent on one and the
    same end; and the Remonstrance which was at last agreed upon,
    appears to have been framed by their united wisdom. As thus drawn
    up it teemed with silly vagaries fit only to please the lowest
    order of intellects. Thus it prayed that His Majesty would for
    ever remove from his presence and councils all his Ministers and
    Secretaries of State, especially Lord Mansfield (who by the way
    was not one of them), and that His Majesty would not again admit
    any Scotchman into the administration!


                         THE CHARACTER OF WILKES.

    He was born in 1727, the son of a rich distiller. Early in life he
    set up a brewery for himself, but soon relinquished the wearisome
    business. Early in life also he improved his fortune by his
    marriage with the daughter and heiress of the celebrated Dr. Mead,
    the author of the "Treatise on Poisons." But this lady, being of
    maturer age than himself, and of slight personal attractions, was
    speedily slighted, and he left her with as much disgust as he had
    his brewery. In 1757 he was elected Member of Parliament for
    Aylesbury, but never obtained any success as an orator, his
    speeches being, though flippant, yet feeble. In truth he had no
    great ability of any kind, but dauntless courage and high animal
    spirits. Nor should we deny him another much rarer praise,—a vein
    of good humor and kindliness, which did not forsake him through
    all his long career, amidst the riot of debauchery or the rancor
    of faction. So agreeable and insinuating was his conversation,
    that more than one fair dame as she listened found herself forget
    his sinister squint and his ill-favored countenance. He used to
    say of himself in a laughing strain, that though he was the
    ugliest man in England, he wanted nothing to make him even with
    the handsomest but half an hour at starting! Politics indeed
    seemed at first wholly alien from Wilkes’s sphere; gayety and
    gallantry were his peculiar objects. For some time he reigned the
    oracle of green-rooms and the delight of taverns. In conjunction
    with other kindred spirits, as Paul Whitehead and Sir Francis
    Dashwood, amounting in all to twelve, he rented Medmenham Abbey,
    near Marlow. It is a secluded and beautiful spot on the banks of
    the Thames, with hanging woods that slope down to the crystal
    stream, a grove of venerable elms, and meadows of the softest
    green. In days of old it had been a convent of Cistercian monks,
    but the new brotherhood took the title of Franciscans in
    compliment to Sir Francis Dashwood, whom they called their Father
    Abbot. On the portal, now again in ruins, and once more resigned
    to its former solitude and silence, I could still a few years
    since read the inscription placed there by Wilkes and his friends:
    fay çe que voudras. Other French and Latin inscriptions, now with
    good reason effaced, then appeared in other parts of the grounds,
    some of them remarkable for wit, but all for either profaneness or
    obscenity, and many the more highly applauded as combining both.
    In this retreat the new Franciscans used often to meet for summer
    pastimes, and varied the round of their debauchery by a mock
    celebration of the principal Roman Catholic rites.


                         WILKES’S ESSAY ON WOMAN.

    It appears that Wilkes had, several years before, and in some of
    his looser hours, composed a parody of Pope’s "Essay on Man." In
    this undertaking, which, according to his own account, cost him a
    great deal of pains and time, he was, it is said, assisted by
    Thomas Potter, second son of the late Archbishop of Canterbury,
    who had been Secretary of Frederick Prince of Wales, and had since
    shown ability and gained office in the House of Commons, but was
    (as well became one of Wilkes’s friends) of lax morals in his
    private life. The result of their joint authorship, however, has
    little wit or talent to make any amends for the blasphemy and
    lewdness with which it abounds. As the original had been inscribed
    by Pope to Lord Bolingbroke, so was the parody by Wilkes to Lord
    Sandwich; thus it began, "Awake my Sandwich!" instead of "Awake my
    St. John!" Thus also, in ridicule of Warburton’s well-known
    commentary, some burlesque notes were appended in the name of the
    Right Reverend the Bishop of Gloucester.

    This worthless poem had remained in manuscript, and lain in
    Wilkes’s desk, until in the previous spring he had occasion to set
    up a press at his own house, and was tempted to print fourteen
    copies only as presents to his boon companions. Of one of these
    copies the Government obtained possession, through a subordinate
    agent, and by not very creditable means, and Lord Sandwich holding
    it forth in his hand with the air of injured innocence, denounced
    it as not only scandalous and impious, but also as a breach of
    Privilege against the Bishop as a Peer of Parliament. He likewise
    complained of another profane parody, written by the same hand,
    and printed on the same occasion; this last was entitled, "The
    VENI CREATOR paraphrased." The most offensive passages of both
    were now by Lord Sandwich’s order read aloud to the House, until
    Lord Lyttleton with a groan entreated that they might hear no
    more!

    In the discussion which ensured, Bishop Warburton, forgetting that
    such ribaldries could not really tarnish his character, showed a
    heat which little became it. He exclaimed that the blackest fiends
    in Hell would disdain to keep company with Wilkes,—and then asked
    pardon of Satan for comparing them together! Both the Earl and
    Bishop in their passion would have readily over-leaped the common
    forms of justice. The former, after producing evidence at the Bar
    as to the authorship of Wilkes, wished the House to take measures
    for his prosecution, without the least delay. But the Peers,
    although readily agreeing to vote the two parodies blasphemous and
    breaches of Privilege, resolved, on the motion of Lord Mansfield,
    to adjourn all further questions until the day after the next, so
    as to give Wilkes the opportunity, if he desired it, of alleging
    any matter in denial or defence.


                              LORD THURLOW.

    With all his faults and shortcomings there was that in Thurlow
    which overawed and daunted his contemporaries, and of which the
    impression is not wholly lost even on posterity. It was a saying
    of Mr. Fox, that no man ever yet was so wise as Thurlow looked.
    His countenance was fraught with sense; his aspect stately and
    commanding; his brow broad, massy, and armed with terrors like
    that of the Olympian Jove, to which indeed it was often compared.
    His voice loud, sonorous, and as rolling thunder in the distance,
    augmented the effect of his fierce and terrible invective. Few
    indeed were they who did not quail before his frown; fewer still
    who would abide his onset in debate. Perhaps no modern English
    statesman, in the House of Lords at least, was ever so much
    dreaded. In parliament, as at the bar, his speeches were home
    thrusts, conveying the strongest arguments or keenest reproofs in
    the plainest and clearest words. His enemies might accuse his
    style of being coarse, and sometimes even ungrammatical, but they
    could never deny its energy or its effect. In private life Thurlow
    was remarkable for his thorough knowledge of the Greek and Latin
    writers; and no less for his skill in argument and brilliant
    powers of conversation. While yet at the bar, Dr. Johnson said of
    him to Boswell: "I honor Thurlow, sir; Thurlow is a fine fellow;
    he fairly puts his mind to yours." And after he became Chancellor,
    the same high authority added: "I would prepare myself for no man
    in England but Lord Thurlow. When I am to meet him, I should wish
    to know a day before." Unless with ladies, his manner was always
    uncouth, and his voice a constant growl. But beneath that rugged
    rind there appears to have lurked much warmth of affection and
    kindliness of heart. Many acts of generous aid and unsolicited
    bounty are recorded of him. Men of learning and merit seldom
    needed any other recommendation to his favor. Thus, on reading
    Horsley’s "Letters to Dr. Priestly," he at once obtained for the
    author a stall at Gloucester, saying—what I earnestly wish all
    other Chancellors had borne in mind—"that those who supported the
    Church should be supported by it." Nevertheless his temper, even
    when in some measure sobered down by age, was always liable to
    violent and unreasonable starts of passion. It is related by a
    gentleman who dined with him at Brighton only a few months before
    his death—for I must ever hold that great characters are best
    portrayed by little circumstances—that a plateful of peaches being
    brought in, the ex-Chancellor, incensed at their ill appearance,
    ordered the window to be opened, and not only the peaches but the
    whole desert to be thrown out!


                              EDMUND BURKE.

    In pamphlets, however, and political essays—and even speeches,
    when revised and sent forth singly, may be comprehended in that
    class,—the personal disadvantages of Burke could no longer apply;
    and as regards that class of writings, it may be doubted whether
    he has ever, in any age, or in any country, been excelled. The
    philosophy and deep thought of his reflections—the vigor and
    variety of his style—his rich flow of either panegyric or
    invective—his fine touches of irony—the glowing abundance and
    beauty of his metaphors—all these might separately claim applause;
    how much more, then, when all blended into one glorious whole! To
    give examples of these merits would be to transcribe half his
    works. Yet still if one single and short instance from his maxims
    be allowed me, I will observe that the generous ardor and activity
    of mind called forth by competition has formed a theme of
    philosophic comment from a very early age. It is touched both by
    Cicero and Quintilian; it has not been neglected either by Bacon
    or Montaigne. Yet still, as handled by Burke, this trite topic
    beams forth, not only with the hues of eloquence, but even with
    the bloom of novelty. He invites us to "an amicable conflict with
    difficulty. Difficulty is a severe instructor set over us by the
    supreme ordinance of a parental guardian and legislator, who knows
    us better than we know ourselves, as he loves us better too. He
    that wrestles with us strengthens our nerves and sharpens our
    skill. Our antagonist is our helper!" If amidst so much of
    eloquence and feeling as Burke’s writings display we are desired
    to seek for faults, we shall find them, not in the want, but only
    in the exuberance and overflow of beauties. The palate becomes
    cloyed by so much richness, the eye dazzled by so much glare. His
    metaphors, fraught with fancy though they be, are often bold; they
    seem both too numerous and strained too far; they sometimes cease
    to please, and occasionally border even on the ludicrous and low.
    Of this defect, as of his excellences, a single instance shall
    suffice me. In the "Letter to a Noble Lord," in 1796, Burk
    compares the Duke of Bedford to a lamb already marked for
    slaughter by the Marats and Robespierres of France, but still
    unconscious of his doom, "pleased to the last," and who "licks the
    hand just raised to shed his blood." Thus far the simile is
    conducted with admirable force and humor. But not satisfied with
    his success, Burke goes further; he insists on leading us into the
    shambles, and makes the revolutionary butchers inquire as to their
    ducal victim, "how he cuts up? how he tallows in the caul or on
    the kidneys?" Apart from the beauty of the style, the value, as I
    conceive, of Burke’s writings, is subject to one not unimportant
    deduction. For most lofty and far-sighted views in politics they
    will never be consulted in vain. On the other hand, let no man
    expect to find in them just or accurate, or even consistent,
    delineations of contemporary character. Where eternal principles
    are at stake, Burke was inaccessible to favor or to fear. Where
    only persons are concerned, he was often misled by resentments or
    by partialities, and allowed his fancy full play. The rich stores
    of Burke’s memory and the rare powers of his mind were not
    reserved solely for his speeches or his writings; they appeared to
    no less advantage in his familiar conversation. Even the most
    trivial topics could elicit, even the most ignorant hearers could
    discern, his genius. "Sir," said Dr. Johnson, "if Burke were to go
    into a stable to see his horse dressed, the hostler would say, We
    have had an extraordinary man here!" On other occasions, also, the
    author of "Rasselas" extols him as "never unwilling to begin
    conversation, never at a loss to carry it on, never in haste to
    leave it off." His attempts at wit, indeed, were not always
    successful, and he might be accused of an inordinate affection for
    quibbles and puns. His favorite niece, and latterly his guest, was
    sometimes provoked into a—"Really, uncle, that is very poor." But
    upon the whole it may be asserted, that in social converse Burke
    was equalled by none of his contemporaries and his countrymen,
    except only Dr. Johnson himself and perhaps Lord Thurlow.


We have no more room for further extracts; those we have made illustrate
the temper and the style of the work, and will commend it to the favorable
consideration of American readers. Among subjects treated most elaborately
is that of the authorship of Junius; but Lord Mahon has no new facts for
the vindication of his judgment, that Sir Philip Francis was
unquestionably the writer of the famous letters under that name.

There is an appendix to each volume; and in the appendix of one, and in
the notes of both, are some curious illustrations of the worthlessness of
Mr. Sparks’s editions of the writings of Washington and Franklin. We first
called attention to this subject some five years ago, and after the
changes, &c. of Mr. Sparks had been pointed out in _The International_, a
series of carefully prepared criticisms appeared in the _Evening Post_, in
which the discrepancies between the original letters of Washington were
exhibited to a degree that at once and for ever destroyed the good
reputation of Mr. Sparks in this department. He chose not to take any
notice of the disclosures to which we refer, but it may be that Lord
Mahon’s criticism will secure his attention, and an attempt, at least, for
his vindication. Besides his comparisons of MS. and printed letters in the
appendix, Lord Mahon has several allusions to the subject, of which we
quote specimens:


    "Some samples of the manner in which that gentleman (Mr. Sparks)
    has thought himself at liberty to tamper with the original MSS.,
    will be found," &c.

    "Mr. Sparks has printed no part of the correspondence precisely as
    Washington wrote it, but has greatly altered, and as he thinks,
    corrected and embellished it. Such a liberty with the writings of
    such a man might be justifiable, nay, even in some respects
    necessary, if Washington and his principal contemporaries had been
    still alive; but the date of this publication, the year (1838),
    leaves, as I conceive, no adequate vindication for _tampering with
    the truth of history_."

    "Washington, however, in his public letter to Congress (unless Mr.
    Jared Sparks has _improved_ this passage), says," &c.

    "I know not whether my readers will concur with me in liking
    Washington’s own and though home-spun, excellent cloth, much
    better than the ’Cobweb schemes and gauze coverings’ which have,
    it seems, been manufactured in its place."


A complete errata to Mr. Sparks’s editions of Washington, Franklin, and
Gouverneur Morris, would occupy several volumes; and we do not remember
one instance in which his alterations were justifiable, or in which they
were really an improvement in point of style. The reprobation with which
Mr. Sparks has been visited by the learned and judicious of his own
country and England will be a warning to future laborers in the same
field. The works edited by Mr. Sparks are no longer, we believe, regarded
by historical students as of the slightest value as authorities, and no
faithfulness or excellence which may be displayed in future works from his
hand will retrieve his lost reputation.

These volumes will be reprinted immediately by the Appletons.





FAUST OF WITTENBERG AND FUST OF MENTZ.


It were well if writers on the origin of typography would obey the
injunction of Sir Thomas Browne, who thought it not inexpedient for those
who seek to enlighten mankind on any particular subject, first to acquire
some knowledge thereof themselves, so that the labor of readers should not
so generally be profitless. In an article by Bishop McIlvaine, and another
in Frazer’s Magazine, by an anonymous contributor, the exercise of
_necromancy_ is imputed to Fust, the inventor or supposed inventor of
printing. Nine of every ten persons who write any thing on the subject
fall into the same error; they have something always to say of Fust and
the devil; curious anecdotes to rehearse of the multiplication of copies
of the Scriptures in Paris and elsewhere; spells and incantations by the
inventor of the "black" art to describe, &c. But this is all induced by
ignorance of the facts. John Fust, the putative inventor of printing, was
a shrewd silversmith, and we suspect a knavish one, for without having any
thing to do with the _invention_ of the "art preservative of arts," he
managed to rob another of the credit and profit of it. He was, however,
never in Paris; he was never in his lifetime accused of the exercise of
magical arts; he simply endeavored to make as much money as he could in
Germany by underselling the copyists in the book market. All stories in
which necromancy is attributed to him or to any other printer; all
accounts of the opposition of the priests to typography as an infernal
invention; in fine, the whole popular idea of Faust and the devil, is a
modern contrivance, and originated in this manner: Some bookmaker, about
the year 1580, undertook to write a history of printing; he had an
indistinct recollection of Professor Faustus of the University of
Wittenberg, and in his book blended as many of his adventures as he could
remember with the memoirs of John Fust the printer; and from that day a
succession of ignorant chroniclers have considered two men, of totally
different characters, living at different times, as one individual.

Faust, the necromancer, was born in the duchy of Weimer in 1491,
twenty-five years after the printer is understood to have died. He is
mentioned by Melancthon, Wierus, and many other cotemporary writers, and
was probably in his time not less distinguished as a magician than Agrippa
or Albertus Magnus. It is related of him by Godwin, that he was in his
youth adopted by an uncle, dwelling in the city of Wittenberg, who had no
children. Here he was sent to college, and was soon distinguished by the
greatness of his talents, and the rapid progress he made in every species
of learning that was put before him. He was destined by his relative to
the profession of theology. But he is said ungraciously to have set at
naught his uncle’s pious intentions. He went through his examinations with
applause, and carried off all the first prizes among sixteen competitors;
he therefore obtained the degree of doctor in divinity; but his success
only made him proud and headstrong. He disdained his theological eminence,
and sighed for distinction as a man of the world. He took his degree as a
doctor of medicine, and aspired to celebrity as a practitioner of physic.
About the same time he fell in with certain cotemporaries, of tastes
similar to his own, and associated with them in the study of Chaldean,
Greek, and Arabic science, of strange incantations and supernatural
influences, in short, of all the arts of a sorcerer.

Having made such progress as he could by dint of study and intense
application, he at length resolved to prosecute his purposes still further
by actually raising the devil. He happened one evening to walk in a thick,
dark wood, within a short distance from Wittenberg, when it occurred to
him that that was a fit place for executing his design. He stopped at a
solitary spot where four roads met, and made use of his wand to mark out a
large circle, and then two small ones within the larger. In one of these
he fixed himself, appropriating the other for the use of his expected
visitor. He went over the precise range of charms and incantations,
omitting nothing. It was now dark night, between the ninth and tenth
hours. The devil manifested himself by the usual signs of his appearance.
"Wherefore am I called?" said he, "and what is it that you demand?" "I
require," rejoined Faustus, "that you should sedulously attend unto me,
answer my inquiries, and fulfil my behests."

Immediately upon Faustus pronouncing these words, there followed a tumult
overhead, as if heaven and earth were coming together. The trees in their
topmost branches bended to their very roots. It seemed as if the whole
forest were peopled with devils, making a crash like a thousand wagons,
hurrying to the right and left, before and behind, in every possible
direction, with thunder and lightning, and the continual discharge of
great cannon. Hell appeared to have emptied itself to have furnished the
din. There succeeded the most charming music from all sorts of
instruments, and sounds of hilarity and dancing. Next came a report as of
a tournament, and the clashing of innumerable lances. This lasted so long,
that Faustus was many times about to rush out of the circle in which he
had inclosed himself, and to abandon his preparations. His courage and
resolution, however, got the better; and he remained immovable. He pursued
his incantations without intermission. Then came to the very edge of the
circle a griffin first, and next a dragon, which in the midst of his
enchantments grinned at him horribly with his teeth, but finally fell down
at his feet, and extended his length to many a rood. Faustus persisted.
Then succeeded a sort of fireworks, a pillar of fire, and a man on fire at
the top, who leaped down; and there immediately appeared a number of
globes here and there red-hot, while the man on fire went and came to
every part of the circle for a quarter of an hour. At length the devil
came forward in the shape of a gray monk, and asked Faustus what he
wanted. Faustus adjourned their further conference, and appointed the
devil to comes to him at his lodging.

He in the mean time busied himself in the necessary preparations. He
entered his study at the appointed time, and found the devil waiting for
him. Faustus told him that he had prepared certain articles, to which it
was necessary that the demon should fully accord,—that he should attend
him at all times, when required, for all the days of his life; that he
should bring him every thing he wanted; that he should come to him in any
shape that Faustus required, or be invisible, and Faustus should be
invisible too whenever he desired it; that he should deny him nothing, and
answer him with perfect veracity to every thing he demanded. To some of
these requisitions the spirit could not consent, without authority from
his master, the chief of devils. At length all these concessions were
adjusted. The devil on his part also prescribed his conditions. That
Faustus should abjure the Christian religion and all reverence for the
supreme God; that he should enjoy the entire command of his attendant
demon for a certain term of years; and that at the end of that period the
devil should dispose of him, body and soul, at his pleasure [the term was
fixed for twenty-four years]; that he should at all times steadfastly
refuse to listen to any one who should desire to convert him, or convince
him of the error of his ways, and lead him to repentance; that Faustus
should draw up a writing containing these particulars, and sign it with
his blood; that he should deliver this writing to the devil, and keep a
duplicate of it himself, that so there might be no misunderstanding. It
was further appointed by Faustus, that the devil should usually attend him
in the habit of a cordelier, with a pleasing countenance and an
insinuating demeanor. Faustus also asked the devil his name, who answered
that he was usually called Mephistophiles.

Numerous adventures of Faustus are related in the German histories. It is
said that the emperor Charles V. was at Inspruck, at a time when Faustus
also resided there. His courtiers informed the emperor that Faustus was in
the town, and Charles expressed a desire to see him. He was introduced.
Charles asked him whether he could really perform such wondrous feats as
were reported of him. Faustus modestly replied, inviting the emperor to
make trial of his skill. "Then," said Charles, "of all the eminent
personages I have ever read of, Alexander the Great is the man who most
excites my curiosity, and whom it would most gratify my wishes to see in
the very form in which he lived." Faustus rejoined that it was out of his
power truly to raise the dead, but that he had spirits at his command who
had often seen that great conqueror, and that Faustus would willingly
place him before the emperor as he required. He conditioned that Charles
should not speak to him, nor attempt to touch him. The emperor promised
compliance. After a few ceremonies, therefore, Faustus opened a door, and
brought in Alexander exactly in the form in which he had lived, with the
same garments, and every circumstance corresponding. Alexander made his
obeisance to the emperor, and walked several times round him. The queen of
Alexander was then introduced in the same manner. Charles just then
recollected he had read that Alexander had a wart on the nape of his neck;
and with proper precautions Faustus allowed the emperor to examine the
apparition by this test. Alexander then vanished.

As Faustus was approaching the last year of his term, he seemed resolved
to pamper his appetite with every species of luxury. He carefully
accumulated all the materials of voluptuousness and magnificence. He was
particularly anxious in the selection of women who should serve for his
pleasures. He had one Englishwoman, one Hungarian, one French, two of
Germany, and two from different parts of Italy, all of them eminent for
the perfections which characterized their different countries.

At length he arrived at the end of the term for which he had contracted
with the devil. For two or three years before it expired his character
gradually altered. He became subject to fits of despondency, was no longer
susceptible of mirth and amusement, and reflected with bitter agony on the
close in which the whole must terminate. He assembled his friends together
at a grand entertainment, and when it was over, addressed them, telling
them that this was the last day of his life, reminding them of the wonders
with which he had frequently astonished them, and informing them of the
condition upon which he had held this power. They, one and all, expressed
the deepest sorrow at the intelligence. They had had the idea of something
unlawful in his proceedings; but their notions had been very far from
coming up to the truth. They regretted exceedingly that he had not been
unreserved in his communications at an earlier period. They would have had
recourse in his behalf, to the means of religion, and have applied to
pious men, desiring them to employ their power to intercede with Heaven in
his favor. Prayer and penitence might have done much for him; and the
mercy of Heaven was unbounded. They advised him to still call upon God,
and endeavor to secure an interest in the merits of the Saviour.

Faustus assured them that it was all in vain, and that his tragical fate
was inevitable. He led them to their sleeping apartment, and recommended
to them to pass the night as they could, but by no means, whatever they
might happen to hear, to come out of it; as their interference could in no
way be beneficial to him, and might be attended with the most serious
injury to themselves. They lay still, therefore, as he had enjoined them;
but not one of them could close his eyes. Between twelve and one in the
night they heard first a furious storm of wind round all sides of the
house, as if it would have torn away the walls from their foundations.
This no sooner somewhat abated, than a noise was heard of discordant and
violent hissing, as if the house was full of all sorts of venomous
reptiles, but which plainly proceeded from Faustus’s chamber. Next they
heard the doctor’s room-door vehemently burst open, and cries for help
uttered with dreadful agony, but in a half-suppressed voice, which
presently grew fainter and fainter. Then every thing became still, as if
the everlasting motion of the world was suspended.

When at length it became broad day, the students went in a body to the
doctor’s apartment. But he was nowhere to be seen. Only the walls were
found smeared with his blood, and marks as if his brains had been dashed
out. His body was finally discovered at some distance from the house, his
limbs dismembered, and marks of great violence about the features of his
face. The students gathered up the mutilated parts of his body, and
afforded them private burial at the temple of Mars, in the village where
he died.





SOME SMALL POEMS.


             WRITTEN FOR THE INTERNATIONAL MONTHLY MAGAZINE.


BY R. H. STODDARD.

A PROLOGUE.

  Without, the winds of Winter blow;
  Without, the Winter sifts its snow:
  Within, the hearths are warm and bright,
  And all the chambers full of light,
  And we again are gathered here,
  To greet the advent of the year.

  Pile on the wood, and stir the fires,
  And in our souls the sweet desires;
  And let us frame a mingled rhyme,
  To suit the singers and the time;
  With different stops, and keys of art,
  In quaint old measures, got by heart.

BY THE SEA.

  By the rolling waves I roam,
    And look along the sea,
  And dream of the day and the gleaming sail,
    That bore my love from me.

  His bark now sails the Indian seas,
    Far down the summer zone:
  But his thoughts, like swallows, fly to me
    By the Northern waves alone.

  Nor will he delay, when winds are fair,
    To waft him back to me;
  But haste, my love! or my grave will be made
    By the sad and moaning sea!

WHEAT AND SHEAVES.

  Before me now the village stands,
    Its cottages embowered in bloom;
  Behind me lies the burying ground,
    Its sepulchres in cypress gloom.

  The bells before me ring aloud,
    A pæan for the live and bold;
  The bells behind are tolling low,
    A requiem for the dead and cold.

  The crowd before me tramp away,
    And shout until the winds are stirred;
  The crowd behind no longer move,
    And never breathe a single word.

  Before me many moan, and weep:
    Behind, there is not one who grieves;
  For blight but wastes the standing wheat.
    It cannot touch the garnered sheaves!

FRAGMENT.

  The gray old Earth goes on
    At its ancient pace,
  Lifting its thunder voice
    In the choir of Space;
      And the Years, as they go,
      Are singing slow,
  Solemn dirges, full of woe!

  Tears are shed, and hearts are broken,
  And many bitter words are spoken,
    And many left unsaid;
  And many are with the living,
  That were better—better dead!

  Tyrants sit upon their thrones,
  And will not hear the people’s moans,
    Nor hear their clanking chains;
  Or if they do, they add thereto,
    And mock, not ease, their pains;
    But little liberty remains—
  There is but little room for thee,
  In this wide world, O Liberty!
  But where thou hast once set thy foot,
    Thou wilt remain, though oft unseen;
  And grow like thought, and move like wind,
  Upon the troubled sea of Mind,
    No longer now serene.
  Thy life and strength thou dost retain,
  Despite the cell, the rack, the pain,
  And all the battles won—in vain!
  And even now thou seest the hour
  That lays in dust the tyrant’s power,
  When man shall once again be free,
  And Earth renewed, and young like thee,
    O Liberty! O Liberty!

CERTAIN MERRY STANZAS.

  I often wish that I could know
    The life in store for me,
  The measure of the joy and woe
    Of my futurity.
  I do not fear to meet the worst
    The gathering years can give;
  My life has been a life accurst
    From youth, and yet I live;
  The Future may be overcast,
  But never darker than the Past!

  My mind will grow, as years depart
  With all the wingéd hours;
  And all my buried seeds of Art
  Will bloom again in flowers;
  But buried hopes no more will bloom,
  As in the days of old;
  My youth is lying in its tomb,
  My heart is dead and cold!
  And certain sad, but nameless cares
  Have flecked my locks with silver hairs!

  No bitter feeling clouds my grief,
  No angry thoughts of thee;
  For thou art now a faded leaf
  Upon a fading tree.
  From day to day I sea thee sink,
  From deep to deep in shame;
  I sigh, but dare not bid thee think
  Upon thine ancient fame—
  For oh! the thought of what thou art
  Must be a hell within thy heart!

  My life is full of care and pain—
  My heart of old desires;
  But living embers yet remain
  Below its dying fires;
  Nor do I fear what all the years
  May have in store for me,
  For I have washed away with tears
  The blots of Memory:
  But thou—despite the love on high—
  What is there left thee but to die!





MR. JUSTICE STORY, WITH SOME REMINISCENT REFLECTIONS.(4)


                 WRITTEN FOR THE INTERNATIONAL MAGAZINE.


BY A. OAKEY HALL.

The hurrying pedestrian in Wall-street, or in some of its bisecting
avenues of commercial bustle, if he have time to glance over his shoulder,
is sure to observe a freshly-painted piece of tin (its brief rhetoric
revelling in the pride and pomp of gold leaf alphabetically shaped),
denominated by lawyers "a shingle"—setting forth that some sanguine
gentleman has then and there established himself as an Attorney and
Counsellor at Law.

The sign is by the front door, shining with self-conceit at the passers
by; and its owner is up some weary stairway, yawning over "twice told
tales" of legal lore, copying precedents for the sake of practice, or
keeping hope alive upon the back benches of the court-rooms in listening
to the eloquence of his seniors while _he_ is waiting for clients.

Heaven help many a young attorney in this "babel" of money-getting. The
race should be prayed for in churches: and it should meet with a
consideration as nearly divine as mortals can call up from crowded
heart-chambers.

Well: the sign keeps nailed up: and by and by the sun blisters it, and
dries out the pomp of the gilded letters, and perhaps the owner yawns over
his one case, or sitting upon a front bench in the court-room while case
number thirty is being heard, waits for case nine hundred and thirty,
against which on the calendar that is reposing by the side of the
complaisant clerk in the corner, his name is placed as counsel—shining
there like a pebble on a wide and extended beach.

The Physiology of the Medical Student from facetious pens was reached to
us over the Atlantic by friendly booksellers some years ago; and we should
have had by this time "the Physiology of the young Attorney." He is a good
subject for dissection; there’s plenty of venous humor in his composition;
and oh! a deal of nerve!

Talk of exploring expeditions to the Arctic regions as offering specimens
of courage and prowess; or of scientific excursions into the wilds of
Africa to the same purport! These instances are trivial compared to the
courage and prowess yearly displayed by hundreds of attorneys who plunge
into the ocean of litigation in order to swim towards the distant buoys
which the sun of prosperity always cheers with enlivening beams.

Don’t waste sympathy in this connection for the young Sawbones. _His_
thirst for action can be slaked at pauper fountains. For _him_ the
emigrant’s chamber, the cabin of the arriving ship, the dispensary, the
asylums, the hospitals, and the poor-houses, are always open; and if his
"soul be in arms," there are (Heaven knows) "frays" in this city numerous
enough for any ambitious surgical eagerness.

But for the aspiring attorney where are the avenues open for gratuitous
action? Do merchants nail up promissory notes upon awning posts for
attorneys to seize and put in suit? What "old nobs" of Wall-street are
willing to put themselves "in chancery" to oblige Hopper Tape, Esq., your
humble attendant upon the Where are the courts possessing suits without
counsel?

We may be told of unfortunate wretches who murder in drunken fits to whom
counsel are assigned. But what are ten crusts of bread per annum among a
thousand hungry dogs?

Thou must face the truth, young college boy, who now and then dost stroll
into court-rooms, or who dost lounge away an hour in a friend’s law office
admiring his books and piles of papers—thinking the while of the time when
thou wilt have graduated and obtained permission to hang up thy
pomp-gilded "shingle:" _thou must face the truth_! The counsel who so
attracts thy admiration, in thy court-room lounging, has fought weary
years with myriad obstacles; there are the ashes of many nights and days
of toil and struggle sprinkled upon his hair; he has fought his way (from
where thou sittest a listener to where he stands a speaker), as if through
an Indian gauntlet file. There were a hundred mouths waiting for the first
crumbs which came to his impatient legal digestion; and a hundred envious
heads and hearts to worry him if possible into a dyspepsia over those
crumbs. He has began with an office in a fifth story, and _climbed down_
towards the street. He commenced to hive his honey near the roof! While
out of his office he climbed a professional ladder, the holding on to
which tasked all his powers of physical, mental, and pecuniary endurance.
Face the truth!

Reach me yonder diary and legal register. Two thousand practising lawyers
in the city of New-York! Out of these one hundred are "notables;" fifty
are "distinguished;" twenty-five are eminent.

A large body of them are "conveyancers" growing thin in person and thinner
in mind over deeds and titles; a larger body "attorneys"—getters up and
supervisors of suits—providers of ammunition for "distinguished counsel"
to discharge with loud reports (the said counsel brilliant by the flash:
the attorney obscured in the smoke); many, very many, chained to
"larcenies" at the Sessions, "landlord dispossessions" at the Marine
Court, suits on butcher’s bills at Ward Courts, or "malicious
prosecutions" in the Common Pleas.

Yet there are hundreds of coral reefs and pearls for persevering divers in
this ocean of litigation. Three thousand pending cases every month are
three thousand nutshells where the meat is often fresh and oily, even with
the weary keeping on the calendar for months and years. There are _some_
counsel who pocket fees and costs to the tune of twenty thousand a year.
We know many a Quirk, Gammon and Snap, who realize an undoubted "ten
thousand a year," with no Tittlebat Titmouse for a standing annoyance. And
we can taper off on the finger many who do not realize five hundred a
year, and work like negro slaves at that: they are continually rough
hewing, but no divinity shapes their ends.

Five years of "starvation," and five more years of toil and trouble,
constitute the depth of a lawyer’s slough of despond in New-York; to say
nothing of the giants’ castles to storm upon the way, or the fights with
the Apolyons of Envy. Obviously so!

A man now-a-days will let a young Sawbones advise ice for his child’s
croup, or even experiment with his own much-abused liver, when he would
not intrust a young attorney with the suing a note where ten witnesses saw
the note signed and the "consideration money" paid over. And if the public
really knew how much danger their pockets were in when the "buttons" were
under the control of inexperienced lawyers, the number of "starvers" would
be doubled. What "eminent" lawyer is there who does not look back to the
"practice" of his youth, in perfect terror to witness the mistakes he
made, as the helmsman, who has scudded through the breakers to the open
sea, glances back at the dangers he escaped?

The young lawyers of a year back are, however, five years—perhaps ten—in
advance of the lawyers of this year’s growth. The latter have greater
rivalry in the _hordes_ of practitioners from the interior whom the "new
code" have driven from their _trespass quare clausum fregit_ into the
city. Many of them, too, were men of mark in their ports of departure,
bold and confident in their new haven!

One field, however, in the legal township of this city, offers room upon
its face for tillers—_the field of advocacy_! It is ploughed by some
twenty or thirty, and _harrowed_ by some fifty or sixty. There are a
_dozen_ whom the ghosts of Nisi Prius flock to hear upon great occasions.
And these will long hold the monopoly.

Why?

Because the advocate and barrister must have had vast experience at Nisi
Prius (or the court where matters of fact are investigated by judge and
jury); have acquired a practised tact; have had opportunities of testing
their own calibre to know if they are fitted for emergencies—as the
gunsmith tests his barrels before he "stocks" them. And the young lawyer
has small opportunity afforded him to acquire this tact—to permit this
testing. If he can play "devil" for a few years to some barrister of
extended practice, or scent "occasions" like a blood-hound on the trail of
the valuable fugitive from justice, then he is a happy man, and is in the
fair way of soon becoming a monopolist himself.

Any juryman of two years’ standing will corroborate our statement as to
the openness of the field of legal advocacy. How often has he seen cause
after cause "set down," "reserved," or "put off," because counsel are
engaged elsewhere? How often has he heard the same advocate in four or
five causes in the same week, in the same court, changing positions like
the queen of an active chess-board; profiting his fame and pocket by means
of only a hurried glance at the elaborate brief which his junior has "got
up" for him?

Some one has said that the barrister works hard, lives well, and dies
poor. Regarding the first two conditions of his life there is little doubt
upon the question of truth; the dying in poverty _may be_ problematical.
Yet in a recent print, professing to furnish a list of wealthy tax-payers,
the list contained four lawyers, and only one was a barrister. The
instance proves little, for a lawyer may be very rich and yet pay no
taxes. The assessors may fight shy of his bell-pull as they go their
rounds, because of his penchant to find flaws in their actions and bring
them official discredit in an apparently laborious task, but in reality a
sinecure of an employment.

We have often asked ourselves if barristers have stomachs. Bowels of
compassion they have not, that is certain; but have they stomachs? Say
nine times in a year they dine at the same hour of the day; and then spoon
their soup with the blood all drawn from the digestive apparatus to feed
the brain. Yet they eat like aldermen and drink like German princes....

This much of idle reverie, as, with pen in hand, we laid down the two
bulky and elaborately-published volumes whose title we have taken as text;
this much of glance at the condition of the young and old advocate of
to-day, before we digest our reflections upon the advocate and jurist of
the past.

It was our privilege in our legal novitiate (this is but _a phrase_; for a
lawyer is always in his novitiate) to have been, at the Cambridge Law
School, a pupil of Mr. Justice Story; and thus to have drank at the very
fountain head of constitutional law—that branch of our national
jurisprudence which can least fluctuate. Judges of a day and not of a
generation, or crazy legislators with spasmodic wisdom, may alter, and
overturn, and mystify by simplification, the laws and usages of every-day
life; but it is scarcely to be apprehended that the current of our
constitutional law will ever be diverted from original channels. There is
danger rather of its being dammed into stagnation.

While fully aware of his faults and foibles as a man, and his
idiosyncracies as a judge and a legal writer, we have never wavered in
loyalty to his judicial majesty, or found a flaw in the regard we paid to
his memory. And no book was more welcome to Zimmerman in his solitude than
these volumes regarding the illustrious judge, prepared by his son, were
welcome to our Christmas-holiday leisure.

Joseph Story was the eldest of eleven children, and lived to be indeed the
"Joseph" of mark and renown to his father and brothers. He was born in
Marblehead, September 18th, 1779. His father was a physician, and served
during a portion of the Revolution as army surgeon. He died when the
future judge was twenty-six years of age: yet what the son then was is
best told by one sentence from the father’s will—after making his wife
sole executrix, he recommends her to his son Joseph, adding, "and although
this perhaps is needless, I do it to mark my special confidence in his
affections, skill, and abilities." From the father, our lawyer thus
panegyrized received friendly geniality and broad understanding; from the
mother, indomitable will, vigor and enthusiasm.

Habit of observation and desire of knowledge were the prominent attributes
of his childish character; nevertheless he was ardent in all the sports of
boyhood. To the last he maintained a regard for his honor, which induced
him while yet a lad, and under promise not to divulge the name of a
schoolmate offender, to receive a severe flogging rather than to yield up
his knowledge upon the subject. At the age of sixteen, in the midst of a
Freshman term at Harvard College, he thought of matriculation; but upon
inquiry learned that he must not only be examined upon the works of
ordinary preparatory reading, but that it was necessary for him to expect
a call upon the volumes which his class had dispatched during the past
half year. At first he was daunted, but remembering there yet remained six
weeks of vacation, he addressed himself to the necessary labor—the
severity of which is best evidenced by the fact that in the short time
above mentioned he read Sallust, the odes of Horace, two books of Livy,
three books of the Anabasis, two books of the Iliad, and certain English
treatises. This sounds like the railroad instruction now much in vogue;
but its effects were permanent in value upon his mind. Few readers of his
works will accuse him of a want of proficiency in Latin! But the _often_
reading—the _saepe legendo_ was ever his habit: for he remembered the
couplet:

  Gutta cavat lapidem non vi sed saepe cadendo
  Sic homo fit doctus non vi sed saepe legendo.

He passed muster with the college tutors in January, 1795. Among his
classmates were the (afterwards Reverends) Dr. Tuckerman and Wm. E.
Channing—to the genius and character of the latter of whom he always bore
the most enthusiastic and hearty testimony. Indeed he contested with
Channing for the highest honor. Channing won it, but always gave the honor
himself to Story; while the latter always declared that the former won the
just meed of his genius and scholarship.

Their graduation was in the summer of 1798: and immediately upon quitting
college Mr. Story commenced the study of the law with Mr. Samuel Sewall,
afterwards Chief Justice in the Supreme Court of Massachusetts. Fourteen
hours a day was over his quantum of study. Although sometimes
disheartened, he never surrendered his determination to master the
elements and details of his new profession.

_Studying_ law in those days was a far different thing from its _reading_
now. Then it was _multum_: now it is _multa_. No copious indexes and
multifarious treatises were counted by thousands: no digests (directories
to the streets, the avenues, the fountains and the temples of the
science), abounded by scores. Libraries were carried about in wheelbarrows
and not in processions of vans, when the inexorable moving day came
around. Learned judges were not then compelled to hold courts in remote
villages (resorting hereby to a _coup de loi_), in order to escape the
_cacoethes loquendi_ of case lawyers and presuming juniors. Legal lore was
builded up like the massive stone and hard grained mortar of the edifices
of that olden time—slowly, carefully, but lastingly; not as are builded
now the brick and stuccoed mansions of the snob and parvenu. Not that
abounding treatises and familiarizing digests forbid the idea of the
perfect lawyer now-a-days: only that to-day the law student in the midst
of a large library stands more in need (when thinking of the _otium_ which
accompanies certain dignity), to utter the ejaculation, "lead us not into
temptation"—the temptation of possessing that knowledge which teaches
where to seek for information, and not the kind which is information of
itself.

In 1801 Mr. Story came to the Salem bar while at the age of twenty-two.
After being three years at practice he married his first wife, who died
within two years afterward, plunging him into the deepest grief. During
his courtship he dabbled (as almost every young lawyer does until he finds
that clients are severe critics) in poetry, and wrote a didactic poem of
two parts in heroic verse, entitled "The Power of Solitude." Adopting the
criticism of the biographers—its prominent defects were exaggeration of
feeling, confusion of imagery, want of simplicity of expression, stilted
and artificial style. But though dull as a poem, it shows facility and
talent for versification, breathes a warm aspiration for virtue and truth,
and is creditable to the scholarship of its author.

After the loss of his wife he sought relief from painful thoughts in the
laborious duties of a large and increasing business. His position at the
bar was prominent, and he was engaged in nearly all the cases of
importance. His manner to the jury was earnest and spirited; he managed
his causes with tact (that great acquirement of the successful lawyer:
being, as a distinguished barrister now dead and gone said to Dr. Hosack,
the same sheet anchor to the advocate which mercury or bark is to the
physician), was ready in attack or defence, and possessed great eloquence
of expression. As an advocate he showed a sagacity of perception which no
intricacy of detail could blind, no suddenness of attack confuse, and
which afterwards so distinguished him as a Judge. He was thrown among the
leading lawyers; and undaunted as all young lawyers should be (although
preserving their modesty of deportment and learning), he measured swords
with the most accomplished. Although sometimes vanquished, he always
received honors from even the victors.

It is a prevailing opinion with the junior members of the legal
profession, that their seniors delight in snubbing them; that they are
fond of being discourteous, and arrogant; that they are envious of some
and insulting to others. But it is rare indeed that the seniors err on
other ground in this respect than magnanimity. The industrious youngster,
the self-reliant youngster, the firm but respectful youngster, the versed
in elementary principles among youngsters, are always received with open
arms. Law begets law. If the junior commences a suit a senior may answer
it: and the reverse. The parson and the doctor are in perpetual
interference with the neighbors and brethren of their particular calling.
But lawyers, like bees in the beehive, must of necessity assist and succor
each other, or there will be less honey laid away when the summer is past
and the harvest ended.

Early in his professional career he became an ardent politician. He was a
Jeffersonian Democrat, and at the bar of his residence stood almost alone
in his partisan position. As such a party man he went into the State
Legislature, and became an acknowledged leader. He possessed that great
quality for a leader, the faculty of extempore speaking, joined with the
ability to condense and elucidate the topics he took in hand. But he never
submitted the convictions of his judgment to party dictation; and soon
after his entering the arena of legislative warfare, he bravely stemmed
party tide in advocating an increase of salaries for the State judges. The
latter were all federalists, and it was not to be wondered that the
republicans of that day, who wore in their noses the rings of party,
should shrug their shoulders at the prospect of benefiting political
opponents. But by his firm conduct, and by his confident assertion and
able arguments in favor of the measure, it was carried. And to Joseph
Story, more than any other man, Massachusetts is indebted for the
opportunity of employing ablest judicial officers, without making their
families beggars.

It is the disgrace of our country that its judicial officers are the most
poorly paid of all professions and pursuits. And in every section of the
Union, that distinguished lawyer who accepts a seat upon the bench, must
hold the glories of his honor at a very high price, to surrender his
ordinary professional emoluments for the wretched pittance which the
various States dole out for days of public toil and nights of private
study. We desire to look no further than this Empire State for examples.
This Empire State, with its magnificent resources and proudly developing
energies, should be the last to unite in adjudging its judicial officers
to the labors of galley slaves, and to then pay them by the year less than
a ballet-dancer receives by the month in all its principal cities. Two
thousand five hundred dollars per year is the astounding sum which this
same Empire State pays to its highest judicial officers. If we reverse the
saying of Walpole, and read "_every price has its man_," we may not wonder
if Dogberries and grandmothers are occasionally found upon the bench,
dispensing their honest but destructive platitudes, and their Malaprop
constructions of commercial law, to juries of astounded merchants.

From the arena of State politics, Mr. Story next changed his position to
the temple of national discussions at Washington. His career in Congress
was, however, limited to one session, and to a vacancy-seat occasioned by
a death. He declined re-election; for in the words of his autobiographical
account of this portion of his career, he had lost all relish for
political controversy, and had found that an entire obedience to party
projects required such constant sacrifices of opinion and feeling, that he
preferred to devote himself with singleness of heart to the study of the
law, which was at all times the object of his admiration and almost
exclusive devotion. Public sentiment, however, forced him again into the
State councils at home, where more liberty of professional engagement was
permitted. He was in political life but a brief period again, before, in
his thirty-second year, President Madison pressed his acceptance of a
vacant Associate Justiceship in the Supreme Court of the United States,
which had been declined by Levi Lincoln and by John Quincy Adams, then in
Russia. Although the acceptance involved the surrender of heavy
professional emolument, the high honor, the permanence of the tenure, and
the opportunity of gratifying his juridical studies that he so much loved,
joined in compelling his acquiescence.

"The atrocious crime of being a young man," which had compelled a hatred
of William Pitt the younger, in a former day, was now brought up against
him by many whose party subserviency fairly blushed before his manly
integrity, and by others who envied him his success. But one year at the
Circuit silenced all complaint. And in his thirty-third year he was
acknowledged to be the able jurist whom, at his death in his sixty-sixth
year of age, a whole nation mourned.

Dismissing for the present all consideration of his judicial life, and all
estimate of his ability upon the bench, and passing over nearly twenty
years of his life, we meet him in the possession of his fourth great honor
in life—but an honor which was ever the first prized by him in all his
after career—the appointment of Law Professor in Cambrige Law School.

Mr. Nathan Dane, whose Abridgement of American law in many volumes had
obtained for him the gratitude of the profession at large, and the more
substantial testimonial of pecuniary profit, had determined, about the
fiftieth year of Judge Story’s life, to repay the law some of the profits
which its votaries had bestowed upon him, by donating ten thousand dollars
for the establishment of a new professorship.  He annexed to his donation,
however, the condition that Judge Story should be the incumbent. To the
great delight of the donor, and of the College Fellows, the Judge
assented, and was inaugurated as Dane Professor of Law, with a special
view to Lectures upon the Law of Nations, Commercial and Maritime Law,
Federal Law and Equity—a station which he filled to the day of his
lamented death.

This brief survey of his life presents him then in several public aspects;
as a student, as an advocate, as a statesman, as a judge, and as an
expounder of the great principles of law, which he worshipped with an
idolatry of love.

To speak of his political career would not belong to the scope of our
article. And to sit in judgment upon his judicial career would be our
presumption. Older and abler pens must render their tributes to the extent
and varied richness of his legal lore, which, taking root in principles,
branched into the minutiæ of detail, under every sun and in every clime
where law is recognized as a rule of human action. His judicial fame can
never be increased or diminished by individual estimate. The law of
patents, of admiralty and prizes, the jurisprudence of equity, and above
all, his luminous explorations of what were once constitutional
labyrinths, are monuments as indestructible as the Pyramids. If every
trace of their original oneness be lost, they will yet live in the hours
of future judicial days, in professional acts, and in the guiding policy
of a remote posterity. His library of treatises are legal classics; and
the worst defects which flippant carpers and canvassers of their claims to
merit have discovered in their pages, have been their richness of detail
and polish of learning! And no one can deny that as a judge he was the
very example which ’Hobbes’ in his ’Leviathan,’ carried in mind when he
thus wrote—"the things that make a good judge or good interpreter of the
laws, are first—a right understanding of that principal law of nature
called Equity, which depending not on the reading of other men’s writings,
but on the goodness of a man’s own natural reason and meditation, is
presumed to be in those most who have had most leisure and the most
inclination to meditate thereon; second—contempt of unnecessary riches and
preferments; third—to be able in judgment to divest himself of all fear,
anger, hatred, love and compassion; fourthly and lastly—patience to hear,
diligent attention in hearing, and memory to retain, digest, and apply
what he hath heard."

Not the least amiable phase of the life of Judge Story, was the attention
which he gave to letters and literary pursuits. He was no _mere_ lawyer:
no stringer of professional centos. He never hid his heart with the veil
of dignity; nor smothered his fresh impulses (preserved intact from
worldly rust since boyhood) with the weight of his judicial and
professional labors. While he believed that the law was a jealous
mistress, he knew that this mistress was too stable and sensible to decree
that a gentle dalliance or seasonable flirtation with her maids of
honor—Poetry, or the Arts, or Literature, or Love—was an unloyal act. He
could turn from Grotius to Dickens, from Vattel to Thackeray. He could
digest the points of the elaborate arguments of eminent counsel, and then
turn aside to a gentle tonic from the administrating hand of Smollett or
Walter Scott. Method was his master-key to all the combinations in the
locks of labor.

Twice married he never ceased to eulogize the bliss of domesticity.
Surrounded by loving eyes, the currents of his freshened affection flowed
deeper and clearer every year. How he treasured home and home joys may be
collected in the following lines from his poem on solitude (before
referred to), written in his twenty-second year.

  "Grandeur may dazzle with its transient glare
  The herd of folly, and the tribe of care,
  Who sport and flutter through their listless days,
  Like motes that bask in Summer’s noontide blaze,
  With anxious steps round vacant splendor while,
  Live on a look, and banquet on a smile;
  But the firm race whose high endowments claim
  The laurel-wreath that decks the brow of fame;
  Who warmed by sympathy’s electric glow,
  In rapture tremble, and dissolve in woe,
  Blest in _retirement_, scorn the frowns of fate,
  And feel a transport power can ne’er create."

Touching the poem from which these lines are taken, we remember being
shown the only copy of the published book which was known to exist, by the
family of the Judge. The Assistant Librarian (who was born for his station
in all that regards enthusiastic love of his duties), of the Harvard
College library, showed us, with great triumph, a small sheep-bound
volume, entitled "Solitude and other Poems, by Joseph Story," printed
sometime in the commencement of this century: saying, "the Judge has
burned all the copies he can pick up, and this is only to be read here."
This poem was a sore subject to the author. He viewed it as not only a
blot upon his dignity, but an annoyance to his professional fame. Numerous
critics have laughed at it; but apart from the shorter poems, the main
theme showed much aptitude of poetic imagery, invention, and harmony of
expression. Glance at the following lines, which contain much of the
genuine spark:

  "Till nature’s self the Vandal torch should raise,
  And the vast alcove of creation blaze."

Or this—

  "Blaze the vast domes inwrought with fretted gold,
  The sumptuous pavements veins or pearl unfold,
  Arch piled on arch with columned pride ascend,
  Grove linked to grove their mingling shadows blend."

Or this—

  "Let narrow prudence boast its grovelling art
  To chill the generous sympathies of heart,
  Teach to subdue each thought sublimely wild,
  And crush, like Herod, fancy’s new-born child."

It is highly probable that the learned Justice, knowing his taste for the
poetical and fanciful, and his aptitude at the harmony of language, often
erred in his judicial writings and treatises, by avoiding beauty of
expression, in fear lest the dignity of his subject should be injured by
too much association with the creatures of fancy. We have known most
accomplished lawyers err through this same caution. Our biographer himself
(Mr. William W. Story) has certainly done himself great injustice as a
writer in his work on "Contracts," when, in the pages before us, he
presents us with so much delicacy of fancy and rhetorical finish.
Blackstone in his "Commentaries," Jones in his "Bailment" treatise,
Stephens in his essay upon "Pleading," time-honored Fearne in his
"Contingent Remainders," have shown how grateful and how suitable it is
for the legal readers to find brilliancy of rhetoric adorning the most
profound learning.

But certainly Judge Story possessed to a remarkable degree the faculty of
condensation in his poetical works. His rhyme was not reason run mad; but
reason in modest holiday attire. Where are lines at once so compact and so
searching in their wisdom as the following, penned in 1832, as matters of
advice to a young law student:

  "Whene’er you speak, remember every cause
  Stands not on eloquence, but stands on laws—
  Pregnant in matter, in expression brief,
  Let every sentence stand in bold relief;
  On trifling points nor time nor talents waste,
  A sad offence to learning and to taste;
  Nor deal with pompous phrase; nor e’er suppose
  Poetic flights belong to reasoning prose,
  Loose declamation may deceive the crowd,
  And seem more striking as it grows more loud;
  But sober sense rejects it with disdain,
  As nought but empty noise, and weak as vain.
  The froth of words, the school-boy’s vain parade
  Of books and cases—all his stock in trade—
  The pert conceits, the cunning tricks and play
  Of low attorneys, strung in long array,
  The unseemly jest, the petulent reply,
  That chatters on, and cares not how, or why,
  Studious, avoid—unworthy themes to scan,
  They sink the speaker and disgrace the man.
  Like the false lights, by flying shadows cast,
  Scarce seen when present, and forgot when past.
    Begin with dignity: expound with grace
  Each ground of reasoning in its time and place;
  Let order reign throughout—each topic touch,
  Nor urge its power too little, or too much.
  Give each strong thought its most attractive view,
  In diction clear, and yet severely true,
  And as the arguments in splendor grow,
  Let each reflect its light on all below.
  When to the close arrive make no delays
  By petty flourishes, or verbal plays,
  But sum the whole in one deep solemn strain,
  Like a strong current hastening to the main."

If Mr. Story had never been elevated to the bench it is not likely his
name would ever have become national property. Although plunged into
politics in his earlier life, he was not fitted for the life. His devotion
to the law, and his dread of becoming that slave to party usages which all
public men must necessarily more or less fashion of themselves, would have
retained him in his native state, and made his usefulness sectional. To
the politicians of the school of General Jackson, and to the
administration of that President, he was particularly distasteful. His
tenacious conservatism drew forth from the "old hero," on one occasion,
the remark, that "he was the most dangerous man in the country." Lord
Eldon, with his doubts and pertinacious toryism was not more unpopular
among the reformers in England than was Judge Story—the last of the old
regime of federal judges—with the bank radicals of 1832.

When Chief Justice Marshall died he felt almost broken-hearted. A new race
of constitutional expounders had arisen around him. Brother justices, with
modern constructions, and more liberal notions of national law, were by
his side. In many decisions he was now a sole dissenter. His pride was
invaded; his self-love tortured; his adoration of certain legal
constructions which he had deemed immutable in their nature, was
desecrated. And, for many years previous to his decease, he had
contemplated resigning from the federal judiciary, and living alone for
his darling law school.

This school was his adopted child. He had taken it in a feeble and
helpless infancy. He had given it strength and increased vitality. He
brought it up to a vigorous and useful maturity. It was loved by only a
handful of students when he gave his name and talents to aid its life: but
when he died, a hundred and fifty pupils were its warm suitors, and
hundreds of lawyers over the whole union cherished its prosperity as a
link in their own chains of happiness.

And, although he thought not of it, his labors in the law school secure
for his memory in the present generation a more brilliant existence than
his array of judicial decisions, and his thousands of written pages, can
ever bestow. In some pine forest settlement of Maine, or in some rude
court-house in California, there are lawyers who bring before them every
day his genial smiles and his impressive lectures, looked upon and heard
by them in former times at Cambridge. Over all the Union, in almost every
village, town, and city, are his pupils. Each one of them may sometimes
reflect with rapture upon their days of college life, or remember with
pride their first professional success: but not one of these
considerations of reminiscence is so grateful to his mind as the thought
of his novitiate with Justice Story. Depend upon it he treasures up those
Cambridge text-books, those Cambridge note-books whose leaves
daguerreotype the learning of the eminent deceased, those catalogues of
students where his name is proudly found, as the most valuable portions of
his library. He will never part with them: but they will descend to his
children.

It was our privilege and pleasure also to know Mr. Justice Story at
Cambridge; to have spent days of pleasure in the hours of his society; to
have rendered to his teachings the tribute of delighted attention and
grateful recollection. We, too, have been fascinated with that
conversation, whose variety of exuberance and sometimes egotism, were its
greatest ornaments. In the sunshine of his intellect our mind has sunned
itself, and been warmed into zealous and proselyting admiration. To his
gray-haired teachings we have paid personal reverence, and we unaffectedly
hope to have caught from his society and intercourse a spark of that
professional enthusiasm which is the only true guiding-star of the
plodding lawyer.

The December blasts are hoarsely sobbing to-night through Mount Auburn,
the garden of his mortal repose—the hallowed spot which his eloquence
consecrated in its origin, and which his religious love in his lifetime
sacredly cherished. The snows of winter and the autumn-woven carpet of
fallen leaves are heaped upon his honored grave, the sodded paths to
which, in the glowing spring-time and fragrant summer, are pressed most
frequent with the tread of faithful mourners. Years have passed since that
honored grave was first closed upon him. Longer years have flown since we
were under his teachings. But we seem to view him the same as of yore.
Again the class is assembled in the hushed lecture-room as his familiar
tread is heard at the door; or as the burst of applause, where there is no
sycophantic flattery known or felt, greets his entrance to his seat. Again
we see him adjusting his genial spectacles, and looking around upon the
upturned faces with parental pride. Again we hear his mellowed, although
often impetuous accents, expounding familiar principles of law, and
descending to the consideration of "first things" with as much pride and
carefulness as the artist treats his Rubens or Titian, which for years and
years has hung before him in all lights and shades and in every
combination of position.

Again, we occupy a modest corner of the library while he is holding his
moot court; infusing into the dignity of his manner a marked suavity of
disposition which never forsook him; or he is perpetrating some
appropriate legal joke to his audience, who never played upon his ease or
good nature.

Again, we have stolen into the self-same library while he is holding an
equity term of his circuit, to listen to the words of judicial wisdom
which came from his utterance, exuberant as pearls of fancy from the mouth
of an inspired poet.

Again, we see him at the summer twilight, seated by the trellised portico
of his hospitable and happy homestead, surrounded by family or friends,
enjoying the amenities of life with unaffected pleasure, and sometimes
awakening the garden echoes with his cheerful ringing laugh; or we see him
in the same hour of the day driving under the venerable elms of the
numerous commons, gazing and bowing around with all the pleasure which the
king of the fairy book marked upon his face when the love of his subjects,
among whom he passed, came forth with the evening breeze to bless and
greet him.

And then we pass into "reverie," and live a few minutes of "dream-life,"
recalling to mind the maxims and sayings which were uttered in our
presence; and the many bright exemplars placed before his pupils, and the
kindly greetings which were showered all about—for he was no distinguisher
of persons so long as honor of feeling and uprightness of motive abounded
in his presence.

He is gone! Yet in these pages of biography before us he will always live.
From infancy to the ripened greatness of old age, his life is preserved to
posterity by the hand of his faithful and grateful son, whose duty has
been most ably and interestingly performed. The very minutiæ of his life
are presented with fidelity and modesty of reference. Some may carp at
this; to these let us say with the French proverbialist, _Rien n’est
indifférent dans la vie d’un grand homme; le genie se revéle dans ses
moindres actions_. The straws of every day life mark the direction of the
breezes of individual action.

To the hearts of his pupils we would send this epitaph, and ask them if
aught less tributary could be said of one who was and is to them a father.

Here sleeps the mortality of Joseph Story, who lived his days so well that
he won in a short lifetime an immortality of fame. His career as a _Man_
reflected lustre upon the lustre of an honored father’s manhood, and added
to the virtues which his mother bequeathed him. As a _Politician_, he
rendered obeisance only to his conscience. As a _Lawyer_, he never
disgraced his profession by a thought, and even honored it by his
slightest acts. The colleague of Marshall, the two now shine together as
twin stars in the often contemplated firmament of _Judicial Renown_. Not
selfish of his _Learning_, it is scattered to the uttermost parts of the
earth, and is treasured wherever it has fallen. The learning which he
borrowed from continental Europe he repaid with magnificent interest. In
Westminster Hall his name is associated with Nottingham, Hale, Mansfield,
and Stowell. Counting as dross the wealth of professional eminence, he
became from the love of it an expounder of law to its tyros. He has spread
for thousands of adopted children a banquet of the treasures of legal
lore, and next to reverencing his paternal love they cherish with profound
gratitude the memory of his slightest instructions. While the Union of his
birthplace exists, her citizens will regard with unfeigned admiration his
constitutional teachings.





COLUMBUS AT THE GATES OF GENOA.


                  WRITTEN FOR THE INTERNATIONAL MAGAZINE


BY THE AUTHOR OF "NILE NOTES OF A HOWADJI."

Christopher Columbus was born at Genoa in 1437. In 1851 the Genoese are
finishing his monument.

  I am Columbus: will ye let me in?
  Or Doria in his palace by the sea.
  Proud Andrea Doria named il Principe,
  In your Republic named il Principe,
  By Charles the Fifth, the Emperor of Spain,
  Monopolizes he your meed of fame
  Before the awful Judgment seat of Time.
    Well, and Pisani, the Venetian, he,
  Venice as Doria was Genoa,—
  Why, wide-mouthed Europe clanged their stunning praise,
  And history with their names adorns herself,
  Dazzing the eyes of pious pilgrims, who
  Press flowers from Doria’s garden, dreaming float
  Upon Pisani’s silent waters, and
  Proceed, much meditating human fate.
  And they had pleasures, palaces. They stood,
  And sat, and went, all men admiring,
  Men of a day, in its brief life they lived,
  In its swift dying died. Men of a day,
  Brave, generous, and noble—not enough.
  Voluptuous Venice, Genoa superb,
  Far fascinating meteors that flashed,
  Then fell forgotten. Do I carp? Not I.
  Ye love your own, I mine, mine me, amen!
  O pious pilgrims and ye Genoese,
  Proceed, much meditating human fate,
  And meditate this well.
        A wanderer driven
  By every adverse gust of evil times.
  Wrecked upon barren reefs of blandest smiles,
  Wan victim of a solitary thought
  Too masculine to die unrealized.
  Tortured with tortuous diplomacy,
  Beseeching monarchs still in vain besought,
  Not to give kingdoms but to take a world,
  Unloved of Fortune, best beloved of Hope,—
  When Doria was a lisping boy at school,—
  This wanderer puts forth one summer morn,
  Among the other fishers of the sea,
  And with a world returns.
        Nay! nay! no words.
  Your hemisphere was only half enough,
  And Christopher Columbus globed his fame.
    And now ye build my statue, Genoese,
  After three silent centuries have died,
  When the old fourth is failing, ye do well
  With lagging stones to pile the pedestal,
  And shape my sculptured seeming. Not with wrath,
  Nor scorn. Good God and less with gratitude,
  Be those worn features wreathed. I love ye not,
  Ye are no friends of mine. I did not ask
  A block of marble for my memory,
  But gold to carve my hope. It was not much—
  Nay, had it been your all, was it not well
  To wreck your fortune on a hope sublime?
  And, Merchants! The brave chance; a small outlay,
  And income inconceivable! You chose.
  My stately Spain was wiser. So much gold,
  A little fleet,—some sailors—leaders known—
  If not investment, speculation safe,
  The honor of the enterprise, and chance—
  Always the siren chance—Spain risked and won,
  And Genoa lost a world.
        Sir Advocate!
  I understand your meaning; it were hard
  Fame drafts upon the Future should be paid
  Ere present recognition! ’Twere unjust
  That hope unhazarded in act, were crowned
  With the same coronal that crowns success.
  The starving mariner upon your shore—
  The riddle of the West unsolved—stood not
  In the same light to set his worthiness,
  As when an unimagined Future streamed
  All over him in glory. Yet he stood
  In that light lonely, as in the old dark,
  Lonely, but looking to that light for life.
  Spring-pinioned Hope impetuously flew,
  And saw, through the deep Future shedding balm,
  His fame a tree in flower.
        If that were all?
  If in his vision of America
  He saw but Christopher made famous? Look!
  Not for himself; but for that martyr, Thought,
  Which struggles fainting in a foolish world,
  To ope a gate to wisdom, his heart swelled
  When his fixed eye beheld his soul’s belief
  Fulfilled in Western twilight. Thou my land!
  Shalt thunder to the ages evermore
  That dreams and hopes are holy. Thou shalt still
  The croaking voice of souls that shake at dawn,
  Loving the dimness of their own decay,—
  The lone desire, entreaty and despair,
  The wasting weariness that breeds disgust,
  All woes but Doubt that, wasp-like, stings Hope back,
  There are ye justified. And never Time
  Goldening this page can slip its moral too:
  And never Thought, loving this sweet success,
  But still shall love its own wild dreams the more.
  And still shall brighter gild all skiey peaks
  Of noble daring, with this perfect day.
    Regard your leisure with my monument,
  My Genoese, for centuries to be
  Will yet retain Its reason as to day.
  There, where my hope was builded, stands my Fame,
  The youngest children of the youngest race.
  The wide worlds heritors, arch-heirs of Time,
  Pronounce my name with reverence, and call
  Your sometime outcast, Father. Be it so.
  Andrea’s palace claims repairs perhaps,
  The sculptured letters must be cut anew,
  That on the crumbling girdle of his house
  Proclaim him Principe. That be your task,
  And pare your miserable marble, me.





FEATHERTOP: A MORALIZED LEGEND.


              WRITTEN FOR THE INTERNATIONAL MONTHLY MAGAZINE


BY NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE.

"Dickon," cried Mother Rigby, "a coal for my pipe!"

The pipe was in the old dame’s mouth, when she said these words. She had
thrust it there after filling it with tobacco, but without stooping to
light it at the hearth; where, indeed, there was no appearance of a fire
having been kindled, that morning. Forthwith, however, as soon as the
order was given, there was an intense red glow out of the bowl of the
pipe, and a whiff of smoke from Mother Rigby’s lips. Whence the coal came,
and how brought thither by an invisible hand, I have never been able to
discover.

"Good!" quoth Mother Rigby, with a nod of her head. "Thank ye, Dickon! And
now for making this scarecrow. Be within call, Dickon, in case I need you
again!"

The good woman had risen thus early (for as yet it was scarcely sunrise),
in order to set about making a scarecrow, which she intended to put in the
middle of her corn patch. It was now the latter week of May, and the crows
and blackbirds had already discovered the little, green, rolled-up leaf of
the Indian corn, just peeping out of the soil. She was determined,
therefore, to contrive as lifelike a scarecrow as ever was seen, and to
finish it immediately, from top to toe, so that it should begin its
sentinel’s duty that very morning. Now, mother Rigby (as every body must
have heard) was one of the most cunning and potent witches in New England,
and might, with very little trouble, have made a scarecrow ugly enough to
frighten the minister himself. But, on this occasion, as she had awakened
in an uncommonly pleasant humor, and was further dulcified by her pipe of
tobacco, she resolved to produce something fine, beautiful, and splendid,
rather than hideous and horrible.

"I don’t want to set up a hobgoblin in my own corn-patch, and almost at my
own doorstep," said Mother Rigby to herself, puffing out a whiff of smoke;
"I could do it if I pleased; but I’m tired of doing marvellous things, and
so I’ll keep within the bounds of everyday business, just for variety’s
sake. Besides, there is no use in scaring the little children, for a mile
roundabout, though ’tis true I’m a witch!"

It was settled, therefore, in her own mind, that the scarecrow should
represent a fine gentleman of the period, so far as the materials at hand
would allow. Perhaps it may be as well to enumerate the chief of the
articles that went to the composition of this figure.

The most important item of all, probably, although it made so little show,
was a certain broomstick, on which Mother Rigby had taken many an airy
gallop at midnight, and which now served the scarecrow by way of a spinal
column, or, as the unlearned phrase it, a backbone. One of its arms was a
disabled flail which used to be wielded by Goodman Rigby, before his
spouse worried him out of this troublesome world; the other, if I mistake
not, was composed of the pudding-stick and a broken rung of a chair, tied
loosely together at the elbow. As for its legs, the right was a
hoe-handle, and the left an undistinguished and miscellaneous stick from
the wood pile. Its lungs, stomach, and other affairs of that kind, were
nothing better than a meal bag, stuffed with straw. Thus, we have made out
the skeleton and entire corporcity of the scarecrow, with the exception of
its head; and this was admirably supplied by a somewhat withered and
shrivelled pumpkin, in which Mother Rigby cut two holes for the eyes and a
slit for the mouth, leaving a bluish-colored knob in the middle, to pass
for a nose. It was really quite a respectable face.

"I’ve seen worse ones on human shoulders, at any rate," said Mother Rigby.
"And many a fine gentleman has a pumpkin head, as well as my scarecrow!"

But the clothes, in this case, were to be the making of the man. So the
good old woman took down from a peg an ancient plum-colored coat, of
London make, and with relics of embroidery on its seams, cuffs,
pocket-flabs, and button-holes, but lamentably worn and faded, patched at
the elbows, tattered at the skirts, and threadbare all over. On the left
breast was a round hole, whence either a star of nobility had been rent
away, or else the hot heart of some former wearer had scorched it through
and through. The neighbors said, that this rich garment belonged to the
Black Man’s wardrobe, and that he kept it at Mother Rigby’s cottage for
the convenience of slipping it on whenever he wished to make a grand
appearance at the governor’s table. To match the coat, there was a velvet
waistcoat of very ample size, and formerly embroidered with foliage, that
had been as brightly golden as the maple-leaves in October, but which had
now quite vanished out of the substance of the velvet. Next came a pair of
scarlet breeches, once worn by the French governor of Louisbourg, and the
knees of which had touched the lower step of the throne of Louis le Grand.
The Frenchman had given these small-clothes to an Indian powwow, who
parted with them to the old witch for a gill of strong waters, at one of
their dances in the forest. Furthermore, Mother Rigby produced a pair of
silk stockings, and put them on the figure’s legs, where they showed as
unsubstantial as a dream, with the wooden reality of the two sticks making
itself miserably apparent through the holes. Lastly, she put her dead
husband’s wig on the bare scalp of the pumpkin, and surmounted the whole
with a dusty three-cornered hat, in which was stuck the longest tail
feather of a rooster.

Then the old dame stood the figure up in a corner of her cottage, and
chuckled to behold its yellow semblance of a visage, with its nobby little
nose thrust into the air. It had a strangely self-satisfied aspect, and
seemed to say, "Come look at me!"

"And you are well worth looking at—that’s a fact!" quoth Mother Rigby, in
admiration at her own handiwork: "I’ve made many a puppet, since I’ve been
a witch; but methinks this is the finest of them all. ’Tis almost too good
for a scarecrow. And, by the by, I’ll just fill a fresh pipe of tobacco,
and then take him out to the corn-patch."

While filling her pipe, the old woman continued to gaze with almost
motherly affection at the figure in the corner. To say the truth, whether
it were chance, or skill, or downright witchcraft, there was something
wonderfully human in this ridiculous shape, bedizened with its tattered
finery; and as for the countenance, it appeared to shrivel its yellow
surface into a grin—a funny kind of expression, betwixt scorn and
merriment, as if it understood itself to be a jest at mankind. The more
Mother Rigby looked, the better she was pleased.

"Dickon," cried she sharply, "another coal for my pipe!"

Hardly had she spoken than, just as before, there was a red-glowing coal
on the top of the tobacco. She drew in a long whiff, and puffed it forth
again into the bar of morning sunshine, which struggled through the one
dusty pane of her cottage window. Mother Rigby always liked to flavor her
pipe with a coal of fire from the particular chimney corner whence this
had been brought. But where that chimney corner might be, or who brought
the coal from it—further than that the invisible messenger seemed to
respond to the name of Dickon—I cannot tell.

"That puppet, yonder," thought Mother Rigby, still with her eyes fixed on
the scarecrow, "is too good a piece of work to stand all summer in a
corn-patch, frightening away the crows and blackbirds. He’s capable of
better things. Why, I’ve danced with a worse one, when partners happened
to be scarce, at our witch-meetings in the forest! What if I should let
him take his chance among the other men of straw and empty fellows, who go
bustling about the world?"

The old witch took three or four more whiffs of her pipe, and smiled.

"He’ll meet plenty of his brethren at every street-corner!" continued she.
"Well; I didn’t mean to dabble in witchcraft to-day, further than the
lighting of my pipe; but a witch I am, and a witch I’m likely to be, and
there’s no use trying to shirk it. I’ll make a man of my scarecrow, were
it only for the joke’s sake!"

While muttering these words, Mother Rigby took the pipe from her own
mouth, and thrust it into the crevice which represented the same feature
in the pumpkin-visage of the scarecrow.

"Puff, darling, puff!" said she. "Puff away, my fine fellow! your life
depends on it!"

This was a strange exhortation, undoubtedly, to be addressed to a mere
thing of sticks, straw, and old clothes, with nothing better than a
shrivelled pumpkin for a head; as we know to have been the scarecrow’s
case. Nevertheless, as we must carefully hold in remembrance, Mother Rigby
was a witch of singular power and dexterity; and, keeping this fact duly
before our minds, we shall see nothing beyond credibility in the
remarkable incidents of our story. Indeed, the great difficulty will be at
once got over, if we can only bring ourselves to believe, that, as soon as
the old dame bade him puff, there came a whiff of smoke from the
scarecrow’s mouth. It was the very feeblest of whiffs, to be sure; but it
was followed by another and another, each more decided than the preceding
one.

"Puff away, my pet! puff away, my pretty one!" Mother Rigby kept
repeating, with her pleasantest smile. "It is the breath of life to ye;
and that you may take my word for!"

Beyond all question the pipe was bewitched. There must have been a spell
either in the tobacco or in the fiercely glowing coal that so mysteriously
burned on top of it, or in the pungent aromatic smoke which exhaled from
the kindled weed. The figure, after a few doubtful attempts, at length
blew forth a volley of smoke, extending all the way from the obscure
corner into the bar of sunshine. There it eddied and melted away among the
motes of dust. It seemed a convulsive effort; for the two or three next
whiffs were fainter, although the coal still glowed, and threw a gleam
over the scarecrow’s visage. The old witch clapt her skinny hands
together, and smiled encouragingly upon her handiwork. She saw that the
charm worked well. The shrivelled, yellow face, which heretofore had been
no face at all, had already a thin, fantastic haze, as it were, of human
likeness, shifting to and fro across it; sometimes vanishing entirely, but
growing more perceptible than ever with the next whiff from the pipe. The
whole figure, in like manner, assumed a show of life, such as we impart to
ill-defined shapes among the clouds, and half-deceive ourselves with the
pastime of our own fancy.

If we must needs pry closely into the matter, it may be doubted whether
there was any real change, after all, in the sordid, worn-out, worthless,
and ill-jointed substance of the scarecrow; but merely a spectral
illusion, and a cunning effect of light and shade, so colored and
contrived as to delude the eyes of most men. The miracles of witchcraft
seem always to have had a very shallow subtlety; and, at least, if the
above explanation do not hit the truth of the process, I can suggest no
better.

"Well puffed, my pretty lad!" still cried old Mother Rigby. "Come, another
good, stout whiff, and let it be with might and main! Puff for thy life, I
tell thee! Puff out of the very bottom of thy heart; if any heart thou
hast, or any bottom to it! Well done, again! Thou didst suck in that
mouthfull as if for the pure love of it."

And then the witch beckoned to the scarecrow, throwing so much magnetic
potency into her gesture, that it seemed as if it must inevitably be
obeyed, like the mystic call of the loadstone, when it summons the iron.

"Why lurkest thou in the corner, lazy one?" said she. "Step forth! Thou
hast the world before thee?"

Upon my word, if the legend were not one which I heard on my grandmother’s
knee, and which had established its place among things credible before my
childish judgment could analyze its probability, I question whether I
should have the face to tell it now!

In obedience to Mother Rigby’s word, and extending its arm as if to reach
her out-stretched hand, the figure made a step forward—a kind of hitch and
jerk, however, rather than a step—then tottered, and almost lost its
balance. What could the witch expect? It was nothing, after all, but a
scarecrow, stuck upon two sticks. But the strong-willed old beldam
scowled, and beckoned, and flung the energy of her purpose so forcibly at
this poor combination of rotten wood, and musty straw, and ragged
garments, that it was compelled to show itself a man, in spite of the
reality of things. So it stepped into the bar of sunshine. There it
stood—poor devil of a contrivance that it was!—with only the thinnest
vesture of human similitude about it, through which was evident the stiff,
ricketty, incongruous, faded, tattered, good-for-nothing patchwork of its
substance, ready to sink in a heap upon the floor, as conscious of its own
unworthiness to be erect. Shall I confess the truth? At its present point
of vivification, the scarecrow reminds me of some of the lukewarm and
abortive characters, composed of heterogeneous materials, used for the
thousandth time, and never worth using, with which romance-writers (and
myself, no doubt, among the rest), have so over-peopled the world of
fiction.

But the fierce old hag began to get angry, and show a glimpse of her
diabolic nature (like a snake’s head, peeping with a hiss out of her
bosom,) at this pusillanimous behavior of the thing, which she had taken
the trouble to put together.

"Puff away, wretch!" cried she, wrathfully. "Puff, puff, puff, thou thing
of straw and emptiness!—thou rag or two!—thou meal-bag!—thou
pumpkin-head!—thou nothing!—where shall I find a name vile enough to call
thee by! Puff, I say, and suck in thy fantastic life along with the smoke;
else I snatch the pipe from thy mouth, and hurl thee where that red coal
came from!"

Thus threatened, the unhappy scarecrow had nothing for it, but to puff
away for dear life. As need was, therefore, it applied itself lustily to
the pipe, and sent forth such abundant volleys of tobacco-smoke, that the
small cottage-kitchen became all vaporous. The one sunbeam struggled
mistily through, and could but imperfectly define the image of the cracked
and dusty window-pane on the opposite wall. Mother Rigby, meanwhile, with
one brown arm akimbo, and the other stretched towards the figure, loomed
grimly amid the obscurity, with such port and expression as when she was
wont to heave a ponderous nightmare on her victims, and stand at the
bedside to enjoy their agony. In fear and trembling did this poor
scarecrow puff. But its efforts, it must be acknowledged, served an
excellent purpose; for, with each successive whiff, the figure lost more
and more of its dizzy and perplexing tenuity, and seemed to take denser
substance. Its very garments, moreover, partook of the magical change, and
shone with the gloss of novelty, and glistened with the skilfully
embroidered gold that had long ago been rent away. And, half-revealed
among the smoke, a yellow visage bent its lustreless eyes on Mother Rigby.

At last, the old witch clenched her fist, and shook it at the figure. Not
that she was positively angry, but merely acting on the principle—perhaps
untrue, or not the only truth, though as high a one as Mother Rigby could
be expected to attain—that feeble and torpid natures, being incapable of
better inspiration, must be stirred up by fear. But here was the crisis.
Should she fail in what she now sought to effect, it was her ruthless
purpose to scatter the miserable simulacre into its original elements.

"Thou hast a man’s aspect," said she, sternly. "Have also the echo and
mockery of a voice! I bid thee speak!"

The scarecrow gasped, struggled, and at length emitted a murmur, which was
so incorporated with its smoky breath that you could scarcely tell whether
it were indeed a voice, or only a whiff of tobacco. Some narrators of this
legend, hold the opinion, that Mother Rigby’s conjurations, and the
fierceness of her will, had compelled a familiar spirit into the figure,
and that the voice was his.

"Mother," mumbled the poor stifled voice, "be not so awful with me! I
would fain speak; but being without wits, what can I say?"

"Thou canst speak, darling, canst thou?" cried Mother Rigby, relaxing her
grim countenance into a smile. "And what shalt thou say, quoth-a! Say,
indeed! Art thou of the brotherhood of the empty skull, and demandest of
me what thou shalt say? Thou shalt say a thousand things, and saying them
a thousand times over, thou shalt still have said nothing! Be not afraid,
I tell thee! When thou comest into the world (whither I purpose sending
thee, forthwith), thou shalt not lack the wherewithal to talk. Talk! Why,
thou shalt babble like a mill-stream, if thou wilt. Thou hast brains
enough for that, I trow!"

"At your service, mother," responded the figure.

"And that was well said, my pretty one!" answered Mother Rigby. "Then thou
spakest like thyself, and meant nothing. Thou shalt have a hundred such
set phrases, and five hundred to the boot of them. And now, darling, I
have taken so much pains with thee, and thou art so beautiful, that, by my
troth, I love thee better than any witch’s puppet in the world; and I’ve
made them of all sorts—clay, wax, straw, sticks, night-fog, morning-mist,
sea-foam, and chimney-smoke! But thou art the very best. So give heed to
what I say!"

"Yes, kind mother," said the figure, "with all my heart!"

"With all thy heart!" cried the old witch, setting her hands to her sides,
and laughing loudly. "Thou hast such a pretty way of speaking! With all
thy heart! And thou didst put thy hand to the left side of thy waistcoat,
as if thou really hadst one!"

So now, in high good humor with this fantastic contrivance of hers, Mother
Rigby told the scarecrow that it must go and play its part in the great
world, where not one man in a hundred, she affirmed, was gifted with more
real substance than itself. And, that he might hold up his head with the
best of them, she endowed him, on the spot, with an unreckonable amount of
wealth. It consisted partly of a gold mine in Eldorado, and of ten
thousand shares in a broken bubble, and of half a million acres of
vineyard at the North Pole, and of a castle in the air and a chateau in
Spain, together with all the rents and income therefrom accruing. She
further made over to him the cargo of a certain ship, laden with salt of
Cadiz, which she herself, by her necromantic arts, had caused to founder,
ten years before, in the deepest part of mid-ocean. If the salt were not
dissolved, and could be brought to market, it would fetch a pretty penny
among the fishermen. That he might not lack ready money, she gave him a
copper farthing, of Birmingham manufacture, being all the coin she had
about her, and likewise a great deal of brass, which she applied to his
forehead, thus making it yellower than ever.





SMILES AND TEARS.


                 WRITTEN FOR THE INTERNATIONAL MAGAZINE,


BY RICHARD COE.

  "Art thou happy, little child,
    On this clear bright summer’s day,
  In the garden sporting wild,
    Art thou happy? tell me, pray!"
  "If I had that pretty thing,
    That has flown to yonder tree,
  I would laugh, and dance, and sing—
    Oh! how happy I should be!"
  Then I caught the butterfly,
    Placed it in his hands securely,
  Now, methought, his pretty eye
    Never more will look demurely!
  "Art thou happy, now?" said I,
  Tears were sparkling in his eye;
  Lo! the butterfly was dead—
  In his hands its life had sped!

  "Art thou happy, maiden fair,
    On this long, bright summer’s day,
  Culling flowerets so rare,
    Art thou happy? tell me, pray!"
  "If my Henry were but here,
    To enjoy the scene with me;
  He whose love is so sincere,
    Oh! how happy I should be!"
  Soon I heard her lover’s feet,
    Sounding on the gravel lightly,
  To his loving words so sweet,
    Tender glances answered brightly!
  "Art thou happy, now?" I said,
  Down she hung her lovely head,
  Henry leaves for foreign skies—
  Tears were in the maiden’s eyes!

  "Art thou happy, mother mild,
    On this bright, bright summer’s day,
  Gazing on thy cherub child,
    Art thou happy? tell me, pray!"
  "If my baby-boy were well,"
    Thus the mother spake to me,
  "Gratitude my heart would swell—
    Oh! how happy I should be!"
  Then the cordial I supplied,
    Soon the babe restored completely;
  Cherub-faced and angel-eyed,
    On his mother smiled he sweetly!
  "Art thou happy, now?" I said;
  "Would his father were not dead!"
  Thus she answered me with sighs,
  Scalding tear-drops in her eyes!

  "Art thou happy, aged man,
    On this glorious summer’s day,
  With a cheek all pale and wan,
    Art thou happy? tell me, pray!"
  "If I were but safe above,"
    Spake the old man unto me,
  "To enjoy my Saviour’s love,
    Oh! how happy I should be!"
  Then the angel Death came down,
    And he welcomed him with gladness,
  On his brow so pale and wan,
    Not a trace was seen of sadness:
  "Art thou happy, now?" I said;
  "Yes!" he answered with his head;
  Tears of joy were in his eyes,
  Dew-drops from the upper skies!





FREEDOM OF THOUGHT AND THE LATEST MIRACLES.


Archbishop Hughes, in a late speech attempted an exposition of the
relations between the Roman Catholic Church and Liberty, with special
reference to the position assumed by him and other prelates, that the
Roman Catholics are, not less than Protestants, upholders of freedom in
opinion and in discussion. The interesting brochure of his Grace will be
better appreciated by our readers, perhaps, if we mention a few recent
facts illustrative of the subject, as it affects "authors and books." The
French Roman Catholic Bishop of Lucan has a pastoral in the _Univers_
condemning Walter Scott’s works, without exception. He does the same by
Chateaubriand, and the _Arabian Nights_, and _Don Quixote_—the first as
Protestant, the second as insufficiently Catholic, the third as no
Christian, the fourth as of no religion at all. One unhappy writer of
school-books is condemned because he cites Guizot and Thierry; another
because he blames the massacres of Saint Bartholomew, and thinks they were
caused by "religious fanaticism." But first of all, and more than all, the
bishop condemns "that irreligious" Parisian journal, _La Presse_. "The
number of its subscribers is deplorable; but they are becoming and shall
become less; no priest must subscribe to it. No priest must be seen with
it. No priest must ’ordinarily’ read it." This is all very proper,
according to antecedents, but we should not like it if Bishop Hughes
deprived us of the _Tribune_, the _Herald_, or the _Journal of Commerce_,
all of which are as bad, in the same way, as the _Presse_. Another example
of the prohibition of books, we add from the cyclic letter just issued by
Cardinal Lambruschini, condemning Professor Nuytz’s works on
ecclesiastical law:


    "And further, although we derive great consolation from the
    promise of Jesus Christ, that the gates of hell shall never
    prevail against the Church, our soul cannot but feel excruciating
    pain, upon considering how daring outrages against divine and
    sacred things daily flow from the unbridled licentiousness, the
    perverse effrontery and impiety of the press. Now in this
    pestilence of corrupt books which invades us on all sides, the
    work entitled _Institutes of Ecclesiastical Law_, by John Nepomue
    Nuytz, Professor in the Royal University of Turin, as also the
    work entitled _Essays on Ecclesiastical Law_, by the same author,
    claim a conspicuous place, inasmuch as the doctrines contained in
    the said nefarious works are so widely disseminated from one of
    the chairs of that university, that uncatholic theses selected
    from them are proposed as fit subjects for discussion to
    candidates aspiring to the doctor’s degree. For in the above
    mentioned works and essays, such errors are taught under the
    semblance of asserting the rights of the priesthood and of the
    secular power, that instead of sound doctrines, thoroughly
    poisoned cups are offered to youth. For the said author hath not
    blushed to reproduce under a new form, in his impious propositions
    and comments, all those doctrines which have been condemned by
    John II., Benedict XIV., Pius VI., and Gregory XVL., as well as by
    the decrees of the fourth Council of Lateran, and those of
    Florence and Trent. _He openly asserts for example, that the
    Church has no right to enforce her authority by might, and that
    has no temporal power whatever, whether direct or indirect._"


One of the latest miracles is described is the Paris _Univers_, as
follows—in the most perfect good faith:—


    "There is much talk at Rome of an extraordinary cure which has
    taken a place in the very palace of the Vatican. The following is
    the manner in which this prodigious fact is described,—which will,
    without doubt, become the subject of a judicial inquiry: ’A young
    girl of about twenty years of age, whose family is employed in the
    domestic side of the palace, had contracted a bad fever, owing to
    the loss of her father a little time before, as well as to the
    influence of the season, which has multiplied at Rome diseases of
    this kind, and by which a great number of victims have fallen
    within the last few months. Notwithstanding the enlightened
    efforts of the doctor of the Pontifical ’family,’ and of her
    parents, the young invalid was soon at the last extremity. The
    vice-curé of the palace (which, as is known, is a foundation), a
    member of the Augustin order (Monseigneur the Sacristan of the
    same order is the titular curé), had administered to her the
    sacrament of extreme unction, and had recited the prayer
    recommending her soul. Her last sigh was hourly expected. For the
    sake of enabling our readers to understand the prodigy about to be
    related, it is necessary to state that during the course of the
    malady the vice-curé had several times engaged the pious patient
    to invoke the aid of a venerable servant of God, of the Augustin
    order, whose beatification is about to be declared, and he had
    even mixed in the potions given to such girl some little fragments
    of the clothes of the venerable man. On the other hand, according
    to the usage of religious families, they had carried into the
    chamber of the dying person the Santo-Bambino del’Ara Cœli,
    demanding of these last resources of the faithful a cure no longer
    in the reach of human science to bestow. Let us return to the bed
    of the dying girl, whom we find in a profound sleep, from which
    she shall soon awaken to relate with smiles on her lips how she
    had seen the infant Jesus, having at his side a venerable servant
    of God, clad in the habit of the order of St. Augustin. She adds
    that she feels herself cured, but very weak, and she asks for a
    cup of broth to give her strength. The broth is given, to her,
    although the request is regarded as coming from one in the last
    agitation of dying; but the sick girl, who had felt the action of
    grace, and who knew well that she was cured, rises, throws off all
    the blisters, of which not a trace was left on her body, and on
    the following day repaired to the church of Ara Cœli, at more than
    half a league distant, to thank the Santo Bambino and the servant
    of God, who had restored her to life and health. You may easily
    comprehend the sensation that a fact of this kind must have
    produced upon a population so full of faith, especially on the eve
    of the ceremony of the 21st, which will put solemnly upon the
    altar, in placing him among the blest, the venerable Father
    Clavier, of the Society of Jesus, and at the close of the
    expiatory _triduo_ which has been celebrated at Saint Andre della
    Valle in reparation of a sacrilegious outrage committed against
    the Madonna du Vicolo dell’ Abate Luigi.’"


Of course the girl never was ill at all.

Miraculous agencies, it appears, have been applied to by the highest
powers at Rome, with the purpose which actuates the old ladies who study
Zadkiel. A young peasant girl living at Sezza, near the Neapolitan
frontier, has been for some time in a kind of ecstatic, or, as
non-believers in miracles would call it, magnetic state, and in that part
of the province of Marittima and Campagna, is already known under the
denomination of St. Catherine. Her fame seems to have originated in a
miracle which she worked some time ago on the person of an old woman, who
came to her in great distress because her daughter had died in childbed,
leaving the grandmother of the infant without pecuniary means for its
support. "St. Catherine" is said to have directed the old woman to suckle
the baby herself, assuring her that, before she reached home, she would
find herself in a condition to do so—a direction which the venerable
applicant strictly obeyed, and found her hopes realized! Other
supernatural answers were subsequently given by the saint to various
applications of the neighboring peasantry, and stolen fowls and stray
cattle were recovered by her indications. But the concourse of people at
last grew so great that that the ecclesiastical authorities interfered in
behalf of the sybil, whom they placed in safety and repose within the
walls of a convent, prohibiting, at the same time, any one from coming to
consult her without the express permission of the bishop:—


    "From the accounts of dispassionate spectators," writes the
    correspondent of the _Daily News_, "I am led to infer that there
    is really something extraordinary in the mental or physical
    organization of this young girl, as she alternates between a
    dormant state, resembling magnetic sleep, and a strong degree of
    hysterical or nervous excitability; but whatever may be the real
    cause of the second sight or preternatural knowledge which she
    has, according to public rumor, so frequently displayed, it is
    certain that many persons of this city, including ecclesiastics of
    high rank, have profited by the opportunity of getting a peep into
    the future, and knowing betimes what they have to prepare for.
    Cardinals Lambruschini and Franzoni and the Duke Don Marino
    Torlonia are amongst the number of distinguished individuals who
    have applied to this modern oracle. The advocate Zaccaleoni,
    Monseigneur Appoloni, and many prelates have followed their
    example; indeed, the surprising replies and alarming prognostics
    of the Pythoness so far roused the fears and curiosity of the Pope
    himself, that he caused her to be sent for from the convent at
    Sezza, and brought to Rome, a few days ago, in the carriage of a
    respectable and religious couple, who went there for that express
    purpose. An interview took place between Pio Nono and the
    prophetess, immediately after which she was sent back to her
    retirement. The result of the interview has not transpired, but
    the girl’s revelations were probably similar to those with which
    she has already excited the terrors of her exalted applicants;
    namely, predictions of imminent and sanguinary disturbances, in
    which, though not of long duration, many persons will fall victims
    to popular fury."


The Bolognese paper, _Vero Amico_, which is thoroughly devoted to the
ecclesiastical cause, occasionally devotes some of its columns to war in
favor of miracles, especially as wrought by images. The following is its
account of a recent miraculous change of the weather at the intercession
of the Virgin:—


    "The inhabitants of Tossignano not long ago obtained a new
    demonstration of love and favor from the prodigious image of the
    most Holy Mary, from that extremely ancient image which, saved
    from iconoclastic fury, always engaged the devout worship of their
    ancestors; and which their not degenerate descendants keep as a
    noble and precious heirloom of their hereditary religion, finding
    in it all comfort and support against public and private
    calamities. The late incessant and unseasonable rains having
    hindered the gathering in of autumn fruits, and impeded
    cultivation for the coming year, the active pastor, the very
    revered arch-priest Agnoli, in order to avert so heavy a calamity,
    called the inhabitants of Tossignano together, and with eloquent
    and touching words brought them before the most prodigious image,
    so that, by the intercession of the Virgin, God might restore
    serene weather. For this purpose, on the 7th of October, the flock
    and their beloved pastor met to depose their humble supplications
    at the foot of the altar, sacred to their distinguished
    benefactress; at the first prayer, whilst the pastor was offering
    the propitiatory wafer, a ray of sun gladdened the sacred temple,
    like a rainbow of peace smiling on the assembled faithful, and in
    a few hours all appearance of clouds vanished from the sky! The
    Tossignanesi rightly attributing this to the peculiar favor of
    their protectress, and full of gratitude to her, resolved to
    sanctify the 12th inst. by solemn acts of thanksgiving."


These poor absurdities, so suggestive of pity and contempt, may he
compared with the tricks of Rochester knockers and travelling mountebanks
generally in this country, and no "authority of the church" can raise
them, in the minds of sensible men, to a higher respectability.





THE SONG QUEEN.


Our excellent friend JAMES T. FIELDS, now in Europe, sends us from his
note book the following fine apostrophe to Jenny Lind:

WRITTEN IN A CONCERT ROOM, LONDON, 1847.

  Look on her! there she stands, the world’s prime wonder
  The great queen of song! Ye rapt musicians,
  Touch your golden wires, for now ye prelude strains
  To mortal ears unwonted. Hark! she sings.
  Yon pearly gates their magic waves unloose,
  And all the liberal air rains melody
  Around. O night! O time! delay, delay,—
  Pause here, entranced! Ye evening winds, come near,
  But whisper not,—and you ye flowers, fresh culled
  From odorous nooks, where silvery rivulets run,
  Breath silent incense still.
        Hail, matchless queen!
  Thou, like the high white Alps, canst hear, unspoiled,
  The world’s artillery (thundering praises) pass.
  And keep serene and safe thy spotless fame!





LOVE SONG.


                  WRITTEN FOR THE INTERNATIONAL MAGAZINE


BY R. S. CHILTON.

  White and silent shines the moonlight,
    And the earth, in slumber deep,
  Smiles, as of the silver splendor
    Conscious in her sleep!
  How the moonbeams dance and glimmer—
    Hunted by the summer breeze—
  On the bosom of the river,
    Through the branches of the trees!
  May this night of quiet beauty
    Be the symbol and the sign,
  Of the holy love that wraps us
    In its light divine!
  So shalt thou still reign forever,
    While the glow of life abides,
  As thou now dost, dearest—empress
    Of my heart’s deep tides!





AUTUMN LINES.


                  WRITTEN FOR THE INTERNATIONAL MAGAZINE


BY J. R. THOMPSON.

  Gone is the golden October
    Down the swift current of time,
  Month by the poets called sober,
    Just for the sake of the rhyme.

  Tints of vermilion and yellow
    Margined the forest and stream;
  Poets then told us ’twas mellow,
    How inconsistent they seem!

  Now, while the mountain in shadow
    Dappled and hazy appears,
  While the late corn in the meadow,
    Culprit-like, loses its ears—

  Get some choice spirits together,
    Bring out the dogs and the guns,
  Follow the birds o’er the heather,
    Where the ’cold rivulet’ runs.

  Look for them under the cover,
    Just as the pole-star at sea
  Always is sought by the rover,
    Near where the pointers may be.

  Yet if your field-tramping brothers
    Should not be fellows of mark,
  Leave the young partridge for others,
    Only make sure of a lark.

  Thus shall the charms of the season
    Gently throw round you their spell,
  Thus enjoy nature in reason,
    If in the country you dwell.

  But if condemned as a denizen
    In a great town to reside,
  Take down a volume of Tennyson,
    Make him do service as guide;

  Borne upon poesy’s pinion,
    Rise the heights that he gains,
  Range over Fancy’s dominion,
    Walk hypothetical plains.

  Soon shall the wintry December
    Darken above us the sky—
  Winds their old custom remember
    All, in a spree, to get high;

  And, as they wail through the copses,
    Dirge-like and solemn to hear,
  Nature’s own grand Thanatopsis
    Sadly shall strike on the ear.

  But all impressions so murky
    Instantly banish like care,
  Turn to the ham and the turkey
    Christmas shall shortly prepare.

  None than yourself can be richer,
    Seated at night by the hearth,
  With an old friend and a pitcher
    Lending a share of the mirth.

  Then to the needy be given
    Aid from your generous boards,
  And to a bountiful Heaven
    Thanks for the wealth it affords.





THE PUNISHMENT OF GINA MONTANI.


                   From Colburn’s New Monthly Magazine.




I.


There was much bustle and commotion in the Castle of Visinara. Servitors
ran hither and thither, the tire-maidens stood in groups to gossip with
each other, messengers were dispatched in various directions, and skilful
leeches and experienced nurses were brought in. Then came a long silence.
Voices were hushed, and footsteps muffled; the apartments of the countess
were darkened, and nought was heard save the issued whisper, or the
stealthy tread of the sick chamber. The Lady Adelaide was ill. Hours
elapsed—hours of intolerable suspense to the Lord of Visinara; and then
were heard deep, heartfelt congratulations; but they were spoken in a
whisper, for the lady was still in danger, and had suffered almost unto
death. There was born an heir to Visinara. And as Giovanni, Count of
Visinara, bent over his child, and embraced his young wife, he felt repaid
for all he had suffered in voluntarily severing himself from Gina Montani;
and from that time he forgot her, or something very like it. And for this
he could not be condemned, for it was in the line of honor and of duty.
Yet it was another proof, if one were wanting, of the fickle nature of
man’s love. It has been well compared to words written on the sands. Many
weeks elapsed ere the Lady Adelaide was convalescent; and some more before
she ventured to join in the gayeties and festal meetings of the land. A
two days’ _fête_, given at the Capella Palace, was the signal for her
reappearance in the world. It was to be of great magnificence, rumor ran,
and the Lady Adelaide consented to attend it early on the morning of the
second day. She placed herself in front of the large mirror in her
dressing-chamber while she was prepared for the visit, the same mirror
before which she had sat on the evening of her wedding-day. The Signora
Lucrezia and Gina were alone present. The former was arranging her rich
tresses, whilst Gina handed the signora what things she required—combs,
and the like. Whilst thus engaged, the count entered, dressed.

"Giovanni," exclaimed Adelaide, "Lucrezia thinks that I should wear
something in my hair—a wreath, or my diamond coronet; but I feel tired
already, and wish the dressing was over. Need I be teased with ornaments?"

"My sweet wife, wear what you best like. _You_ need no superficial
adorning."

"You hear, Lucrezia: make haste and finish my hair. Do not put it in curls
to-day; braids are less trouble, and sooner done. You may put aside the
diamond casket, Gina. Oh, there’s my darling!" continued the countess,
hearing the baby pass the door with its nurse. "Call him in." The count
himself advanced, opened the door, and took his infant. "The precious,
precious child!" exclaimed Adelaide, bending over the infant, which he
placed on her knees. "Giovanni," she added, looking up eagerly to her
husband’s face, "do you think there ever was so lovely a babe sent on
earth?"

He smiled at her earnestness—men are never so rapturously blind in the
worship of their first-born as women. But he stooped down, and fondly
pressed his lips upon her forehead, while he played with the little hand
of the infant; and she yielded to the temptation of suffering her face to
rest close to his.

"But it grows late," resumed the young mother, "and I suppose we ought to
be going. Take the baby to its nurse, Lucrezia," she continued, kissing it
fifty times as she resigned it.

The count had drawn behind the Lady Adelaide, where stood Gina. As his
eyes happened to fall upon her, he was struck by the pallid sorrow which
sat in her countenance. Ill-fated Gina! and he had been so absorbed these
last few weeks in his new happiness! A rush of pity, mingled perhaps with
self-reproach, flew to his heart. What compensation could he offer her? In
that moment he remembered her last words at the interview in his wife’s
embroidery-room, and gave her _a look_. It was not to be mistaken.
Love—love, pure and tender—gleamed from his eyes, and she answered him
with a smile which told of her thanks, and that he was perfectly
understood. Had any one been looking on, they could scarcely fail to
become aware of their existing passion, and that there was a secret
understanding between them.

_And one was looking on._ The Lady Adelaide’s back was towards them, but
in the large glass before her she had distinctly seen the reflection of
all that took place. Her countenance became white as death, and her anger
was terrible. "You may retire for the present," she said, in a calm,
subdued tone, to the startled Gina, upon whose mind flashed somewhat of
the truth; "and tell the Signora Lucrezia not to return until I call for
her."

To describe the scene that ensued would be difficult. The shock to the
young wife’s feelings had been very great. That her husband was faithless
to her, not only in deed but in heart, she doubted not. It was in vain he
endeavored to explain all; she listened to him not. She thought he was
uttering falsehoods, which but increased his treachery. Gina had once
spoken of her fierce jealousy, but what was hers compared with the Lady
Adelaide’s? In the midst of her explosions of passion, Lucrezia, who had
either not received, or misunderstood, her lady’s message by Gina,
entered. The maiden stood aghast, till, admonished by a haughty wave of
the hand from the count, she hastened from the room. Later in the day, the
Lord of Visinara quitted the castle, to pay the promised visit. His wife
refused to go. "Mercy! mercy!" she exclaimed, in anguish, as she sat alone
in her apartments, "to be thus requited by Giovanni—whom I so loved, my
husband! my own husband! Is it possible that a man can be guilty of
treachery so deep? Would that I had died ere I had known his
faithlessness, or ever seen him! Shame—shame upon it! to introduce his
paramour into my very presence; an attendant on my person! Holy Virgin,
that I should be so degraded! Sure a wife, young and beautiful, was never
treated as I have been. Lowered in the eyes of my own servants; insulted
by him who ought to have guarded me from insult; laughed at—ridiculed by
_her_! Oh! terrible! terrible!"

As she spoke the last words, she rose, and unlocking the bright green
cabinet, that of malachite marble already spoken of, took from thence a
small bag of silver gilt. Touching the secret spring of this, she drew
forth a letter, opened, and read it:


    "_’To the Lady Adelaide, Countess of Visinara._

    "’You fancy yourself the beloved of Giovanni. Count of Visinara;
    but retire not to your rest this night, lady, in any such vain
    imagining. The heart of the count has long been given to another;
    and, you know, by your love for him, that such passion can never
    change its object. Had he met you in earlier life, it might have
    been otherwise. He marries you, for your lineage is a high one;
    and she, in the world’s eye and in that of his own haughty race,
    was no fit mate for him."


"Ay," she shuddered, "it is explained now. So, Gina Montani was this
beloved one. I am his by sufferance—she, by love. Holy Mother, have mercy
on my brain! I _know_ they love—I see it all too plainly. And I could
believe his deceitful explanation, and trust him. I _told_ him I believed
it on our wedding night. _He did not know why he went to her house; habit,
he supposed, or, want of occupation._ Oh, shame on his false words! Shame
on my own credulity!"

None of us forget the stanzas in Collins’s Ode to the Passions:

  "Thy numbers, Jealousy, to nought were fixed,
    Sad proof of thy distressful state:
  Of differing themes the veering song was mixed,
    And now it courted love—now, raving, calling on hate."

And calling, indeed, upon hate, as she strode her chamber in a frenzy near
akin to madness, was the lady Adelaide, when her attendant, Lucrezia,
entered.

"My dear lady," she exclaimed, bursting into tears, as any crocodile might
do—"my dear, dear young lady, I cannot know that you are thus suffering,
and keep away from your presence. Pardon me for intruding upon you against
orders."

The Lady Adelaide smoothed her brow, and the lines of her face resumed
their haughtiness, as she imperiously ordered Lucrezia to quit the room.
The heart most awake to the miseries of life wears to the world the
coldest surface; and it was not in the Lady Adelaide’s nature to betray
aught of her emotions to any living being, save, perhaps, her husband.

"Nay, my lady, suffer me to remain yet a a moment: at least, while I
disclose what I know of that viper."

The Lady Adelaide started; but she suppressed all excitement, and Lucrezia
began her tale—an exaggerated account of the interview she had been a
witness to between the Lord of Visinara and Gina Montani. The countess
listened to its conclusion, and a low moan escaped her.

"What think you now, madam, she deserves?"

"_To die!_" burst from the pale lips of the unhappy lady.

"To die," acquiesced Lucrezia, calmly. "No other punishment would meet her
guilt; and no other, that I am aware of, could be devised to prevent it
for the future."

"Oh! tempt me not," cried the lady, wringing her hands. "I spoke hastily."

"Give but the orders, madam," resumed Lucrezia, "and they shall be put in
practice."

"How can I?" demanded the Lady Adelaide, once more pacing the room in her
anguish; "how could I ever rest afterwards, with the guilt of murder upon
my soul?"

"It will be no guilt, lady."

"Lucrezia!"

"I have made it my business to inquire much about this girl—to ascertain
her history. I thought it my duty, and very soon I should have laid the
whole matter before you."

"Well?"

"You may destroy her, madam, as you would destroy that little bird there
in its golden cage, without sin and without compunction."

"Oh, Lucrezia, Lucrezia! once more I say unto thee, tempt me not. Wicked
and artful as she is, she is still one of God’s creatures."

"Scarcely, my lady," answered Lucrezia, with a gesture which spoke of deep
scorn for the culprit. "I have cause to believe—good cause," she repeated,
lowering her voice, and looking round, as if she feared the very walls
might hear the fearful words she was about to utter, "that she is one of
those lost creatures who are enemies to the Universal Faith, a descendant
of the Saxons, and an apostate; as too many of that race have become."

"_What_ say you?" gasped the Lady Adelaide.

"That we have been harboring a heretic, madam," continued Lucrezia, her
passion rising; "a spy, it may be, upon our holy ceremonies. No wonder
that evil has fallen upon this house."

"Go to the cell of Father Anselmo," shivered the Lady Adelaide, her teeth
chattering with horror, "and pray his holiness to step hither: this
fearful doubt shall at once be set at rest."




II.


Gina Montani, her head aching with suspense and anxiety, was shut up alone
in her chamber when she received a summons to the apartments of her
mistress. Obeying at once, she found the confessor, Father Anselmo,
sitting there, by the side of the countess. The monk cast his eyes
steadfastly upon Gina, as if examining her features. "Never, my daughter,
never!" he said, at length, turning to the countess. "I can take upon
myself to assert that this damsel of thine has never once appeared before
me to be shriven."

"Examine her," was the reply of the lady.

"Daughter," said the priest, turning to Gina, "for so I would fain call
thee, until assured that thou canst have no claim to the title, what faith
is it that thou professest."

Gina raised her hand to her burning temples. She saw that all was
discovered. But when she removed it, the perplexity in her face had
cleared away, and her resolution was taken. "The truth, the truth," she
murmured; "for good, or for ill, I will tell it now."

"Hearest thou not?" inquired the priest, somewhat more sternly. "Art thou
a child of the True Faith?"

"I am not a Roman Catholic," she answered, timidly, "if you call that
faith the true one."

The Lady Adelaide and the priest crossed themselves simultaneously, whilst
Gina grasped the arm of the chair against which she was standing. She was
endeavoring to steel her heart to bravery; but in those days, and in that
country, such a scene was a terrible ordeal.

"Dost thou not worship the One True God," continued the priest, "and
acknowledge his Holiness, our Father at Rome, to be His sole
representative here?"

"I worship the One True God," replied Gina, solemnly, joining her hands in
a reverent attitude; "but for the Pope at Rome, I know him not."

The Lady Adelaide shrieked with aversion and terror, and the pale face of
the monk became glowing with the crimson of indignation. "Knowest thou
not," he said, "that to the Pope it is given to mediate between earth and
heaven?"

"I know," faltered Gina, shrinking at the monk’s looks and tone, yet still
courageous for the truth, "that there is One Mediator between God and
man."

"And he—?"

"Our Saviour."

"Miserable heretic!" scowled the monk, "hast thou yet to learn that of all
the living souls this world contains, not one can enter the fold of Heaven
without the sanction of our Holy Father, the Pope?"

"I shall never learn it," whispered Gina, "and to me such doctrines savor
of blasphemy. Therefore, I beseech you, dilate not on them."

"Lost, miserable wretch!" cried the priest, lifting his hands in dismay.
"Need I tell thee, that in the next world there is a place of torture kept
for such as thee—a gulf of burning flames, never to be extinguished.

"We are told there is such a place," she answered, struggling with her
tears, for the interview was becoming too painful. "May the infinite love
and mercy of God keep both you and me from it!"

"Thou art hopeless—hopeless!" ejaculated the monk, sternly. "Yet, another
question ere I send thee forth. Where hast thou imbibed these deadly
doctrines?"

"My mother wedded with an Italian," answered Gina, "but she was born on
the free soil of England, and reared in its Reformed Faith."

"A benighted land—an accursed land!" screamed the priest, vehemently; "the
time will come when it shall be deluged from one end to the other with its
apostates’ blood."

"It is an enlightened land—a free, blessed land!" retorted Gina, in
agitation; "and God’s mercy will rest upon it, and keep it powerful
amongst nations, so long as its sons remain true to their Reformed Faith."

"Insanity has fallen upon them," raved the monk, endeavoring to drown the
bold words of Gina,—"nothing but insanity. But," he added, dropping his
voice, "let them beware. Quem Deus vult perdere, prius dementat."

Gina understood not the tongue; but the Lady Adelaide did, and crossed
herself.

"And this mother of thine," sneered the monk, turning again to Gina,
"where may she be?"

"She is dead," gasped Gina, bursting into tears.

"Good!" assented the monk; "then she is meeting with her deserts."

"God grant she may be!" aspirated the maiden, "for she died in the faith
of Christ."

"And who have been thy worthy instructors since?" proceeded the priest.

"I have had but one guide since," answered Gina.

"Disclose the name."

"My Bible."

The monk uttered what seemed very like a scream of passion, and the Lady
Adelaide, as she heard the words, half rose from her chair.

"Be calm, my daughter," interrupted the monk, waving his hand towards the
countess; "I will guard thee from the harm caused by contact with this
heretical being. Desire her, I pray thee, to fetch this Book hither, that
I may glance at it."

"Go," cried the Lady Adelaide, imperiously, to Gina; "bring this Bible
instantly!"

Gina obeyed, and the sacred volume was placed in the hands of the monk.
The Lady Adelaide shrank from touching it.

"Ha!" cried the monk, perceiving it to be printed in the English tongue,
"dost thou speak this language, then?"

"It is familiar to me as my own," replied Gina.

"I will summon thy attendants for a light, my daughter," he remarked to
the Lady Adelaide. And when one was brought, the priest advanced to a part
of the room where the marble floor was uncovered by tapestry, and tearing
the leaves from the Book, he set light to them, till all, both the Old and
New Testament, were consumed, and the ashes scattered on the ground. "It
is the most dangerous instructor that can be placed in the hands of the
people," he observed, complacently watching the black mass smouldering
there. And Gina Montani pressed her hands upon her chest, which was
throbbing with agitation, but she did not dare to utter a word of
remonstrance.

"Oh, father, father!" cried the Lady Adelaide, sinking at his feet, after
Gina had been conducted to her chamber, and giving vent involuntarily to
sobs of agony, "she has dared to come between me and my husband—he has
known her long, it seems. If she should have tainted him with this black
heresy?"

The monk turned as white as the lady’s dress at the suggestion. It was
enough to make him. That that docile and faithful servant of the Church,
the powerful Chief of Visinara, who was ever ready, at only half a hint,
to endow it with valuable offerings and presents—entire robes of point
lace for the Virgin Mary, and flounces and tuckers for all the female
saints in the calendar, not to speak of his donations in hard cash, and
his frequent offerings of paintings, most of them representing the popes
working miracles, particularly that very pious one, Alexander VI.—that
_he_ should have had dissent instilled into him, perhaps even been made
familiar with the principles of this upstart creed! Had his reverence
swooned outright, it would have only been what might be expected.

"It will not be a crime to remove her, father," faltered the Lady
Adelaide.

"_Crime_!" cried the ruffled priest; "canst thou connect the word—in that
sense—with so degraded a being?"

"To remove her in _any way_," persisted the lady, in a whisper. "Yet the
world might call it MURDER."

"No punishment in this world is adequate to her sin," answered the monk.
"And she must not be suffered to remain in it."

"Thou wilt then grant me absolution beforehand, holy father," implored the
Lady Adelaide.

"And what canst thou do, my child?" resumed the monk, smiling upon the
countess. "Thou hast not been used to such work, and wouldst prove a sad
novice at it."

"Too true," she uttered; "my heart is trembling now. Indeed, I could think
but of one way—the moat. And though the order seems easy enough to give, I
fear I should, when the moment came, shrink from issuing it."

"And who hast thou in this castle that will do thy bidding in secret and
in silence? It were better that this deed were not known: and thou canst
not stop tongues, my daughter."

"There are many bound to my interests, who would, I believe, lay down
their lives for me," deliberated the Lady Adelaide; "yet, alas! the tongue
is an unruly member, and is apt to give utterance in unguarded moments to
words against the will."

"Thou hast reason, my child. I but put the question to try thee. I will
undertake this business for thee. That evil one’s sin has been committed
against the Church, and it is fitting that the Church should inflict the
punishment."

"Thou wilt cause her to be flung into the moat?" shuddered the Lady
Adelaide.

"The moat!" echoed the priest. "Thinkest thou, my daughter, that the
Church is wont to carry out her dealings by ordinary means? Signal as this
woman’s sin has been, signal must be her expiation."

"_Can_ it be expiated?"

"Never, either in this world or the next. And every moment of delay that
we voluntarily make in hurling her to her doom, must draw down wrath on
our own heads from the saints on high."

The Lady Adelaide meekly bowed _her_ head, as if to deprecate any wrath
that might just then be falling.

"Thy lady in waiting, Lucrezia, is true, I have reason to believe,"
continued the monk.

"I believe her to be true," answered the Lady Adelaide.

"We may want her co-operation," he concluded, "for I opine that thou, my
daughter, wilt not deign to aid in this; neither do I think thou art
fitted for it."




III.


The castle was wrapped in silence, it being past the hour at which the
household retired to repose. Gina Montani was in her nightdress, though as
yet she had not touched her hair, which remained in long curls, as she had
worn it in the day. Suspense and agitation caused her to linger, and she
sat at her dressing-table in a musing attitude, her head resting on her
hand, wondering what would be the ending to all that the day had brought
forth. She had dismissed her attendant some time before. With a deep sigh
she rose to continue her preparations for rest, when the door softly
opened, and the Signora Lucrezia appeared.

"You need not prepare yourself for bed," she observed, in a low, distinct
whisper; "another sort of bed is preparing for you."

"What do you mean?" demanded the startled girl.

"That you are this night to die."

Gina shrieked.

"I may tell you," interrupted the lady, "that screams and resistance will
be wholly useless. Your doom is irrevocable, therefore it may save you
trouble to be silent."

"You are speaking falsely to me. I have done nothing to deserve death."

"Equivocation will be alike unavailing," repeated Lucrezia. "And if you
ask what you have done—you have dared to step with your ill-placed passion
between my lord and the Lady Adelaide: you have brought discredit upon the
long-upheld religion of this house."

"I have disturbed no one’s faith," returned Gina. "I wish to disturb none.
It is true that I love Giovanni, Count di Visinara, but I loved him long
ere he saw the Lady Adelaide."

"What!" cried the signora, her cheeks inflamed, and her brow darkening,
"do you dare to avow your shame to my face?"

"It is no shame," answered Gina, sadly; there is nothing of guilt in such
a love as mine."

"Follow me," repeated Lucrezia. "You have no time to waste in
lamentations."

"By whose orders do I die?" demanded the indignant girl. "Not by _his_;
and no one else has a right to condemn me."

Lucrezia expected this, and was prepared. Alas, that the Lord of Visinara
should that day have left his signet ring behind him!

"Do you know this ring!" demanded Lucrezia, holding out the jewel.

"Too well. It is the Count of Visinara’s."

"You may then know who has condemned you."

"Oh, Giovanni!" wailed Gina, as she sank prostrate on the floor in her
anguish, "this from you!" All idea of resistance vanished with the thought
that it was him she so loved who doomed her to destruction. "I thought he
was still at the Capella Palace," she inquired, looking up at Lucrezia, a
doubt possibly finding its way to her heart. "When did he return?"

"I came not to waste the moments in idle words," returned Lucrezia, as she
prepared to utter the falsehood; "it is sufficient for you to know that he
_has_ returned, and has given the orders that you seem inclined to
resist."

"Implore him to come to me for one moment, for a last farewell."

"I may not ask it. He is with the Lady Adelaide."

"First, my happiness, then, my life, sacrificed to appease the Lady
Adelaide! Oh, Giovanni! false, but dear Giovanni—"

"I have no orders to call those who will use violence," interrupted the
signora, "but I must do so if you delay to follow me."

"I am about to dress myself," returned Gina.

"The dress you have on will serve as well as another—and better, for a
night-gown bears some resemblance to a shroud."

"One moment for prayer," was the next imploring petition.

"Prayer for you!" broke contemptuously from the signora.

"A single moment for prayer," reiterated the victim. "If I am, indeed,
about to meet my Maker, I stand awfully in need of it; for I have of late
worshipped but one, but it has not been Him."

"Prayer for _you_, a _heretic_!" repeated Lucrezia; "you may as well offer
it up to blocks of wood or stone. The creed you profess forfeits all
inheritance for you in heaven."

Yet still Gina repeated it—"A few moments for prayer, in mercy!"

"Then pray away where you are going," returned Lucrezia, impatiently. "You
will have time enough, and to spare—minutes, and hours, and days,
perhaps."

The signora evidently took a savage pleasure in urging on the death of
Gina Montani. What could be the reason? Women in general are not so
frightfully cruel. The motive was, that she herself loved the count. As
Bianca had said, when watching the bridal cavalcade, could any be brought
into daily contact with one so attractive and not learn to love him? so it
had proved with Lucrezia. Being the favorite attendant of her mistress,
she was much with her, and consequently daily and frequently in the
company of Giovanni. He had many a gay word and passing jest for her, for
he was by nature a gallant, free-spoken man; and this had its effect.
Whilst he never glanced a thought towards her but as one necessary to wait
upon his wife, he became to her heart dangerously dear; and excessively
jealous had she been of Gina ever since she had heard the conversation in
the embroidery-room. Pushing the unfortunate girl on before her, Lucrezia
silently passed from Gina’s bed-chamber to the secret passages, plenty of
which might be found in the castle. She bore a lantern in her hand, which
emitted a dim, uncertain light. At length they came to a passage, a little
beyond the chapel, far removed from the habited apartments; and in the
middle of this were two male forms, busily occupied at work of some
description. A lantern, similar to the one Lucrezia carried, was hanging
high up against the opposite wall; another stood on the ground. Gina
stopped and shivered, but Lucrezia touched her arm, and she walked on.
They were nearing the men, who were habited as monks, and their faces
shielded beneath their cowls, when the signora halted and pressed her hand
upon her brow, as if in thought. Presently she turned to Gina. A second
lie was in her mouth; but how was the ill-fated young lady to know it?
"_He_ sent you a message," she whispered. "It is his last request to you.
Will you receive it?" The unhappy victim looked up eagerly.

"He requests, then, by his love for you—by the remembrance of the happy
moments you once spent together, that you neither resist nor scream."

Her heart was too full to speak; but she bowed her head in acquiescence.
Lucrezia moved to go on. "How is my life to be taken? By the dagger? By
blows?"

"By neither—by nothing. Not a hair of your head will be touched."

"Ah! I might have guessed. It is by poison."

"It will be taken by _nothing_, I tell you. Why do you not listen to me?"

"You speak in riddles," said Gina, faintly. "But I will bear my fate,
whatever it may be."

"And in silence? _He_ asks it by your mutual love."

"All, all, for his sake," she answered. "Tell him, as I have loved, so
will I obey him to the last."

Lucrezia walked on, and Gina followed. She saw and understood the manner
of her death, but, faithful to the imagined wish of her lover, she uttered
neither remonstrance nor cry. The clock was upon the stroke of one, when
smothered groans of fear and anguish told that her punishment had begun;
but no louder sound broke the midnight silence, or carried the appalling
deed to the inhabitants of the castle. An hour passed before all was
completed: they were long in doing their deed of vengeance; and, when it
was over, Gina Montani had been removed from the world forever.

"Madame, she is gone!" was the salutation of Lucrezia, her teeth
chattering, and her face the hue of a corpse, when she entered the chamber
of her mistress.

The Lady Adelaide had not retired to rest. She was pacing her apartment in
unutterable misery. The social conditions of life, its forms and objects,
were to her as nothing since her terrible awaking to reality.

Morning had dawned before the return of the Lord of Visinara. He was
fatigued both in body and mind, and, throwing himself upon a couch, slept
for some hours. And he probably would have rested longer, had not an
unusual disturbance and commotion in his household aroused him. They were
telling a strange tale: one that, for the moment, drove the life-blood
away from his heart. It was, that the wicked dealings of Gina Montani with
Satan had been brought to light on the previous day. The holy Father
Anselmo had taxed her with her guilt, and she had openly confessed all
without reserve; and that the Evil One had appeared in the night, and had
run away with her—a just reward.

In those times, a reputed visit of the devil in _propria persona_ would
have been likely to obtain more credence than it could in these: but it
would probably be going too far to say that the Lord of Visinara
participated in the belief of his horror-stricken household. Certain it
is, he caused minute inquiries to be made, although at the express
disapprobation of the spiritual directors of the neighboring monastery,
some of whom were attached to the services of his chapel, and pointed out
to him the grievous sin it was thus to be solicitous about the fate of an
avowed heretic. But he could learn nothing. The maid who waited on her
testified that she assisted Gina to undress on the previous night. In
proof of which, the garments she had taken off were found in the chamber.
The remainder of her clothes were in their places undisturbed; the only
article missing being a nightdress, which the attendant in question said
she saw her put on; and her bed had not been slept in. Giovanni spoke to
his wife, but she observed a haughty silence, and it was useless to
question her. He had the moat dragged, and the neighborhood for miles
round scoured, but no tidings could be obtained. Yet, strange to say, in
passing on that first morning through the remote corridors, he fancied he
heard her voice pronounce his name in a tone of imploring agony. He
searched in every nook and corner, but found nothing, and soon thought no
more of it, except to marvel how his imagination could so have deceived
him.

After a time, peace was restored between the count and the Lady Adelaide;
but all bliss for her, all mutual confidence, had ceased for ever.




IV.


It was midnight. In the nursery at the castle sat the head nurse, and on
her lap was the dying heir of Visinara, now eight or ten months old. Until
nine days previous, he had been a healthy child, but, from that time, a
wasting fever had attacked him, and now he was ill unto death. The Lady
Adelaide, her eyes blinded with tears, knelt beside him, gazing on his
colorless face. The count himself was gently rubbing his little hands to
try and excite some warmth in them.

"Do you not think he looks a little, a _very_ little better?" demanded the
lady, anxiously.

The nurse hesitated. She did not think so, but she was unwilling to say
what she thought.

"His hands—are they any warmer, Giovanni?"

The count shook his head, and the nurse spoke. "There will be hope, madam,
if this last medicine should take effect."

The Lady Adelaide pressed her lips upon the infant’s forehead, and burst
into tears.

"You will be ill, Adelaide," said her husband. "This incessant watching is
bad for you. Let me persuade you to take rest."

She motioned in the negative.

"Indeed, madam, but you ought to do so," interrupted Lucrezia, who was
present: "these many nights you have passed without sleep; and your health
so delicate!"

"Lie down—lie down, my love," interposed her husband, "if only for a short
time."

Again she refused; but at length they induced her to comply, her husband
promising to watch over the child, and to let her know if there should be
the slightest change in him. He passed his arms round his wife to lead her
from the chamber, for she was painfully weak; but they had scarcely gone
ten steps from the door, when a prolonged, shrill scream, as of one in
unutterable terror, reached their ears. They rushed back again. The nurse
sat, still supporting the child, but with her eyes dilating and fixed on
one corner of the room, and her face rigid with horror. It was she who had
screamed.

"My child! my child!" groaned the Lady Adelaide.

"Nurse, what in the name of the Holy Virgin is the matter?" exclaimed the
count, perceiving no alteration in the infant. "You look as if you had
seen a spectre!"

"I have seen one," shuddered the nurse.

"What _have_ you been dreaming of?" he returned, angrily.

"As true as that we are all assembled here, my lord," continued the nurse,
solemnly, "I saw the spirit of Gina Montani!"

A change came over the Lord of Visinara’s countenance, but he spoke not;
whilst the Lady Adelaide clung to her husband in fear, and Lucrezia darted
into the midst of the group, and laid hold of the nurse’s chair.

"What absurdity!" uttered the count, recovering himself. "How could such
an idea enter your head?"

"Were it the last word I had to speak, my lord," continued the woman, "and
to my dying day, I will maintain what I assert. I saw but now the ghost of
Gina Montani. It was in a night-dress, and stood _there_, far away, where
the lamp casts its shade."

"Nonsense!" said the count abstractedly. "Pray did you see anything?" he
continued, banteringly, to Lucrezia, and to another attendant who was in
the room. They answered that they had not: but Lucrezia was white, and
shook convulsively. A wild, frantic sob, burst from the Lady Adelaide. The
child was dead!




V.


Many months again slipped by, with little to distinguish them save the
decreasing strength of the Lady Adelaide. She had been wasting slowly
since the shock given her heart at discovering her husband’s love for Gina
Montani. She loved him passionately, and she _knew_ her love was
unrequited; for affections once bestowed, as his had been, can never be
recalled and given to another. The illness of the mind had its effect upon
the body; she became worse and worse, and, after the birth of a second
child, it was evident that she was sinking rapidly. She lay upon the
stately bed in her magnificent chamber, about which were scattered many
articles consecrated to her girlhood, or to her happy bridal, and, as
such, precious. Seated by the bedside was her husband; one hand clasping
hers, in the other he held a cambric handkerchief, with which he
occasionally wiped her languid brow. "Bear with me a little longer," my
husband—but a short time."

"Bear with you, Adelaide!" he repeated; "would to the Blessed Virgin you
might be spared to me!"

"It is impossible," she sighed, pressing his hand upon her wasted bosom.

"Adelaide"—he hesitated; after awhile—"I would ask you a question—a
question which, if you can, I entreat that you will answer."

She looked at him inquiringly, and he resumed, in a low voice: "What
became of Gina Montani?"

Even amidst the pallid hue of death, a flush appeared in her cheeks at the
words. She gasped once or twice with agitation before she could speak.
"Bring not up that subject now; the only one that came between us to
disturb our peace—the one to which I am indebted for my death. I am lying
dying before you, Giovanni, and you can think but of her."

"My love, why will you so misunderstand me?"

"These thoughts excite me dreadfully," she continued. "Let us banish them,
if you would have peace visit me in dying."

"May your death be far away yet," he sighed.

"Ah! I trust so—a little longer—a few days with you and my dear child!"
And the count clasped his hands together as he silently echoed her prayer.

"Will you reach me my small casket?" she continued; "I put a few trinkets
in it, yesterday, to leave as tokens of remembrance. I must show you how I
wish them bestowed."

He rose from his seat, and looked about the room; but he could not find
the jewelcase. "The small one, Giovanni," she said; "not my diamond
casket. I thought it was in the mosaic cabinet. Or, perhaps, they may have
taken it into my dressing-room."

He went into the adjoining apartment, and had found the missing casket,
when a shriek of horror from the lips of the Lady Adelaide smote his ear.
He was in an instant at her bedside, supporting her in his arms; the
attendants also came running in. "My dearest Adelaide, what is it that
excites you thus?" But his inquiries were in vain. She lay in his arms,
sobbing convulsively, and clinging to him as if in terror. Broken words
came from her at length: "I looked up—when you were away—and saw—there, in
that darkened recess—_her_. I did—I did, Giovanni!"

"Whom?" he said becoming very pale.

"Her—Gina Montani. She was in white—a long dress it seemed. Oh! Giovanni,
leave me not again."

"I will never leave you, Adelaide. But this—it must have been a fancy—an
illusion of the imagination. We had just been speaking of her."

"You remember," she sobbed, "the night our child died—nurse saw the same
spectre. It may—"

The lady’s voice failed her, and her husband started, for a rapid change
was taking place in her countenance.

"I am dying, Giovanni," she said, clinging to him, and trembling with
nervous terror. "Oh, support me! A doctor—a priest—Father Anselmo—where
are they? He gave me absolution, he said. Then why does the remembrance of
the deed come back again now? They would not have done it without my
sanction. Giovanni, my husband—protect and love our child—desert him
never. Giovanni, I say, can they indeed forgive—or does it rest above? If
so, oh! why did I have her killed? Giovanni, who is it—Father
Anselmo?—God?—_who_ is to forgive me? It _was_ murder! Giovanni, where are
you? My sight is going—Giovanni—" Her voice died away, and the count bowed
his head in his anguish, whilst the attendants pressed forwards to look at
her countenance. The Lady Adelaide had passed to another world!




VI.


It was years after the death of Lady Adelaide, that workmen were making
some alterations in the Castle of Visinara, preparatory to the second
marriage of its lord, who was about to espouse the lovely Elena di
Capella. They were taking down the walls of a secret passage, or corridor,
leading out of the chapel to the neighboring monastery. Standing, looking
on, was the count, still, to all appearance, youthful, though he was, in
reality, some years past thirty, but his features were of a cast that do
not quickly take the signs of age. By his side stood a fair boy of seven
years old—his heir—open-hearted, engaging, with a smiling countenance, on
which might be traced his father’s features, whilst he had inherited his
mother’s soft blue eyes and her sunny hair.

"What a while you are!" exclaimed the child, looking on, with impatience,
to see the walls come down. "You should hit harder."

"The walls are very thick, Alberto," observed his father. "All these
niches, which have been blocked up, and in the olden time contained
statues, have to come down also."

"They are taking down a niche now, are they not, papa?"

"Not yet. They are removing the wall which has been built before it. It
appears fresher, too, than the rest; of more recent date."

"It seems extraordinarily fresh, my lord," observed one of the workmen.
"The materials are old, but it has certainly been rebuilt within a few
years—within ten, I should say."

"Not it," laughed the count. "These corridors have not been touched during
my lifetime."

"This portion of them has, my lord, you may rely upon it."

As he spoke, the remainder came down with a tremendous crash, leaving the
niches exposed, There was no statue there—but the corpse of the
unfortunate Gina Montani, standing upright in her night-dress, was
revealed to their sight—nearly as fresh as if she had died but yesterday,
having been excluded from the air. The features, it is true, were scarcely
to be recognized, but the hair—the long brown curls falling on her
neck—was the same as ever. This was her horrible death then—to be walled
up alive! The count grew sick and faint as he gazed. Before he had time to
collect his startled thoughts, the child pulled at and clung to his arm.
"Take me away. What is that dreadful thing? You look white and cold too,
not as you always do. Oh, what is it? Dear papa, take me from here!"

The workmen were affrighted—perhaps more so, though less shocked, than the
count. But one of them, partially recovering himself, touched the corpse
with an implement he had been using, and it came down a heap of dust. The
Lord of Visinara turned, and with steps that tottered under him, bore his
child back to the castle.




VII.


You may hear in Italy unto this day, various versions of this tradition.
One will tell you that the Lord of Visinara offered moneys and treasures,
to the half of his possessions, to the monks, if they would lay the
troubled spirit of Gina Montani, but that, although they tried hard, they
could not do it. According to another version, the friars would not try,
for that no heretic’s soul may be prayed for in the Roman Church. But,
however the monks may have settled it amongst themselves, all versions of
the history agree in one particular, that the ghost _was not_ laid; that
it never would be, and never could be, but still wanders on the earth. And
you were wise to profess faith in it too, if you go amongst the Italians,
unless you would be looked on as an unbeliever, not a degree better than
the poor Protestant maiden Montani.

Several descendants of Giovanni and Adelaide of Visinara, are still
scattered about Italy, though greatly reduced in station. And the
accredited belief is, that whenever death is going to remove one of these,
the spirit of the ill-fated Gina appears and shows itself to them in the
moments of their last and most terrible agonies.





VISION OF CHARLES XI.


                          From Sharpe’s Magazine


We are in the habit of laughing incredulously at stories of visions and
supernatural apparitions, yet some are so well authenticated, that if we
refuse to believe them, we should, in consistency, reject all historical
evidence. The fact I am about to relate is guaranteed by a declaration
signed by four credible witnesses; I will only add, that the prediction
contained in this declaration was well known, and generally spoken of,
long before the occurrence of the events which have apparently fulfilled
it.

Charles XI., father of the celebrated Charles XII., was one of the most
despotic, but, at the same time, wisest monarchs, who ever reigned in
Sweden. He curtailed the enormous privileges of the nobility, abolished
the power of the Senate, made laws on his own authority; in a word, he
changed the constitution of the country, hitherto an oligarchy, and forced
the States to invest him with absolute power. He was a man of enlightened
and strong mind, firmly attached to the Lutheran religion; his disposition
was cold, unfeeling, and phlegmatic, utterly destitute of imagination. He
had just lost his queen, Ulrica Eleonora, and he appeared to feel her
death more than could have been expected from a man of his character. He
became even more gloomy and silent than before, and his incessant
application to business proved his anxiety to banish painful reflections.

Towards the close of an autumn evening, he was sitting in his
dressing-gown and slippers, before a large fire, in his private apartment.
His chamberlain, Count Brahe, and his physician, Baumgarten, were with
him. The evening wore away, and his majesty did not dismiss them as usual;
with his head down and his eyes fixed on the fire, he maintained a
profound silence, weary of his guests, and fearing, half unconsciously, to
remain alone. The count and his companion tried various subjects of
conversation, but could interest him in nothing. At length Brahe, who
supposed that sorrow for the queen was the cause of his depression, said
with a deep sigh, and pointing to her portrait, which hung in the room,

"What a likeness that is! How truly it gives the expression, at once so
gentle and so dignified!"

"Nonsense!" said the king, angrily, "the portrait is far too flattering;
the queen was decidedly plain."

Then, vexed at his unkind words, he rose and walked up and down the room,
to hide an emotion at which he blushed. After a few minutes he stopped
before the window looking into the court; the night was black, and the
moon in her first quarter.

The palace where the kings of Sweden now reside was not completed, and
Charles XI. who commenced it, inhabited the old palace, situated on the
Ritzholm, facing Lake Modu. It is a large building in the form of a
horseshoe: the king’s private apartments were in one of the extremities;
opposite was the great hall where the States assembled to receive
communications from the crown. The windows of that hall suddenly appeared
illuminated. The king was startled, but at first supposed that a servant
with a light was passing through; but then, that hall was never opened
except on state occasions, and the light was too brilliant to be caused by
a single lamp. It then occurred to him that it must be a conflagration;
but there was no smoke, and the glass was not broken; it had rather the
appearance of an illumination. Brahe’s attention being called to it, he
proposed sending one of the pages to ascertain the cause of the light, but
the king stopped him, saying, he would go himself to the hall. He left the
room, followed by the count and doctor, with lighted torches. Baumgarten
called the man who had charge of the keys, and ordered him, in the king’s
name, to open the doors of the great hall. Great was his surprise at this
unexpected command. He dressed himself quickly, and came to the king with
his bunch of keys. He opened the first door of a gallery which served as
an antechamber to the hall. The king entered, and what was his amazement
at finding the walls hung with black.

"What is the meaning of this?" asked he.

The man replied, that he did not know what to make of it, adding, "When
the gallery was last opened, there was certainly no hanging over the oak
panelling."

The king walked on to the door of the hall.

"Go no further, for heaven’s sake," exclaimed the man; "surely there is
sorcery going on inside. At this hour, since the queen’s death, they say
she walks up and down here. May God protect us!"

"Stop, sire," cried the count and Baumgarten together, "don’t you hear
that noise? Who knows to what dangers you are exposing yourself! At all
events, allow me to summon the guards."

"I will go in," said the king, firmly; "open the door at once."

The man’s hand trembled so that he could not turn the key.

"A fine thing to see an old soldier frightened," said the king, shrugging
his shoulders; "come, Count, will you open the door?"

"Sire," replied Brahe, "let your majesty command me to march to the mouth
of a Danish or German cannon, and I will obey unhesitatingly, but I cannot
defy hell itself."

"Well," said the king, in a tone of contempt, "I can do it myself."

He took the key, opened the massive oak door, and entered the hall,
pronouncing the words, "With the help of God." His three attendants, whose
curiosity overcame their fears, or who, perhaps, were ashamed to desert
their sovereign, followed him. The hall was lighted by an innumerable
number of torches. A black hanging had replaced the old tapestry. The
benches round the hall were occupied by a multitude, all dressed in black;
their faces were so dazzlingly bright that the four spectators of this
scene were unable to distinguish one amongst them. On an elevated throne,
from which the king was accustomed to address the assembly, sat a bloody
corpse, as if wounded in several parts, and covered with the ensigns of
royalty; on his right stood a child, a crown on his head, and a sceptre in
his hand; at his left an old man leant on the throne; he was dressed in
the mantle formerly worn by the administrators of Sweden, before it became
a kingdom under Gustavus Vasa. Before the throne were seated several
grave, austere looking personages, in long black robes. Between the throne
and the benches of the assembly was a block covered with black crape; an
axe lay beside it. No one in the vast assembly appeared conscious of the
presence of Charles and his companions. On their entrance they heard
nothing but a confused murmur, in which they could distinguish no words.
Then the most venerable of the judges in the black robes, he who seemed to
be their president, rose, and struck his hand five times on a folio volume
which lay open before him. Immediately there was a profound silence, and
some young men, richly dressed, their hands tied behind their backs,
entered the hall by a door opposite to that which Charles had opened. He
who walked first, and who appeared the most important of the prisoners,
stopped in the middle of the hall, before the block, which he looked at
with supreme contempt. At the same time the corpse on the throne trembled
convulsively, and a crimson stream flowed from his wounds. The young man
knelt down, laid his head on the block, the axe glittered in the air for a
moment, descended on the block, the head railed over the marble pavement,
and reached the feet of the king, and stained his slipper with blood.
Until this moment surprise had kept Charles silent, but this horrible
spectacle roused him, and advancing two or three steps towards the throne,
he boldly addressed the figure on its left in the well-known formulary,
"If thou art of God, speak; if of the other, leave us in peace."

The phantom answered slowly and solemnly, "King Charles, this blood will
not flow in thy time, but five reigns after." Here the voice became less
distinct, "Woe, woe, woe to the blood of Vasa!" The forms of all the
assembly now became less clear, and seemed but colored shades: soon they
entirely disappeared; the lights were extinguished; still they heard a
melodious noise, which one of the witnesses compared to the murmuring of
the wind among the trees, another to the sound a harp string gives in
breaking. All agreed as to the duration of the apparition, which they said
lasted ten minutes. The hangings, the head, the waves of blood, all had
disappeared with the phantoms, but Charles’s slipper still retained a
crimson stain, which alone would have served to remind him of the scenes
of this night, if indeed they had not been too well engraven on his
memory.

When the king returned to his apartment, he wrote an account of what he
had seen, and he and his companions signed it. In spite of all the
precautions taken to keep these circumstances private, they were well
known, even during the lifetime of Charles, and no one hitherto has
thought fit to raise doubts as to their authenticity.





DIVINATION, WITCHCRAFT, AND MESMERISM.


                   From the Dublin University Magazine.


It seems strange that so obvious a case as that of Barlaam and the monks
of Mount Athos has not been brought into the mesmerical collection of
_pièces justificatives_. The first compiler of the authorities on which it
rests is Ughelli. The story is told in modern language by Mosheim, by
Fleury, and by Gibbon at the years 1341-51. In taking the version of it by
the last (Decline and Fall, c. 63,) we shall run least risk of being
imposed on by over-credulity.

"The Fakirs of India and the monks of the Oriental Church," says the
complacent philosopher of Lausanne, "were alike persuaded that in total
abstraction of the mind and body, the purer spirit may ascend to the
enjoyment and vision of the Deity. The opinions and practices of the
monasteries of Mount Athos will be best represented in the words of an
abbot who flourished in the eleventh century. ’When thou art alone in thy
cell,’ says the ascetic teacher, ’shut thy door and seat thyself in a
corner: raise thy mind above all things vain and transitory; recline thy
beard and chin on thy breast; turn thine eyes and thy thoughts towards the
middle of thy belly, the region of the naval; and search the place of the
heart, the seat of the soul. At first all will be dark and comfortless;
but if you persevere day and night you will feel an ineffable joy; and no
sooner has the soul discovered the place of the heart, than it is involved
in a mystic and etherial light.’ This light, the production of a
distempered fancy, the creature of an empty stomach and an empty brain,
was adored by the Quietists as the pure and perfect essence of God
himself; and as long as the folly was confined to Mount Athos, the simple
solitaries were not inquisitive how the divine essence could be a
_material_ substance, or how an _immaterial_ substance could be perceived
by the eyes of the body. But in the reign of the younger Andronicus these
monasteries were visited by Barlaam, a Calabrian monk, who was equally
skilled in philosophy and theology. The indiscretion of an ascetic
revealed to the curious traveller the secrets of mental prayer, and
Barlaam embraced the opportunity of ridiculing the Quietists who placed
the soul in the naval; of accusing the monks of Mount Athos of heresy and
blasphemy. His attack compelled the more learned to renounce or dissemble
the simple devotion of their brethren; and Gregory Palamas introduced a
scholastic distinction between the essence and operation of God."

Gregory illustrated his argument by a reference to the celestial light
manifested in the transfiguration of our Lord on Mount Thabor. On this
distinction issue was taken by the disputatious Calabrian, and the result
was the convocation of a synod at Constantinople, whose decree
"established as an article of faith the uncreated light of Mount Thabor;
and, after so many insults, the reason of mankind was slightly wounded by
the addition of a single absurdity."

Of the truth of facts so long and openly discussed, there can be no
question. The monks of Mount Athos did indeed put themselves into a state
which may with safety be called one of mental lucidity, by fixing their
eyes intently on a point. Mr. Robertson, who used to induce the mesmeric
sleep by causing his votaries to fix their eyes on a wafer, had better
precedent than he supposed for his practice; and Miss Martineau, who, in
her artificial trances, saw all objects illuminated has been unconsciously
repeating a monastic method of worship. The contemptuous indifference of
Gibbon for once arises from defect of information; and when in a note he
observes that Mosheim "unfolds the causes with the judgment of a
philosopher," while Fleury "transcribes and translates with the prejudices
of a Catholic priest," himself gives a luculent example of the errors of
philosophy, and of the often unsuspected approach of prejudice to truth.
Mosheim’s observation, notwithstanding the damaging approval of Gibbon, is
not without its value. "There is no reason," he says, "for any to be
surprised at this account, or to question its correctness. For among the
precepts and rules of all those in the East who teach men how to withdraw
the mind from the body, and to unite it with God, or inculcate what the
Latins call a contemplative and mystic life, whether they are Christians,
or Mohammedans, or Pagans, there is this precept, viz., _that the eyes
must be fixed every day for some hours upon some particular object_, and
that whoever does this will be rapt into a kind of ecstasy. See what
Engelbert Kempfer states concerning the monks and mystics of Japan; and
the account of those of India by Francis Bernier." Strange that Mosheim,
observing the uniformity both of the process and of its results in so many
different parts of the world, should not have suspected that there was
something more in this species of lucidity than the merely casual effects
of a distempered imagination. By fixing the gaze even of the lower animals
on an immovable point, they fall into a condition equally unnatural, and
which, if they had language to express their visions, would probably be
found equally clairvoyant.

A favorite subject of mediæval art is the life of the Christian ascetic in
the Desert. In these representations a human skull may generally be seen
placed before the eyes of the devotee. Such an object would fix the gaze
and induce the ecstasy as well as any other. The charm of this species of
contemplation must have been intense, since in search of its exaltations
and illuminations the very convents were deserted; and during the fourth
and fifth centuries the deserts of Idumea, of Egypt, and of Pontus,
swarmed with anchorites, who seemed to live only for the sake of escaping
from life, and in their fasts and mortifications rivalled, if they did not
for a time even surpass, the Fakirs of the East. To such an extent was
this religious enthusiasm carried, that in Egypt the number of the monks
was thought to equal that of the rest of the male population. Strange
consideration, if it be the fact, that a few passes of a mesmeric operator
should produce the same effects which these multitudes procured through
toils so painful and sacrifices to themselves and to society so costly.

The Egyptian method of inducing clairvoyance in boys, by causing them to
gaze on a pool of ink in the palm of the hand, has already been identified
with the practice of Dr. Dee, whose blank spherical mirror is now said to
be in the possession and use of a distinguished modern mesmeriser.
Divination by the crystal is a well-known mediæval practice; and from the
accounts of it which Delrio and others have handed down it appears to have
resembled, in some remarkable particulars, the method now in use among the
soothsayers of Cairo. It does not appear to make any difference whether
the polished object be black or white, a mirror, a solid ball, or a
transparent globe containing water: the same extraordinary series of
appearances is alleged to follow an earnest inspection of it. Before
proceeding to Delrio’s singular corroboration of this use of the crystal,
it will be well to state what is known of divination by the phial and by
the mirror. Divination by the phial is technically known as
_gasteromancy_. "In this kind of divination," says Peucer, "the response
is given by pictures, not by sounds. They procured glass vessels of a
globular shape, filled with fair water, and set round them lighted tapers;
and after invoking the demon with a muttered incantation, and proposing
the question, they brought forward a pure boy-child, or a pregnant woman,
who, gazing intently on the glass, and searching it with their eyes,
called for, and demanded, a solution of the question proposed. The devil
then answered these inquiries by certain images, which, by a kind of
refraction, shone from the water on the polished and mirror-like surface
of the phial."

_Catoptromancy_, or divination by the mirror, is as old as the time of the
Roman Emperors. In one of the passages relating to this method of inducing
what is called clairvoyance, we have an illustration of the early
acquaintance of mankind with some of the forms of mesmerism. The passage
is found in Spartian’s life of Ditius Julian, the rich Roman who purchased
the Empire when it was put up to auction by the Prætorian guards. "Julian
was also addicted to the madness of consulting magicians, through whom he
hoped either to appease the indignation of the people, or to control the
violence of the soldiery. For they immolated certain victims (human?) not
agreeable to the course of Roman sacrifice; and they performed certain
profane incantations; and those things, too, which are done at the mirror,
in which boys with their eyes blindfolded are said, by means of
incantations, to see objects with the top of the head, Julian had recourse
to. And the boy is said to have seen (in the mirror) both the approach of
Severus and the death of Julian."

The passage may be variously rendered, according to different readings and
punctuations, either as "boys, who can see with their eyes blindfolded, by
reason of incantations made over the top of the head;" or, "boys, who,
having their eyes blindfolded, can see with the top of the head, by reason
of incantations;" or, "boys, who, having their eyes blindfolded, can see
with the top of the head, it being operated on by way of incantation."
This seeing, or seeming to see, with the top of the head, is one alleged
variety of the modes of modern clairvoyance. It seems difficult to imagine
that the boy Horner, whose case is related by Mr. Topham, in a letter to
Dr. Elliotson, dated May 31, 1847, could have heard any thing of these
pagan practices. Mr. Topham, a barrister and man of credit, states: "After
five or six weeks’ mesmerism, he began spontaneously to exhibit instances
of clairvoyance. The first occasion was on the 11th of September. It was
in the dusk of the evening, so that the room where he was mesmerised was
nearly dark. My previous mode of mesmerising him had been by pointing at
his eyes, but on this occasion I began by making passes over the top of
his head, and continued them after he was in the sleep. In the course of
five or six minutes after the sleep was induced, he suddenly exclaimed
that he could see into the room above us (the drawing-room). I said, ’Your
eyes are closed; how can you see?’ And he replied, ’I don’t see with my
eyes; I see from the top of my head. All the top of my head seems open.’
He then described, &c. I found every thing as he had described, &c." Mr.
Topham, it need scarcely be added, does not appear to have been at all
aware of the passage in Spartian, which, indeed, has not been cited or
referred to in any published work for nearly two hundred years back.

A like use of the suspended ring, indicating the early acquaintance of
practitioners in these arts with one of the alleged evidences of the
so-called _odylic_ force, is thus described by Peucer among various modes
of hydromancy: "A bowl was filled with water, and a ring suspended from
the finger was librated in the water; and so, according as the question
was propounded, a declaration or confirmation of its truth, or otherwise,
was obtained. If what was proposed was true, the ring, of its own accord,
without any impulse, struck the sides of the goblet a certain number of
times. They say that Numa Pompilius used to practise this method, and that
he evoked the gods, and consulted them in water, in this way."

_Crystallomancy_ is the art of divining by figures, which appear on the
surface of a crystal ball, in like manner as on the phial filled with
water. Concerning this practice, Delrio has the following remarkable
passage, citing his contemporary, Spengler: "A man well versed in the
Greek and Latin fathers, and happy, if he had not presumed, with unclean
hands, to dabble in the mysteries of our faith (Spenger), has published in
Germany a learned commentary on the nature of demons, which he has
prefixed to Plutarch’s Essay, _De Defectu Oraculorum_. From this (says
Delrio) I extract, in his own words, the following narrative. There are
some (he says) who, being consulted on matters unknown, distinctly see
every thing that is inquired after in _crystals_; and a little further on
proceeds to state, that he once had an acquaintance, a man of one of the
best families of Nuremberg, and that this acquaintance of his came to him
on one occasion, bringing with him a crystal gem, of a round form, wrapped
up in a piece of silk, which he told him he had received from a stranger,
who encountering him several years before in the market-place, had asked
his hospitality, and whom he had brought home with him and lodged for the
space of three days; and that when the stranger was departing, he had left
him the crystal as a present, in token of his obligation, and had taught
him the use of it; thus, that if there was any thing he particularly
wished to be informed of, he should take out this crystal and desire a
pure male child to look into it and say what he should see there; and that
it would come to pass that whatever he desired to be informed of, would be
indicated by appearances seen by the boy. And he affirmed that he never
was deceived in any instance, and that he learned matters of a wonderful
kind from the representations of those boys, although no one else, by the
closest inspection, could see any thing except the clear and shining gem.
At a certain time, however, when his wife was pregnant of a male child,
appearances were visible to her also in the crystal. First of all, there
used to appear the form of a man clad in the ordinary habit of the times,
and then would open the representation of whatever was inquired after; and
when all was explained, the same figure of the man would depart and
disappear; but in his departure would often appear to perambulate the town
and enter the churches. But the report of these appearances having spread
in all directions, they began to be threatened by the populace. It also
appeared, that certain men of learning had read in the crystal some
statements respecting doubts entertained by them in their studies; and
moved by these and other reasons, Spengler stated that the owner of the
crystal came to him, representing that he thought the time was come when
he ought to cease making such a use of it; for that he was now persuaded
he had sinned in no light degree in doing so, and had for a long time
suffered grievous pangs of a disturbed conscience on that account, and had
come to the determination of having nothing further to do with experiments
of that kind, and had accordingly brought the crystal to him to do with it
whatever he pleased. Then Spengler, highly approving his resolution,
states that he took the crystal, and having pounded it into minute
fragments, threw them, together with the silk wrapper, into a draw-well."
So far Delrio.

Another variety of this process is found in the _Onuchomanteia_, or
nail-divinition, also spoken of by Delrio. "In this species," says he,
"male children, before they have lost their purity, smear their nails with
oil and lamp-black, and then, holding up the nail against the sun,
repeating some charm, see in it what they desire. This mischief," he goes
on to say, "has gone even farther in our own time. I myself knew one
Quevedo, a veteran Spanish soldier, but more distinguished in war and arms
than in piety, who, being in Brussels at the time when the Duke of Medina
Cæli set sail from Gallicia for Belgium, clearly showed in more than one
of his nails the fleet leaving the port of Corunna, and soon after
dreadfully tossed by a tempest. Thus this man, who could also cure the
wounds of others by his words alone, rendered his own spiritual state
incurable by any one."

The like use of the crystal ball and spherical phial, containing water,
suggests a version of the epigrams of Claudian—"De crystallo in quo aqua
inclusa"—which has not been afforded by any of the commentators. Globules
of water are sometimes found inclosed in crystals, as well as in amber. On
one of those singular gems Claudian has composed a series of epigrams,
which ascribe properties to the stone, and make allusion to uses of it
hardly reconcileable with the idea of its being a merely puerile
curiosity. The earlier epigrams of the series are neat and playful, but
insignificant:—

  "The icy gem its aqueous birth attests,
  Part turned to stone, while part in fluid rests;
  Winter’s numbed hand achieved the cunning feat,
  The perfecter for being incomplete.

  "Nymphs who your sister nymphs in glassy thrall
  Hold here imprisoned in the crystal ball;
  Waters that were and are, declare the cause
  That your bright forms at once congeals and thaws.

  "Scorn not the crystal ball, a worth it owns,
  Greater than graven Erythrean stones;
  Rude though it seems, a formless mass of ice,
  ’Tis justly counted ’mongst our gems of price."

And so on through several others, until he comes to that one which seems
to indicate something beyond a merely figurative use of the word "nymphs;"
though, after all, it is possible that the word was originally written
with an _l_, instead of _n_, which would make all the difference between
"nymphs" and "waters":—

  "While the soft boy the slippery crystal turns,
  To touch the waters in their icy urns,
  Safe in its depths translucent he beholds
  The nymphs, unconscious of the winter colds:
  And the dry ball exploring with his lip,
  Seems, while he fails, the illusive lymph to sip."

The Latin is subjoined:—

  "Dum crystalla puer contingere lubrica gaudet
    Et gelidum tenero pollice versat onus,
  Videt perspicuo deprensas in marmore nymphas,
    Dura quibus solis parcere novit hyems:
  Et siccum religens labiis sitientibus orbem,
    Irrita quæsitis oscula figit aquis."

Not the least remarkable of the qualities here ascribed to the crystal
ball is its energy in imparting the sensation of cold. Dom Chifflet, who,
in 1665, published his learned treatise at Antwerp on the objects then
recently discovered in the supposed tomb of King Childeric, at Tournay,
says of the crystal ball which was found amongst them, "You would say it
was petrified ice; so cold it was, that my palm and fingers, after
handling it, were quite torpid." And cites Anslem Boetius, in his book on
stones and gems, as saying, "the crystal is of so cold and dry a nature,
that placed beneath the tongue of a feverish person, it allays the thirst;
and held in the hands even of those violently fevered, it refreshes and
cools them, especially if it be of considerable size, and of a spherical
figure;" and another writer on the same subject, Andreas Cisalpinus, who
states of the marble called ophite, that "they make of it little globes,
for the handling of such as are in burning fever, the coldness of the
stone expelling the disease." So far Dom Chifflet. It seems almost as if
we were reading Reichenbach. "He (Reichenbach) found that crystals are
capable of producing all the phenomena resulting from the action of a
magnet on cataleptic patients. Thus, for instance, a large piece of rock
crystal, placed in the hand of a nervous patient, affects the fingers so
as to make them grasp the crystal involuntarily, and shut the fist.
Reichenbach found that more than half of all the persons he tried were
sensible of its action." Chifflet probably was a man of a nervous
temperament. Those who desire to see the crystal ball in question, may
inspect it, where it is still preserved, with other objects found in the
tomb, at the Gallerie de Medailles, in Paris. Two similar balls may be
seen here in the collection of the Royal Irish Academy.

The use of water in communicating an ecstacy similar to the mesmeric
lucidity, is largely dwelt on by the mystical writers known as the
Neo-Platonists. Psellus describes a mode of divinition among the Assyrians
by a basin, which smacks strongly of the mesmeric practice. "The water,
which is poured into the basin, seems, as to its substance, to differ in
nothing from other water; but it possesses a certain virtue, infused into
it by incantations, whereby it is rendered more apt for the reception of
the demon." The effect of the waters of some sacred places on those
accustomed to their influence, was also such as is claimed for the
mesmerized waters of our present practitioners. Jamblichus gives this
account of the Colophonian oracle:—"There was a subterranean place at
Colophon, near Ephesus, in which was a fountain. The priest on stated
nights sacrificed, then drank the water, and afterwards prophesied, being
rendered invisible to the spectators. It might seem," he says, "to some
that the Divine Spirit passed into the priest through the water. But this
is not so; for the divine influence is not transmitted thus according to
the laws of distance and division, through these things which participate
in it, but comprehends them from without, and inwardly illuminates and
fills them with lucidity, and fills the water also with a certain virtue
conducive to the prophetic faculty, that is, a clarifying virtue; so that
when the priest drinks, it purifies the luminous spirit which is implanted
in him, and accommodates it to God, and by that purifying and
accommodating process, enables him to apprehend the deity. But there is
another kind of presence of the god, besides the virtue infused into the
wafer, which illumines all around, above, and within us, and which no man
wants, if he can only attain to the necessary state of congruity. And so
of a sudden it falls on the prophet, and makes use of him as an
instrument; and he in the meantime has no command of himself, and knows
not what he says, nor where he is, and with difficulty comes to himself
again, after the response given. Moreover, before drinking the water, he
abstains for a day and night from food, and partakes of certain mysteries
inaccessible to the vulgar; from which it is to be collected that there
are two methods by which man may be prepared for the reception of the
divine influence: one by the drinking of purgatorial water, endowed by the
Deity with a clarifying virtue; the other, by sobriety, solitude, the
separation of the mind from the body, and the intent contemplation of the
Deity."

One might here suppose he read of the rites of St. Patrick’s Purgatory.
The water of the lake there is usually called wine, and it may be that on
minds and bodies "which have attained to the needful congruity," it has
operated as wonderful effects as the Colophonian fount itself. The
proceedings of the priestess at Brancidæ, who also, from amongst other
sources, derived the afflatus, or _Waren_, from a fountain, are to the
same purpose. "The prophetic priestess at Brancidæ either sits on an axis
[exposing herself to the influence, as the Pythoness on her Tripod], or
holds a wand in her hand, given by some god, or dips the hem of her
garment, in water, or inhales a certain vapor of water, and by these
methods is filled with the divine illumination, receives the god, and
prophesies. But, that the prophetic faculty comes from no corporeal or
animal source, and from no local or material instrumentality, but solely
and extrinsically from the presence of the incoming deity, appears from
this, that the priestess, before she gives her oracle, performs many
ceremonious rites, observes strict purity, bathes, abstains for three days
from food, dwells apart, and so, by little and little, begins to be
illuminated and enraptured." What the exact meaning of sitting on an axis
may be, it is difficult to divine; but those who allege that a patient may
be thrown into the mesmeric trance by holding a magnetized branch—and
those also who have read of all the phenomena of exorcism being as fully
elicited by a satchel of feathers as by a bag of reliques—will readily
apply the wand "presented by some deity," and placed in the hand of the
priestess at the moment when she should receive the final cataleptic
impulse. If there be truth in the alleged modern cases of _clairvoyance_,
we need not be surprised at the singular coincidences which have sustained
the credit of Colophon and Delphi.

Not to dwell on other methods of inducing the afflatus, such as by
characters and amulets, by music, by dancing, and by movements of the
body, I shall now proceed with the effects alleged to have been produced
on the _afflati_. Jamlichus must still be our principal authority.
Lucidity and prevision have already been sufficiently indicated, and have
doubtless been readily recognized: the other symptoms will be found not
less remarkable and equally familiar:—"Man has a double life—one annexed
to the body, the other separate from every thing bodily.... In sleep we
have the capacity of being wholly loosed from the chains that confine our
spirit, and can make use of the life which is not dependent on generation.
When the soul is thus separate from the body in sleep, then that (latter)
kind of life which usually remains separable and separate by itself,
immediately awakes within us, and acts according to its proper nature,...
and in that state has a presaging knowledge of the future." Then, omitting
a distinction between sleeping and waking inspiration, and coming to the
latter, in which, also, the _offlati_ have a presaging power, he
proceeds:—"Yet those (latter) are so far awake that they can use their
senses, yet are not capable of reasoning,... for they neither (properly
speaking) sleep when they seem to do so, nor awake when they seem awake;
for they do not of themselves foresee, nor are they moved by any human
instrumentality; neither know they their own condition; nor do they exert
any prerogative or motion of their own; but all this is done under the
power and by the energy of the deity. For that they who are so affected do
not live an ordinary animal life is plain, because many of them, on
contact with fire, are not burnt, the divine inward afflatus repelling the
heat; or, if they be burnt, they do not feel it; neither do they feel
prickings, or scratchings, or other tortures. Further, that their actions
are not (merely) human, is apparent from this, that they make their way
through pathless tracks, and pass harmless through the fire, and pass over
rivers in a wonderful manner, which the priestess herself also does in the
Cataballa. By this it is plain that the life they live is not human, nor
animal, nor dependent on the use of senses, but divine, as if the soul
were taking its rest, and the deity were there instead of the soul.
Various sorts there are of those so divinely inspired, as well by reason
of the varying divinity of the inspiring gods as of the modes of
inspiration. These modes are of this sort—either the deity occupies us, or
we join ourselves to the deity, &c.... According to these diversities,
there are different signs, effects, and works of the inspired; thus, some
will be moved in their whole bodies, others in particular members; others,
again, will be motionless. Also they will perform dances and chants, some
well, some ill. The bodies, again, of some will seem to dilate in height,
of others in compass; and others, again, will seem to walk in air."

Taking these various manifestations in order, and beginning with the
alleged power of resisting the action of fire, the reader will not need to
be reminded of many seemingly well-authenticated cases of escape from the
fire-ordeal. It has been usual to ascribe the preservation of those who
have walked bare-footed over heated ploughshares to the use of astringent
lotions: and where opportunity existed for preparation of that kind, their
escape may perhaps be so explained. But in most instances the accused was
in the custody of the accusers, and not likely to have access to such
phylacteries. The exemption from the effects of fire was not confined to
those cases of exaltation attendant on the enthusiasm of conscious virtue.
Bosroger (La Piéte Affligée, Rouen, 1752) states of one of the possessed
sisters of St. Elizabeth at Louviers, in 1642: "One morning Sister
Saint-Esprit was rapt as in an ecstasy. The bishop commanded the devil to
leave her. Immediately she experienced dreadful contortions, and an access
of rage, and, on a sudden, says the exorcist, her demon left her like a
flash of lightning, and threw the young woman into the fire, which was a
considerable one, casting her with her face and one hand direct between
the two andirons; and when they ran to drag her away, they found that
neither her face nor her hand were in anywise burnt."

It would be idle to multiply instances of this sort from the monkish
writers. The preservation of the three youths in the Chaldæan furnace was
one of the miracles most adapted to the servile yet audacious imitations
of the Thaumaturgists. It is only when their statements correspond in
unsuspected particulars with the phenomena of experience—as, for example,
in the case of Barlaam and the monks of Mount Athos—that they can be
adduced without offending the judgment of rational inquirers. But the
action of burning is an operation of mechanical and chemical forces; and
how any amount of spiritual or electrical effusion could prevent the
expansion of the fluids in the tissues and the disruption of the skin,
seems hard to imagine. Something more must, one should think, have been
needed; and if the mesmeric and Pagan oracular ecstasies be identical,
this testimony of Jamblichus would lead us to suppose that that something
was supplied by the mind. However this may be, we shall be better able to
judge after the investigation of some other of the alleged concomitants of
Pagan inspiration.

The insensibility to prickings and pinchings is perhaps the commonest test
of the cataleptic condition; and, as will doubtless suggest itself to
every reader, was, until modern times, a popular test of witchcraft. That
the unhappy wretches who were put to death in such numbers during the
middle ages for this offence were actually in an unnatural and detestable
state of mind and body, cannot be doubted. They really were insensible to
punctures; for if they had winced when pricked with pins and needles by
their triers, it would have been deemed a proof of their innocence. A
person feigning the mesmeric sleep, and whose interest it is to feign, may
endure such prickings with seeming insensibility; but it was not the
interest of the ancient witch to affect an insensibility, which would be
taken as one of the surest proofs of guilt. A perverse desire to be
believed guilty is the only motive that can be suggested as likely to lead
to such conduct; and those who have studied human nature most profoundly
will be disposed to give great credit to that suggestion. The same nature
which in the fourth century ran into the epidemic frenzy of anchoritism,
and impelled the Circumcellionist multitudes to extort the boon of
martyrdom from reluctant tribunals, may be admitted capable even of the
madness of a voluntary aspiration to the stake and pyre of the witch.
Certain it is that many of the convicts boasted of their interviews with
the Devil, and seemed to be, if they were not, possessed with the
conviction of having actually partaken of the orgies imputed to them. Had
they really been there in imagination? Was it that the popular mind had
realized to itself an epidemic idea, and that the effect of the contagion
was to put its victims _en rapport_ with the distempered picture present
to the minds of the multitude? In a moral epidemic the crowd, possessed
with one idea, are the operators: it is the _Panic_ possession of the
ancients, which was not confined to general terrors, but applied to
general delusions of every kind. The multitude itself radiates its own
madness; witness the Crusaders, the Flagellants, the Dancing Fanatics of
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries; perhaps even we might add the
Mathewites of our own day.

The next symptom of possession was the power of passing through trackless
places, the disposition to run to wilds and mountains, like that rage of
the votary of Bacchus:

  "Quo me Bacche, rapis tui
  Plenum? Quæ in nemora aut quos agor in specus
  Velox mente nova?"

The Bacchic ecstasy was not merely drunkenness, but an epidemic madness
induced by long-continued dancing and gesticulating to the sound of
cymbals and other noisy instruments, in all respects identical with the
methods of inducing the Hindoo _Waren_. The dancing mania also of the
fifteenth century, described by Hecker in his _Epidemics of the Middle
Ages_, was induced in the same manner, and its effects were the
same,—possession, illumination, and insensibility to external influences.
That the Bacchic and Corybantic frenzies were, in all respects, identical
with the middle age dancing manias, and with the possession of those who
still exhibit the influences of _Waren_ in Hindoostan, can hardly be
doubted. "As for the Bacchanalian motions and friskings of the
_Corybantes_," says Plutarch in his Essay on Love, "there is a way to
allay these extravagant transports, by changing the measure from the
_Trochaic_ to the _Spondaic_, and the tone from the _Phrygian_ to the
_Doric_:" just as with the dancers of St. Vitus, and those bit by the
Tarantula. Hecker states, "The swarms of St. John’s dancers were
accompanied by minstrels playing those noisy instruments which roused
their morbid feelings; moreover, by means of intoxicating music, a kind of
demoniacal festival for the rude multitude was established, which had the
effect of spreading this unhappy malady wider and wider. Soft harmony was,
however, employed to calm the excitement of those affected, and it is
mentioned as a character of the tunes played with this view to the St.
Vitus’s dancers, that they contained transitions from a quick to a slow
measure, and passed gradually from a high to a low key." After the
termination of the frenzy the conduct of the dancers, as well indeed as of
all the victims of this species of possession, whether _Taratati_,
convulsionnaires, or revivalists, tallied precisely with that of the
Bacchic women. Plutarch, in his thirteenth example of the Virtues of
Woman, has this graphic picture of the condition of a band of Bacchante
after one of their orgies. "When the tyrants of Phocea had taken Delphos,
and the Thebans undertook that war against them which was called the Holy
War, certain women devoted to Bacchus (which they called _Thyades_) fell
frantic, and went a gadding by night, and, mistaking their way, came to
Amphissa, and being very much tired, and not as yet in their right wits,
they flung themselves down in the market-place and fell asleep, as they
lay scattered up and down here and there. But the wives of the
Amphisseans, fearing because the city was engaged to aid in the Phocean
war, and abundance of the tyrants’ soldiers were present in the city, the
_Thyades_ should have any indignity put upon them, ran forth all of them
into the market-place, and stood silently round about them; neither would
offer them any disturbance while they slept, but when they were awake they
attended their service particularly, and brought them refreshments; and,
in fine, by persuasion, obtained leave of their husbands that they might
accompany them in safety to their own borders."

In the same way, throughout the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, might
groups of both sexes be seen lying, exhausted from their agitations, in
the streets of Aix-la-chapelle, Cologne, Strasburg, Naples, and elsewhere;
and even in our own century sights not dissimilar have been witnessed at
revival assemblages in Wales and Scotland, and at camp-meetings in North
America. The rending of Pentheus on Mount Citheron by his own mother and
sisters, who, while under the influence of the Bacchic _afflatus_,
imagined they saw in his form the appearance of a wild beast, might be
adduced as an example at once of the furious character of the frenzy, and
of the liability of the afflated to optical illusions. Has what we read of
fairy-gifts and glamour any foundation in this alleged power of the
biologist to make his patient imagine different forms for the same object?
But we are still among the mountain tops, and must descend to the
remaining symptoms enumerated by Jamblichus.

"They pass over rivers in a wonderful manner, which the priestess herself
also does in the Cataballa." We here again encounter the _indicia_, of
that possession which went by the name of witchcraft in the middle ages. A
witch, really possessed, could not sink in the water, any more than she
could feel the insertion of a needle. The vulgar belief is, that the
suspected witch was cast into a pond, where, if she floated, she was
burned, and if she sank she was drowned. The latter alternative was not
so; if she betrayed no preternatural buoyancy, the trial was so far in her
favor, and she was taken up.

Nor was water the only test, in some parts of Germany the triers, less
philosophically, employed scales; and had fixed weights (from 14 to 15
lbs.), which, if the accused did not counterpoise, they concluded them to
be possessed. But it will be asked, how can there be degrees of philosophy
in practices equally insane, and which have been condemned by the common
consent of enlightened nations for near three hundred years? Insanity
there certainly was, and on a prodigious scale, in these ages; but the
judges and executioners were not so insane as the multitudes who either
believed themselves possessed by others, or believed that they themselves
exercised the power of possessing. To us, living in an age of comparative
rest from spiritual excitement, it seems almost incredible that thousands
of persons, in all ranks and conditions of life, should simultaneously
become possessed with the belief that they were in direct communication
with the devil: should cease to attend to their duties and callings,
passing their time in hysterical trances and cataleptic fits, during which
they seemed to themselves to be borne through the air to witch orgies and
assemblies for devil-worship, in deserts and mountains; and that while one
portion of society gave themselves up to these hallucinations, another
class should, with an equal abandonment of every duty of life, have
betaken themselves to mope and pine, going into convulsions, and wasting
to skeletons, under the idea of having been bewitched; yet nothing is more
certain than that it was such a frenzy as this the heads of the Church and
the temporal Government had to contend against in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries. There were no mad-houses; if there had been, even to
the extent we now possess them, they would not have sufficed to hold a
tenth part of the numbers whose contact and example would have been fatal
to the peace, perhaps even to the existence, of society. If such frenzies
were, unhappily, to burst out among mankind at present, civilized nations
might transport their _energumeni_ to distant possessions; but the
middle-age magistrates had no facilities of that kind: they should deal
with the terrible plague by the only means at their disposal; and these
were, either to let the madness wear itself out, or to repress it by the
rope and faggot. If they had adopted the former course, the epidemic would
probably have passed through the usual stages of popular distempers; would
have had its access, its crisis, and decline; and when the scourge had
passed, the public would have awakened to a full sense of the madness of
which they had been the victims; but in that process there was the danger
of society going to pieces—of the visionary frenzy of the possessed being
taken up by fanatics as the foundation of a new and abominable religion,
and of the hostility of the ignorant and uneducated class, among whom
chiefly the possession prevailed, being directed against the restraints of
government and the principle of property. Having adopted the other course,
they pushed it to cruel and inexcusable lengths; punished many innocent
persons, and suffered many of the really possessed to go free. For they
whose madness was most to be apprehended, as most contagious, were not the
wretches who fancied they possessed the power of bewitching others; but
the _convulsionnaires_, who deemed themselves bewitched, and were their
accusers. Certainly if the same epidemic should ever again break out among
a European population, or even among a British population, the arm of the
magistrate would be again required to suppress it, and we would be better
able to judge of the conduct of those whom it has been the fashion of
modern historians to represent as altogether ignorant and brutal
executioners. So long as possession is only the result of manual passes,
or of fixing the gaze on indifferent objects; so long as the effects are
regarded as physical or psychological phenomena, due to a physical cause,
and the pretensions of the practitioner are not rested on any peculiar
religious sanction, there is no danger of mesmerism degenerating into a
dangerous epidemic; but we might have seen a very different state of
affairs if the magnetizers and biologists had referred their powers to any
species of supernatural agency; and possibly would have found ourselves
long since under the necessity of reviving those penal proceedings which
we have so generally been taught to abhor, as among the most revolting
remnants of mediæval superstition.(5) Even as it is, these powers of the
biologist, if in truth they exist, are capable of fearful abuse. Let us
take, for example, one of the oldest methods of exercising influence, for
good or evil, on an absent person:—

  "As fire this figure hardens, made of clay,
  And this of wax with fire consumes away;
  Such let the soul of cruel Daphnis be,
  Hard to the rest of women, soft to me."

If the waxen or clay image be but a concentrator of the good or evil will
of the operator towards the distant object, and the witchcraft of the
love-sick magician in Virgil, or of the evil-disposed wizard of the middle
ages, be in truth no more than an exertion of biological power, it behoves
society to take care how individuals should be suffered to acquire
mesmerical relations with others, over whom they may exercise malignant as
well as healing influences. If the pretensions of the biologists be
established, biology must soon be put under medical supervision. But to
return to the phenomena of possession.

The propriety of trying alleged witches by water, has been impugned and
defended with abundance of scholastic learning; and, singular to say, its
opponents have been chiefly found among the Roman Catholic writers, and
its advocates among the Reformers. Delrio, by far the most learned of all
the writers on demonology, vigorously assails Rickius, the only notable
Roman Catholic advocate of the practice. The arguments on both sides being
based entirely on scholastic definitions and distinctions respecting the
nature of demons, and the baptismal and other spiritual virtues of water,
are of little relevance in the present method of discussing physical
phenomena. Both parties assume that the persons of witches exhibit a
preternatural levity—Delrio admitting that something less than fourteen or
fifteen pounds was the actual weight which popular belief throughout
Germany ascribed to persons in that possessed state, no matter how large
or fat they might seem to the eye; and Rickius gives an example of a
woman, executed by drowning in 1594, whom the executioner could hardly
keep under with repeated thrusts of his pole, so high did she bound
upwards from the surface, and "so boil up," as it were, out of the depths
of the water. The levity of possessed persons in water might be accounted
for by a phenomenon attendant on those preternatural conditions of the
body which follow excitements of an analogous kind. The victims of the
flogging and dancing manias in the middle ages, and subjects of the
fanatical fervors of camp-meetings and revivals, alike experienced a windy
intestinal distension, consequent on the departure of their mental frenzy.
To control this disagreeable symptom, the candidates for both species of
afflatus used to come to their meetings provided with napkins and rollers
with which to bind their middles, and prevent the supervening inflation.
Persons so puffed up would certainly float with all the buoyancy ascribed
to the German witches, if cast into water; but they would still preserve
their proper corporeal gravity if placed in a scale. Unless, then, we
suppose Delrio to have been the dupe of some singular and unaccountable
delusion on this point, the typanitic affections of the _convulsionnaires_
will not account for the anti-gravitating phenomena ascribed to medieval
witchcraft. There are some reasons, however, for the belief that these
appearances may not have been wholly imaginary; for if any reliance can be
placed on the concurrent traditions of all religions, Pagan as well as
Christian, supported by wide-spread popular belief, the high mental
exaltation induced by religious abstraction, and also by other vehement
affections of the mind, is actually attended with a diminished specific
gravity. Of alleged ecclesiastical miracles of this kind it is better to
say nothing. The Roman Catholic and the Hindoo devotees equally claim for
their adepts in religious contemplation an exemption from (among other
earthly liabilities) the hindrance of weight. In the rapture of prayer,
the ascetic and the saint alike rise in the air, and spurn the law of
gravitation with the other incidents of matter. Suspected evidences of
this kind are, however, of no weight in philosophical inquiry. It will be
safer to leave the Etstaticas and the Fakirs to their respective
believers, and to take a story of the people, into which religious
considerations do not so directly enter. The native Irish, then, have a
remarkable tradition, as old, at least, as the seventh or eighth century,
that phrenetic madmen lose the corporeal quality of weight. A picturesque
and romantic example of this belief is found in the story of the fate of
Suibhne, son of Colman, King of Dalnaraidhe, as related in the bardic
accounts of the battle of Moyra. Suibhne, a valiant warrior, has offered
an insult to Saint Ere, Bishop of Slane; the affront is avenged by a
curse, the usual retaliation of aggrieved ecclesiastics in those days. The
curse falls on Sweeny in the most grievous form of visitation that could
afflict a warrior:—a fit of cowardice seizes him in the very onset of the
battle, and drives him frantic with terror. "Giddiness came over him at
the sight of the horrors, grimness, and rapidity of the Gaels; at the
fierce looks, brilliance, and ardor of the foreigners; at the rebounding
furious shouts of the embattled tribes on both sides, rushing against and
coming into collision with one another. Huge, flickering, horrible, aërial
phantoms, rose up (around him), so that from the uproar of the battle, the
frantic pranks of the demons, the clashing of arms, and the sound of the
heavy blows reverberating on the points of heroic spears, and keen edges
of swords, and warlike borders of broad shields, the hero Suibhne was
filled and intoxicated with horror, panic, and imbecility; his feet
trembled as if incessantly shaken by the force of a stream; the inlets of
his hearing were expanded and quickened by the horrors of lunacy; his
speech became faltering from the giddiness of imbecility; his very soul
fluttered with hallucinations, and with many and various phantasms. He
might be compared to a salmon in a weir, or to a bird after being caught
in the strait prison of a crib," &c. "When he was seized with this frantic
fit, he made a supple, very light leap, and where he alighted he was on
the boss of the shield of the warrior next him; and he made a second leap,
and perched on the crest of the helmet of the same hero, who,
nevertheless, did not feel him. Then he made a third active, very light
leap, and perched on the top of the sacred tree which grew on the smooth
surface of the plain in which the inferior people and the debilitated of
the men of Erin were seated, looking on at the battle. These shouted at
him when they saw him, to press him back into the battle again; and he in
consequence made three furious leaps to shun the battle, but through the
giddiness and imbecility of his hallucination, he went back into the same
field of conflict; but it was not on the earth he walked, but alighted on
the shoulders of men and the tops of their helmets," &c.

In this state, Suibhne flits off the field of battle like a bird, or a
waif of the forest, without weight, and betakes himself to the wilds,
where he "herds with the deer, runs races with the showers, and flees with
the birds," as a wild denizen of the wilderness; but with his ecstacy of
terror, he receives the gift of prophecy. Dr. O’Donovan, in a note on this
curious passage, observes, "it was the ancient belief in Ireland, and
still is in the wilder mountainous districts, that lunatics are as light
as feathers, and can climb steeps and precipices like the
somnambulists."—See _Buile Suibhne_, a bardic romance on the madness of
this unfortunate warrior. This latter romance is occupied with Suibhne’s
adventures as a mad prophet, _Omadh_, in Irish. Query did the Bacchus
_Omadios_ of the Greeks derive his name from a similar source? It would be
a singular coincidence that would make a Greek god an _omadran_. Keats,
with a fine intuition, has depicted those _mores afflatorum_, in the
satyrs who do the benevolent biddings of Pan:

  "Thou, to whom every faun and satyr flies,
  For willing service; whether, to surprise
  The squatted hare, while, in half-sleeping fit,
  Or upward ragged precipices flit
  To save poor lambkins from the eagle’s maw;
  Or by mysterious enticement draw
  Bewildered shepherds to their paths again."

Compare with this picture of the Irish lunatic among the boughs of the
tree on the field of Moira, the following extracts from Bosroger’s account
of the possession of the nuns of Louviers, in A.D. 1642. One of the
sisters, surnamed De Jesus, conceived herself to be possessed by a demon
whom she called _Arracon_. "On the occasion of a procession of the host by
Monseigneur the Bishop of Evreux, _Arracon_ exhibited another example of
his quality, causing sister De Jesus to pour forth a torrent of
blasphemies and furious expressions all the time of the procession. When
she was brought into the choir, and held fast by an exorcist, for fear of
her offering some insult, the holy sacrament was borne past her. Arracon
immediately caused her to be shot forward through the air to a
considerable distance, so as to strike the gilt sun in which the adorable
eucharist was placed, out of the hands of the lord bishop; and the
exorcist making an effort to detain her, the demon lifted her up in the
air over an accoudoir, or leaning place, of three feet in height,
intending to lift her, as he declared, into the vault, but the exorcist
holding fast, all he could do was to cast the nun and exorcist back to the
floor together," &c. _Putiphar_, the possessor of Sister Saint Sacrement,
"made her with wonderful impetuosity run up a mulberry tree, of which the
stem was easy enough of ascent; but when she got up the stem, he forced
her onward till she approached the extremities of the slenderest branches,
and caused her to make almost the entire circuit of the mulberry tree, in
such sort that a man who saw her from a distance cried out that she flew
like a bird. Then the demon permitted her to see her peril; she grew pale,
and cried out with alarm. They ran in haste to bring a ladder, but
_Putiphar_ mocked them, crying, ’As I made this _chienne_ get up without a
ladder, so she shall go down,’ and caused her descend the same slender
branches to the stem, and thence to the ground."

Pere de la Menarday, in his _Examen Critique de l’Histoire des Diables de
London_, gives a letter from a missionary priest in Cochin China,
describing a case of demonopathy, in the course of which, if we could
believe the narrator, the patient seemed for a time to have conquered all
the ordinary tendencies of gravitation. The missionary, M. Delacourt,
writing from Paris, 25th November, 1738, begins by protesting his
unwillingness to expose himself to the repulses of public incredulity; but
for his friends’ sake consents to give the particulars. "Voici donc le
fait dans ses principales circonstances _tel que je l’ai vu de mes propres
yeux_." In the month of May, 1733, a young native communicant, named Dodo,
residing at the town of Cheta, in the province of Cham, and kingdom of
Cochin China, being reproached by his conscience for the suppression of
some facts in his confession, fell into violent convulsions on attempting
to take the host in his mouth. He was brought to the missionary, foaming,
leaping, and blaspheming in the manner usual among victims of his malady.
After many exorcisms, both by the missionary and by two other
ecclesiastics, which only increased his sufferings, he was at length, by
gentler entreaties, brought to make a confession. The missionary then
renewed his exorcisms, which he continued for a month with little success.
"At last," says he, "I determined to make a last effort, and to imitate
the example of Monseigneur the Bishop of Tilopolis on a like occasion,
namely, in my exorcism to command the demon in Latin to transport him to
the ceiling of the church, feet up and head down. On the instant his body
became rigid, and as though he were impotent of all his members, he was
dragged from the middle of the church to a column, and there, his feet
joined fast together, his back closely applied to the pillar, without
aiding himself with his hands, he was transported in the twinkling of an
eye to the ceiling, just like a weight run up by a cord, without any
visible agency. While he hung there, with his feet glued to the ceiling,
and his head down, I made the demon, for I had determined to confound and
humiliate him, confess the falsehood of the Pagan religion. I made him
confess that he was a deceiver, and at the same time admit the holiness of
Christianity. I kept him for better than half an hour in the air, and not
possessing enough of constancy to hold him there any longer, so frightened
was I myself at what I saw, I at length commanded him to lay the patient
at my feet without harming him. Immediately he cast him down before me
with no more hurt to him than if he had been a bundle of foul linen." It
is by no means improbable that Pere Delacourt himself had become infected
with the madness of the monomaniac whom he was engaged in exorcising,
before his eyes conceived that extraordinary image of the patient
ascending by invisible agency to the ceiling of the church. But his letter
bears evident marks of having been written under a sincere belief of the
reality of all that he describes, and he refers to several living
witnesses of the scene.

Reverting to this subject of optical illusion, already glanced at, we find
still another resemblance between the mysticism of the ancients and
moderns. The priestess rendering herself invisible to the bystanders,
appears to transcend all the rest of Jamblichus’s wonders. Strange to say,
even this pretension of the Colophonian prophetess is not without
something analogous among the alleged phenomena of mesmerism. "I requested
a young lady," says Dr. Elliotson, "whom I had long mesmerised, with the
never-tiring devotion of a parent, and in whom I produced a variety of
phenomena, to promise to be unable on waking to see her maid, who always
sat in the room at work during my visit, till I left the room, and then at
once to discern her. On waking, she said she did not see the maid, but
said she saw the chair on which the maid sat. Presently, however, she saw
the maid, was agitated, had an hysteric fit, and passed into the
sleep-waking state. I now inquired how she came to see her maid, as I had
not left the room, and told her she must not (see the maid), when I awoke
her again. I then awoke her again; she could not see the maid, was
astonished at the maid’s absence, and at first supposed she was in an
adjoining room; but presently rang the bell twice, though the woman was
standing before her, I moved just out of the room, leaving the door open,
and she saw the maid instantly, and was astonished, and laughed." In the
Colophonian oracle, they were the spectators, not the prophetess, who had
need thus to be put under the influence of the mesmeric _glamour_. Can it
be that, in certain diseased states of the optic nerve, it really is
subject to the illusion of seeing objects rise in air, as well as go round
in horizontal motion? They who saw these sights in the _adyta_ of temples,
in caves and sacred groves, in initiations and oracular consultations,
were all prepared by fasting, watching, and prayer, for the reception of
biological influence, and possibly may have seemed to themselves to see
what others desired they should believe themselves to have actually seen.
Was Lord Shrewsbury under this influence at Caldaro?

But the reader will begin to suspect that his credulity is about to be
solicited for the aërial flights of witches on their sweeping brooms. This
apprehension may be dismissed. Witchcraft, or, to call it by its proper
pathological name, demonopathy, was a true delusion, true so far as the
belief of the monomaniacs themselves was concerned, but resting wholly in
their own distempered imagination.

From a learned and philosophic review of the great work of Calmeil, _De la
Folie_, in the _Dublin Quarterly Journal of Medicine_, we extract the
following _resumé_ of the symptoms of this dreadful epidemic malady: "The
leading phenomenon was the belief of the sufferers that Satan had obtained
full mastery over them; that he was the object of their most fervent
worship, a certain portion of their life being spent in the actual company
of himself and his legion of darkness, when every crime that a diseased
imagination could suggest was committed by them. Both sexes attended at
the Devil’s Sabbaths, as they were termed, where the sorcerers met,
danced, and enjoyed every wild pleasure. To these meetings they travelled
through the air, though, by the power of Satan, their bodies seemed to
remain at home. They killed children, poisoned cattle, produced storms and
plagues, and held converse with Succubi and Incubi, and other fallen
spirits. At the Sabbath all agreed, that from every country the sorcerers
arrived transported by demons. Women perched on sticks, or riding on
goats, naked, with dishevelled hair, arrived in thousands; they passed
like meteors, and their descent was more rapid than that of the eagle or
hawk, when striking his prey. Over this meeting Satan presided; indecent
dances and licentious songs went on, and an altar was raised, where Satan,
with his head downward, his feet turned up, and his back to the altar,
celebrated his blasphemous mass."

Each individual sufferer believed herself or himself to have seen these
sights, to have gone through these origies, and to have been transported
to them through the air. If there had been but a few confessions, and
these exacted by torture, it might be thought that the fancies of the
examiners supplied the phenomena, to which the sufferers merely gave an
enforced and worthless assent. But the confessions were as often voluntary
as forced, and were indeed rather triumphant bravadoes than confessions of
anything that the sufferers themselves deemed shameful. It was a true
belief in the minds of the parties affected. The question has already been
asked, were they _en rapport_ with the rest of the diseased multitude, in
whose minds the common delusion existed? The question presupposes a mental
sympathy and participation, by one mind, of images existing in another,
which is one of the alleged manifestations of clairvoyance. But there is
another mode of accounting for these and similar phenomena, which as yet
obtains the approval of physicians, more than any suggestions of
clairvoyant communications. It is, that there are certain states of the
body in which the patient truly believes himself to see particular
objects, to do particular acts, and to possess special powers, which to
the rest of the world have no existence, but in respect of the patient
himself are realities as visible, tangible, and perceptible, as the actual
existences which surround him. For example, it is a fact which admits of
no dispute, that a certain quantity of alcohol taken into the human
stomach will cause the drinker to fall into _delirium tremens_; and that
in that state the patient will, with his waking eyes, see objects of a
particular kind; in nine cases out of ten, the forms of rats and mice
running over his bed, and about his person. There is no public delusion
here, no popular mind possessed with a fixed idea of these appearances, to
which the individual delusions might be referred; yet the swallower of the
alcohol in Dublin, and the swallower of the alcohol in Calcutta, will both
see exactly the same sorts of appearances, and will both express precisely
the same horror and disgust at their supposed tormentors. Is it the case,
then, that, as the forms of rats and mice come into the minds of men in
one kind of mental sickness, the forms of men and women riding on goats
and broomsticks through the air, and the other apparatus of the
witch-sabbaths, may have been but the manifestations of another disordered
state of the mental organism, a symptom merely and concomitant of an
epidemical disease? It is easy enough to understand how symptoms so simple
as the appearance of what are usually called "blue devils" should be
constant in their attendance on a particular state of cerebral disorder;
but when the hallucination becomes so complex as in the fantasies of
witchcraft, it is difficult to suppose that that long train of appearances
and imaginary transactions should follow on a merely pathological
derangement of the brain. Between the two alternatives of referring these
hallucinations to such a cause, on the one hand, or to a mesmeric
sympathy, as above suggested, between the individual and the crowd of the
possessed, on the other, it is hard to choose; but, perhaps, the latter
will appear to offer the less amount of difficulty. In the present state
of knowledge, however, it would be rash to say that a particular state of
diseased cerebral action might not be attended with a perfect set of
supposed phenomena as complex and constant in the minds of the sufferers,
as those which existed among the victims of demonomania.

An example less difficult of reconcilement with the theory of cerebral
disorder than that of the witchcraft of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, and yet more complex than that of the fantasies of _delirium
tremens_, may be found in the case of _lycanthropism_, or that form of
mania in which men have fancied themselves transformed into wolves. This
disease also is contagious; and on many occasions has exhibited itself in
all the terrors of a maniacal epidemic. As early as the time of Herodotus
the belief was rife among the Græco-Scythian colonies that a people called
the Neuri were subject to this species of metamorphosis; and Giraldus
Cambrensis, in the twelfth century, found the same superstition in full
force in Ireland. It again broke forth in Livonia, its ancient seat, with
all the symptoms of a periodical annual epidemic, in the sixteenth
century. Peucer gives the following account of what these maniacs
themselves believed to happen to them. "Immediately after Christmas day,
in each year, a club-footed boy appears, who goes round the country, and
summons all those slaves of Satan, of whom there are great numbers, to
assemble and follow him. If they hesitate or refuse, a tall man appears,
armed with a whip of flexible iron wires, and compels them with blows of
his scourge to come forth and proceed. He whips them so severely, that
oft-times the stripes left by the iron thongs remain impressed on their
bodies and torment them cruelly. As soon as they go out and follow in the
train, they seem to lose their human form, and to put on the appearance of
wolves. Several thousands thus assemble. The leader walks before with his
iron scourge; the crowd of those who, in their delusion, imagine that they
have become wolves, follow after. Wherever they meet with cattle they rush
upon them and rend them; they carry off such portions as they can, and do
much destruction; but to touch or injure mankind is not permitted to them.
When they come to rivers, the leader with a stroke of his whip divides the
waters, which stand apart, leaving a dry channel by which they cross.
After twelve days the band disperses, and every man resumes his own form,
the vulpine mask dropping off him. The way in which the change takes place
is this, as they allege: those who undergo the change, which occupies but
a moment, drop suddenly down as if struck with a fit, and so lie senseless
and like dead persons; but they do not in fact go away or change their
places at all; nor while lying in that seemingly lifeless state do they
exhibit any vulpine appearance whatever, but they go out of themselves
(and leave themselves) like dead bodies; and save that they are convulsed,
and roll about somewhat, they exhibit no sign or evidence of life. Hence
the opinion has arisen that their spirits only are taken forth of their
bodies, and put for a time into the phantasms of vulpine forms; and then,
after doing the bidding of the devil in that way, are remitted back to
their proper bodies, which thereupon are restored to animation; and the
were-wolves themselves confirm this belief by acknowledging that in truth
the human form is not withdrawn from their bodies, nor the vulpine
appearance substituted for it; but that it is their spirits only which are
impelled to leave their human bodily prisons, and enter into the bodies of
wolves, in which they dwell and are carried about for the prescribed space
of time. Some of those who have stated that they came long distances after
escaping from the chains of their wolfish imprisonment, being questioned
how they got out of that confinement, and why they returned, and how they
could cross such wide and deep rivers, gave answer that the imprisoning
forms no longer confined them, that they felt coerced to come out of them,
and passed over the rivers by aërial flight."

The same features marked the outbreak of lycanthropy in the years
1598-1600, among the Vaudois. The possessed fell into catalepsy, and lay
senseless during the time they imagined themselves in their bestial
transformation. The disease was almost uniformly complicated with
demonopathy, or the possession of witchcraft.

There seems no reason to doubt that lycanthropism was a disease as
constant in its character and as well defined in its symptoms as _delirium
tremens_, or any of the ordinary forms of mania. The evidences of its
existence are, however, considerably stronger than those of witchcraft;
for where on the one hand no credible witness ever saw a witch either at
the sabbath, or on her way to it, or on her return from it, there are not
wanting distinct proofs on oath, corroborated by admitted facts in
judicial proceedings, of persons afflicted with lycanthropy traversing the
woods on all-fours, and being found bloody from the recent slaughter both
of beasts and human victims; and in one of these cases, that of Jacques
Roulet, tried before the Parliament of Paris in 1598, the body of a newly
slain child, half mangled, and with all the marks of having been gnawed by
canine teeth, was found close to the place where the maniac was arrested.
It is worthy of remark that both lycanthropists and witches ascribed the
power of disembodying themselves to the use of ointments. Antiquity
furnishes no parallel to the horrors of these malignant and homicidal
manias. Their analogues may be found in the fabled styes of Circe, or in
the frenzied raptures of the Sybilline and Delphic priestesses; but the
extent, the variety, and the hideousness of the disease in modern times,
infinitely surpass all that was ever dreamt of in Pagan credulity. The
points of resemblance, however, are not yet exhausted.

"A chief sign of the divine afflatus," says Jamblichus, citing Porphyry,
"is, that he who induces the _numen_ into himself, sees the spirit
descending, and its quantity and quality. Also, he who receives the
_numen_ sees before the reception a certain likeness of a fire; sometimes,
also, this is beheld by the bystanders, both at the advent and the
departure of the god. By which sign, they who are skilful in these matters
discern, with perfect accuracy, what is the power of the numen, and what
its order, and what are the things concerning which it can give true
responses, and what it is competent to do.... Thus it is that the
excellence of this divine fire, and appearance, as it were, of ineffable
light, comes down upon, and fills, and dominates over the possessed
person, and he is wholly involved in it, so that he cannot do any act of
himself.... But after this comes ecstacy, or disembodiment."

Thomas Bartholin (brother of Gaspar) has anticipated the inquiries of Sir
Henry Marsh, and of Reichenbach himself, on the subject of light from the
human body. In a treatise, full of singular learning, "De luce Animalium,"
he has adduced a multitude of examples of the evolution of light from the
living as well as the dead body, and in the cases of secular and pagan, as
well as of ecclesiastical and Christian, persons; and this, without having
recourse to any testimony of the Hagiologists. The _Aureolæ_ of the
Christian saints may not, after all, have been the merely fanciful
additions of superstitious artists.

The convulsive distortions of the Pythoness were but a feeble type of the
phenomena of demonopathy, or the supposed possession of the middle ages.
It was chiefly in convents, among the crowd of young girls and women, that
these dreadful disorders were used to break out; but the visitation was
not confined to convents, nor to the profession of any particular creed.
Wherever religious excitation prevailed among the young and susceptible,
especially when they happened to be brought together in considerable
numbers, there the pest was attracted, as a fever or other malady would be
attracted by a foul atmosphere. No patient in the magnetic coma ever
exhibited such prodigies of endurance as thousands of the involuntary
victims of these contagious manias. Who in any modern _seance_ has beheld
a patient supported only on the protuberance of the stomach, with the head
and limbs everted, and the arms raised in the air, and so remaining curved
into the appearance of a fish on a stall, tied by the tail and gills,
motionless for hours at a time? Or what rigidity of muscle in magnetic
catalepsy has ever equalled that of a convulsionnaire, who would weary the
strongest man, inflicting blows of a club, to the number of several
thousands a day, on her stomach, while sustaining herself in an arc solely
by the support of the head and the heels? Madame de Sazilli, who was
exorcised in presence of the Duke of Orleans, at London, in 1631, "became,
at the command of Pere Elisce, supple as a plate of lead. The exorcist
plaited her limbs in various ways, before and behind, to this side and to
that, in such sort that her head would sometimes almost touch the ground,
her demon (say her malady) retaining her in each position immovably until
she was put into the next. Next came the demon Sabulon, who rolled her
through the chapel with horrible convulsions. Five or six times he carried
her left foot up higher than her shoulder; all the while her eyes were
fixed, wide open, without winking; after that he threw out her limbs till
she touched the ground, with her legs extended straight on either side,
and while in that posture, the exorcist compelled her to join her hands,
and with the trunk of the body in an erect posture, to adore the holy
sacrament." We seem to read the proceedings of an electro-biologist,
rather than of a pastor of the church: but the parallel is not yet at an
end. "The same nun," says Calmeil, "towards the close of her exorcism,
executed a command which the Duke imparted secretly to her exorcist." Then
follows this remarkable admission of the learned and cautious
physiologist:—"On hundreds of occasions one might believe, in effect, that
the Energumenes read the thoughts of the ecclesiastics who were charged
with the combating of their demons. It is certain that these young women
were endowed, during their excesses of hysteria or nervous exaltation,
with a penetration of mind altogether unique." The children of the
fanatics of the Cevennes, while in their supposed prophetic ecstacies,
spoke the purest dialect of French, and expressed themselves with singular
propriety. The same facility of speaking in a fluent and exalted style
while in the divinatory ecstacy, was remarked of old in the case of the
Pythian priestess. "Though it cannot be divined," says Plutarch, in his
"Inquiry," "why the Pythian priestess ceases to deliver her oracles in
verse; but that her parentage was virtuous and honest, and that she always
lived a sober and chaste life, yet her education was among poor, laboring
people, so that she was advanced to the oracular sect rude and unpolished,
void of all the advantages of art or experience. For, as it is the opinion
of Xenophon, that a virgin, ready to be espoused, ought to be carried to
the bridegroom’s house before she has either seen or heard the least
communication, so the Pythian priestess ought to converse with Apollo
illiterate and ignorant almost of every thing, still approaching his
presence with a truly virgin soul."

We might here, without any stretch of imagination, suppose we are reading
a commentary on the birth and character of Joan of Arc, or of any of the
prophetesses of the Swiss Anabaptists. But to return to the possessions
recorded by Calmeil.

The biological relations alleged by the mesmerists appear in still
stronger development in the case of the nuns of Auxonne in 1662. The
Bishop of Chalons reports, speaking of the possessed, "that all the
aforesaid young women, being in number eighteen, as well seculars as
regulars, and without a single exception, appeared to him to have obtained
the gift of tongues, inasmuch as they accurately replied to the matters in
Latin, which were addressed to them by their exorcists, and which were not
borrowed from the ritual, still less arranged by any preconcert; they
frequently explained themselves in Latin—sometimes in entire periods,
sometimes in broken sentences;" "that all or almost all of them were
proved to have introvision (_cognizance de l’interieur_) and knowledge of
whatever thought might be secretly addressed to them, as appeared
particularly in the case of the internal commands which were often
addressed to them by the exorcists, and which in general they obeyed
implicitly, although without any external signification of the command,
either verbal or by way of sign; as the said Lord Bishop experienced in
many instances, among others, in that of Denise Parisot, whom the exorcist
having commanded, in the depths of his own mind, to come to him for the
purpose of being exorcised, she came incontinently, though dwelling in a
remote part of the town; telling the Lord Bishop that she had received his
commands and was come accordingly; and this she did on several occasions;
likewise in the person of Sister Jamin, a novice, who, on recovering from
her fit, told him the internal commandment which he had given to her demon
during the exorcism; also in the case of the Sister Borthon, to whom
having issued a mental commandment in one of her paroxysms to come and
prostrate herself before the Holy Sacrament, with her face to the ground
and her arms stretched forward, she executed his command at the very
instant that he willed it, with a promptitude and precipitation altogether
wonderful."

Sister Denise Parisot, one of those who exhibited these singularities,
also displayed a farther and very remarkable manifestation of what would
now be called biological influence. "Being commanded by his Lordship to
make the pulse of her right arm entirely cease beating while that of the
left continued, and then to transfer the pulsation so as to beat in the
right arm while it should stop in the left, she executed his orders with
the utmost precision in the presence of the physician (Morel), who
admitted and deposed to the fact, and of several ecclesiastics. Sister de
la Purification did the same thing two or three times, causing her pulse
to beat or to stop at the command of the exorcist."

Instead of exorcist we may, without much apprehension of offending either
the reason or the belief of any candid person, read "Mesmerist." The
passes seem similar, the phenomena identical. Again, in the case of the
girls of the parish of Landes, near Bayeux, in 1732, the orders given by
the exorcists in Latin appeared to be well understood by the patients. "In
general," says Calmeil, quoting the contemporaneous account of their
possession, "during the ecstatic access, the sense of touch was not
excited even by the application of fire; nevertheless the exorcists affirm
that their patients yielded immediate attention to the thoughts which they
(the exorcists) refrained from expressing, and that they described with
exactness the interior of distant houses which they had never before
seen."

This long and varied survey of different forms of physical and mental
malady brings us to a point where we may, with some confidence, take our
stand on inductive conclusions. It seems evident, then, that all the
phenomena of animal magnetism have been from an early period known to
mankind under the various forms of divinatory ecstasy, demonopathy or
witchmania, theomania, or fanatical religious excitation, spontaneous
catalepsy, and somnambulism. That, in addition to the ordinary
manifestations of insensibility to pain, rigidity, and what is called
clairvoyance, the patients affected with the more intense conditions of
the malady have at all times exhibited a marvellous command of languages;
a seeming participation in the thoughts, sensations, and impulses of
others; a power of resisting, for some short time at least, the action of
fire; and, perhaps, a capacity of evolving some hitherto unknown energy
counteractive of the force of gravitation. That the condition of mind and
body in question can be induced by means addressed to each and all of the
senses, as well as involuntarily by way of sympathy or contagion. That the
fixing of the eyes on a particular point, as a wafer, or the umbilicus, or
on a polished ball or mirror, is one of the most general and efficacious
means of artificially inducing the condition of clairvoyance. That it may
also, on those prepared for its reception by strong mental excitement, be
induced by tumultuous music, as by the sound of drums and cymbals, by
odors, and, perhaps, by unguents; and that the same condition also
frequently supervenes on long-continued and intense emotion, as well as on
those hysterical and convulsive movements of the body which sometimes
attend on excessive religious excitation. That, induced by the latter
means, clairvoyance has a tendency to become contagious, and has often
afflicted whole communities with the most dangerous and deplorable
epidemic hallucinations, as in the fancied witch-sabbaths of the
domonomaniacs, and prowling excursions of lycanthropes and vampyres; but
that, although in these demotic frenzies, the prevailing ideas and images
presented to the minds of the sufferers are merely illusory, they possess
the capacity of being put in such a relation with ideas and images derived
from actual existence in the mind of others, as to perceive and
appropriate them. Beyond this it would be difficult to advance our
speculation with any degree of certainty; but if speculation may be at all
indulged in such a question, it might, perhaps, be allowed to a sanguine
speculator to surmise that, possibly, the mind in that state may be put
_en rapport_ with not only the ideas and emotions of another particular
mind, but with the whole of the external world, and with all its minds.
Another step would carry us to that participation in the whole scheme of
nature, pretended to by divinators and seers; but it must be owned that,
in the present state of the evidences, there is no solid ground on which
to rest the foot of conjecture in taking either the one step or the other.

In the mean time, many practitioners are playing with an agency, the
dangerous character of which they little suspect. In ancient exorcisms, it
sometimes happened that the exorcist himself became the involuntary
recipient of the contagious frenzy of the patient. If such an event
happened now, it would not be more wonderful than when it befel the Pere
Surin, at Loudon, in 1635, as he has himself described his disaster in his
letter to the Jesuit Attichi: "For three months and a half I have never
been without a devil in full exercise within me. While I was engaged in
the performance of my ministry, the devil passed out of the body of the
possessed, and coming into mine, assaulted me and cast me down, shook me,
and traversed me to and fro, for several hours. I cannot tell you what
passed within me during that time, and how that spirit united itself with
mine, leaving no liberty either of sensation or of thought, but acting in
me like another self, or as if I possessed two souls; these two souls
making, as it were, a battle ground of my body. When I sought, at the
instigation of the one, to make the sign of the cross on my mouth, the
other suddenly would turn round my hand and seize the fingers with my
teeth, making me bite myself with rage. When I sought to speak, the word
would be taken out of my mouth; at mass I would be stopped short; at table
I could not carry the food to my mouth; at confession I forgot my sins; in
fine, I felt the devil go and come within me as if he used me for his
daily dwelling-house."

Or, if instead of passing into a single operator, as in the case of Surin,
the diseased contagion should suddenly expand itself among a crowd of
bystanders, there would be nothing to wonder at, although enough to
deplore, in such a catastrophe. It would be no more than has already
happened in all the epidemics of lycanthropy and witchmania, of the
dancers of St. Vitas, of the Jumpers, Quakers, and Revivalists, of the
Mewers, Barkers, and Convulsionnaires. The absence of religious
pretensions among the operators seems as yet to be the chief guarantee
against such results. If instead of being made rigid and lucid by the
manipulations of a professor, the patients should find themselves cast
into that state by contact with the tomb of a preacher, or with the
reliques of a saint, society would soon be revisited with all the evils of
_pseudo_-miracles and supposed demoniacal possessions. The comparatively
innocent frenzy of the followers of Father Mathew, was the nearest
approach to a social disturbance of that kind that our country has been
visited by since the barking epidemic of the fourteenth century. "In the
county of Leicester, a person travelling along the road," says Camden,
"found a pair of gloves, fit for his hands, as he thought; but when he put
them on, he lost his speech immediately, and could do nothing but bark
like a dog; nay, from that moment, the men and women, old and young,
throughout the whole country, barked like dogs, and the children like
whelps. This plague continued, with some eighteen days, with others a
month, and with some for two years; and, like a contagious distemper, at
last infected the neighboring counties, and set them a barking too."

If mesmerism did no more than demonstrate, as it has done, that all the
supposed evidences of modern inspiration, as well as of modern demoniacal
possession and ghost-craft, are but the manifestations of a physical
disorder, capable of being induced by ordinary agencies, it would have
done a great service to the cause of social and religious stability. In
addition to this, it has furnished surgery with a new narcotic, perhaps
with a new anti-spasmodic. It is not impossible that here, at length, a
means may have been found for combating the horrors of hydrophobia. Its
higher pretensions of clairvoyance and provision, if not proved, are at
least not yet satisfactorily disproved. Its admitted usefulness may,
perhaps, counterbalance its perils; but in every exercise of it, whether
curative or speculative, it is never to be forgotten, that the phenomena
are those of disease, and that the production of disease, save for the
counteraction of other maladies more hurtful, is in itself an evil.

                                                                     S. F.





A CHAPTER OF EPITAPHS.


                          From Sharp’s Magazine.


By F. Lawrence.

The best epitaphs, according to our notion, are generally the shortest and
the plainest. In no description of composition is elaborate and ornate
phraseology so much out of place.  Where a world-wide reputation has been
achieved, the name alone, with the addition perhaps of a date, is often
calculated to produce a more impressive effect than an ostentatious
inscription. It has been observed that the simple words—

                 CATHERINE THE GREAT TO PETER THE FIRST,

inscribed on the monument erected by the Empress Catherine to the memory
of her husband, arrogant as they are, contain the essence of the sublime.
And, in like manner, among the most impressive memorials in Westminster
Abbey are the words, "O rare Ben Jonson," chiselled beneath the great
play-wright’s bust, and the name of J. DRYDEN, with the date of his birth
and death, and the simple statement, that the tomb was erected, in 1720,
by John Sheffield, Duke of Buckingham. We doubt whether the effect of the
latter would have been improved by the addition of the couplet written for
it by Pope, admirable as it is:

  This Sheffield raised: the sacred dust below
  Was Dryden once—the rest who does not know?

Among the best epitaphs in the Poet’s Corner, we are inclined to number
that on Spenser, which combines in an eminent degree dignity and
simplicity, and possesses a character which at once attracts attention.
The monument on which it appears had been originally erected by Anne,
Countess of Dorset, and having fallen into decay, was restored, in 1768,
precisely in its old form:

  Heare lyes (expecting the second
  Comminge of our Savior CHRIST
  JESUS) the body of Edmond Spencer,
  The Prince of Poets in his tyme,
  Other witnesse than the works
  Which he left behinde him.
  He was borne in London in the yeare 1553,
    And died in the year 1598.

The epitaph of Michael Drayton, another of the Elizabethan poets, said by
some to be the composition of Ben Jonson, and by others to be by Quarles,
has also a species of quaint beauty and solemnity which raises it above
the ordinary level. It was originally in gilt letters:

                          MICHAEL DRAITON, Esq.

                      A memorable poet of this age,
              Exchanged his laurell for a crowne of glorye,
                                Ao. 1631.

    Doe, pious Marble! let thy readers knowe
    What they and what their children owe
    To DRAITON’S name, whose sacred dust
    We recommend unto thy TRUST:
  Protect his memory, and preserve his storye,
  Remaine a lastinge monument of his glorye;
    And when thy ruines shall disclaime
    To be the treas’rer of his name,
    His name that cannot fade shall be
    An everlasting monument to thee.

We cannot say that the Latin compositions of this sort in Westminster
Abbey are much to our taste. One however, we cannot pass over—that to the
memory of Goldsmith, by Dr. Johnson—a scholar-like production, dictated by
affection, and full of grace and tenderness. In the delineation of the
personal and literary character of his friend, we recognize all the
grander traits of the honest giant’s loving heart and powerful pen.
Nothing can be in better taste than his commendation of Goldsmith’s
genius:

  Affectuum _potens et lenis Dominator_;
  Ingenio sublimis—vividus, versatilis,
  Oratione grandis, nitidus, venustus—

Of the English epitaphs, one of the most remarkable for elegance and
simplicity is that on Purcell, the composer, reputed, on the authority of
Malone, to be by Dryden, It certainly is not unworthy of his pen:

  Here lyes
  HENRY PURCELL, Esq.
  Who left this life,
  And is gone to that blessed place
  Where only his Harmony
  Can be exceeded.
  Obiit 21 die Novembris
  Anno Ætatis suæ 37
  Annoque Domini 1695.

Among more modern inscriptions, those on the great engineers, Watt and
Telford, are particularly worthy of notice. The former is from the pen of
Lord Brougham:

  Not to perpetuate a name,
  Which must endure while the peaceful arts flourish,
  But to show
  That mankind have learned to know those
  Who best deserve their gratitude,
  The King,
  His ministers, and many of the nobles
  And commoners of the realm
  Raised this monument to
  JAMES WATT,
  Who, directing the force of an original genius,
  Early exercised in philosophic research,
  To the improvement of the Steam Engine,
  Enlarged the resources of his country,
  Increased the power of man,
  And rose to eminent place
  Among the most illustrious  followers of science,
  And the real benefactors of the world.

The inscription on Telford’s monument is equally chaste and beautiful. It
presents this noble summary of his life and character:

  The orphan son of a shepherd, self-educated,
  He raised himself,
  By his extraordinary talents and integrity,
  From the humble condition of an operative mason,
  And became one of the
  Most eminent Civil Engineers of the age.
  This marble has been erected near the spot
  Where his remains are deposited,
  By the friends who revered his virtues,
  But his noblest monuments are to be found amongst
  The great public works of his country.

Every visitor will reverently pause before the magnificent cenotaph of the
great Earl of Chatham, which, though somewhat too confused and elaborate
in its decorations, is not unworthy of the greatest of English ministers.
Having achieved a higher reputation as a statesman and orator than any
other public man which his country had produced, and having fallen, as it
were, in her service, the national gratitude was displayed in an
unprecedented manner by honors paid his memory. His body lay in state
three days in the painted chamber in the House of Lords—his public funeral
exceeded in splendor the obsequies of princes—his debts were paid by the
nation—and finally, the stately tomb to which we have drawn attention, was
placed over his remains. The inscription whilst exceedingly plain and
simple, is impressive and appropriate:

  Erected by the King and Parliament
  As a testimonial to
  The Virtues and Ability
  of
  WILLIAM PITT, EARL OF CHATHAM,
  During whose administration, in the reigns of
  George II. and George III.
  Divine Providence
  Exalted Great Britain
  To a height of Prosperity and Glory
  Unknown in any former age.

Of poetical epitaphs in the Abbey some of the most important are by Pope.
Like everything else from his pen, they are carefully written, but viewed
as monumental inscriptions, not distinguished for any striking excellence.
Among the best of them is that on the Honourable James Craggs, a secretary
of state, rather discreditably mixed up with the South Sea Bubble:—

  Statesman, yet friend to truth! of soul sincere,
  In action faithful, yet in honour clear!
  Who broke no promise, served no private end,
  Who gained no title, and who lost no friend;
  Ennobled by Himself, by all approved,
  Praised, wept, and honored by the Muse he loved.

The one on Gay is interesting as a tribute of friendship, and as a
faithful portrait of that pleasing and amiable poet, the simplicity of
whose character is admirably delineated in the first couplet:—

  Of manners gentle, and affections mild,
  _In wit a man, simplicity a child_.

Altogether it is a beautiful and appropriate composition, and we cannot
but regret that the monument on which it appears should be disfigured by
the doggerel, said to have been written by Gay himself, and inscribed on
the ledge just above Pope’s epitaph;

  Life is a jest, and all things show it;
  I thought so once, but now I know it.

That of Nicholas Rowe, the dramatist (also by Pope), has been admired for
the pathos of the concluding lines, the beauty of which, however, it is a
matter of notoriety, was considerably marred by a prosaic circumstance,
which proves the danger of assuming facts even in poetical compositions.
The monument is commemorative of the poet and of his only daughter, the
wife of Henry Fane. His widow survived him, and her inconsolable
affliction was beautifully depicted:-

  To these so mourned in death, so loved in life,
  The childless parent and the widowed wife,
  With tears inscribes this monumental stone,
  That holds their ashes, _and expects her own_.

Almost, however, before "the monumental stone" was finished, the
disconsolate widow dried her eyes, and married a gallant colonel of
dragoons, without considering that she was spoiling the beauty of her
husband’s epitaph.

Among the most flagrant instances of false taste, we must specify that on
the tomb of David Garrick. The tomb itself has been described as "a
theatrical conceit, of which the design exhibits neither taste nor
invention." The epitaph was the production of Pratt, author of Harvest
Home and other lucubrations which have long since been consigned to the
tomb of the Capulets; and both epitaph and monument are thus spoken of by
Charles Lamb in the _Essays of Elia_. Alluding principally to the
eccentric attitude of the actor’s effigy, he observes, "Though I would not
go so far, with some good Catholics abroad, as to shut players altogether
out of consecrated ground, yet I own I was not a little scandalized at the
introduction of theatrical airs and gestures into a place set apart to
remind us of the saddest realities. Going nearer, I found inscribed under
this burlesque figure a farrago of false thought and nonsense." The
farrago in question is in verse, and represents Shakspeare and Garrick as
"twin stars," who as long as time shall last are to "irradiate earth with
a beam divine."

There are but few epitaphs in St. Paul’s Cathedral—the other great
resting-place of illustrious dead—worthy of remark or reproduction. The
best in the whole edifice, and one of the most perfect compositions of its
kind, is the well-known inscription commemorative of its renowned
architect, Sir Christopher Wren:

  Subditus conditur hujus Ecelesiæ at Urbis
  Conditor, CHRISTOPHERUS WREN, qui vixit
  Annos ultra nonaginta, non sibi, sed
  Bono publico. _Lector, si monumentum requiris,_
  _Circumspice._

We need not point out the beauties of this celebrated epitaph:—its
terseness of phraseology (to which no translation could do justice)—its
suggestiveness, grandeur and dignity. Another Latin inscription in St.
Paul’s is also deserving notice, both on account of its merit, and the
individual it commemorates—that on Dr. Samuel Johnson, written by the
famous Dr. Parr. Of English inscriptions in this Cathedral, the most
striking is that on the monument of John Howard. It concludes with the
well-known sentence: "He trod an open and unfrequented path,to
immortality, in the ardent and unremitting exercise of Christian charity.
May this tribute to his fame excite an emulation of his truly glorious
achievements."

It is no very easy matter to produce a good epitaph. Great practice in
composition is required—great power of condensation—and the exercise of
judgment and discrimination. In efforts at epitaph-writing, few English
poets have appeared to advantage. One or two perfect specimens, indeed, we
possess, but the success of a single writer must be set against the
failure of a great many. Of our good epitaphs, the very best, in our
opinion, is that on the Countess Dowager of Pembroke, the sister of Sir
Philip Sidney, by Ben Jonson. Although it has been often quoted, we cannot
exclude it from this paper:

  Underneath this sable hearse
  Lies the subject of all verse,
  Sidney’s sister, Pembroke’s mother:
  Death, ere thou hast slain another,
  Fair, and wise, and good as she,
  Time shall throw his dart at thee.

Another of Jonson’s epitaphs, although more rugged in versification, is
also deserving of quotation;

  Underneath this stone doth lie
  As much virtue as could die;
  Which, when alive, did vigor give
  To as much beauty as could live.
  If she had a single fault,
  Leave it buried in this vault.

Not a few of Pope’s epitaphs, as we have before hinted, appear tame,
insipid, and characterized by a false taste. We except the well-known
couplet for the monument of Sir Isaac Newton, in which there are dignity
of language and boldness of conception:

  Nature and nature’s laws lay hid in night;—
  God said, "Let Newton be!" and all was light.

David Garrick is the author of some very good and characteristic epitaphs.
The best, is that on Claudius Philips, the musician, who lived and died in
great poverty. It was some time ascribed to Dr. Johnson, but is now known
to be the production of Garrick:

  Philips, whose touch harmonious could remove
  The pangs of guilty power and hapless love,
  Rest here, distress’d by poverty no more,
  Here find that calm thou gav’st so oft before;
  Sleep undisturbed within this peaceful shrine,
  Till angels wake thee with a note like thine.

Another of Garnet’s epitaphs, is that on Mr. Havard, the comedian, who
died in 1778. It is described by the author as a tribute "to the memory of
a character he long knew and respected." Whatever its merits as a
composition, the professional metaphor introduced is sadly out of place:

  "An honest man’s the noblest work of God."
  Havard, from sorrow rest beneath this stone;
  An honest man—beloved as soon as known;
  Howe’er defective in the mimic art,
  In real life he justly played his part!
  The noblest character he acted well,
  And heaven applauded when the curtain fell.

The one on William Hogarth, in Chiswick Churchyard, by Garrick, is in
better taste:

  Farewell, great painter of mankind,
    Who reach’d the noblest point of art;
  Whose pictur’d morals charm the mind,
    And through the eye correct the heart!
  If genius fire thee, reader, stay;
    If nature touch thee, drop a tear:-
  If neither move thee, turn away,
    For Hogarth’s honor’d dust lies here.

Some distinguished men have amused themselves, while living, by inditing
epitaphs for themselves. Franklin, and the great lawyer and orientalist,
Sir William Jones, have left characteristic performances of this kind in
prose, and from Matthew Prior we have a mock-serious one in verse. The
latter has been often quoted, but it will bear repetition:

  Nobles and heralds, by your leave,
    Here lie the bones of Matthew Prior:
  The son of Adam and of Eve,
    Can Bourbon or Nassau go higher?

In the same spirit, but superior in tone and quality, is the following,
the authorship of which is unknown, "on a poor but honest man:"

  Stop, reader, here, and deign to look
    On one without a name,
  Ne’er enter’d in the ample book
    Of fortune or of fame.
  Studious of peace, he hated strife;
    Meek virtues fill’d his breast;
  His coat of arms, "a spotless life,"
    "An honest heart" his crest.
  Quarter’d therewith was innocence,
    And thus his motto ran:
  "A conscience void of all offence,
    Before both God and man."
  In the great day of wrath, through pride
    Now scorns his pedigree,
  Thousands shall wish they’d been allied
    To this great family.

The thought in Prior’s is ludicrously expressed in the following, from a
monument erected in 1703, in the New Church burying-ground, Dundee, to the
memory of J. R.

  Here lies a Man,
  Com’d of Adam and Eve;
  If any will climb higher,
  I give him leave.

Amongst poetical epitaphs, of the more elaborate class, we must notice two
by Mason; one to the memory of his mother, in Bristol Cathedral, and the
other on a young lady named Drummond, in the church of Brodsworth,
Yorkshire. We have space for only the latter.

  Here sleeps what once was beauty, once was grace;
    Grace, that with tenderness and sense combined
  To form that harmony of soul and face,
    Where brainy shines the mirror of the mind.
  Such was the maid that, in the morn of youth,
    In virgin innocence, in nature’s pride,
  Blest with each art that owes its charms to truth,
    Sank in her father’s fond embrace, and died.
  He weeps; O venerate the holy tear!
    Faith lends her aid to ease affliction’s load;
  The parent mourns his child upon the bier,
    The Christian yields an angel to his God.

Of whimsical and satirical epitaphs—some actually inscribed on tombstones,
and others intended for pasquinades—a large collection might be made. We
have little taste for these anomalous compositions, nor do we consider it
creditable to the national character, that so many English churchyards can
be pointed out where they occur. But there are those who will make even
the tomb a subject of pleasant humors. The epitaph for the tomb of Sir
John Vanbrugh, distinguished as a dramatist and architect, and reflecting
on his achievements in the latter capacity, is as follows:

  Lie heavy on him, Earth, for he
  Laid many a heavy load on thee.

The original of the following is among the epigrams of Boileau:—

  Here lies my wife; there let her lie;
  She is at rest—and so am I.

We do not suppose that this was ever engraved on a tombstone, either in
French or English; but the following lines are said to have been copied
from a slab in an English church:—

  Here lies the body of Sarah Sexton,
  Who as a wife did never vex one;
  We can’t say that for her at the next stone.

The next specimen is also known to have appeared on a tomb in Essex:—

  Here lies the man Richard,
    And Mary his wife;
  Their surname was Pritchard;
    They lived without strife;
  And the reason was plain;
    They abounded in riches,
  They no care had nor pain,
    And the wife wore the breeches.

We will not multiply examples of these compositions. Lines of the
description we have quoted have often found their way into print, and we
have selected one or two of the least offensive as examples of
eccentricity.





THE GOOD OLD TIMES IN PARIS.


                        AN ADVENTURE WITH ROBBERS.


From Chamber’s Edinburgh Journal.

The world, since it was a world at all, has ever been fond of singing the
praises of the good old times. It would seem a general rule, that so soon
as we get beyond a certain age, whatever that may be, we acquire a high
opinion of the past, and grumble at every thing new under the sun. One
cause of this may be, that distance lends enchantment to the view, and
that the history of the past, like a landscape travelled over, loses in
review all the rugged and wearisome annoyances that rendered it scarcely
bearable in the journey. But it is hardly worth while to speculate upon
the causes of an absurdity which a little candid retrospection will do
more to dissipate than whole folios of philosophy. We can easily
understand a man who sighs that he was not born a thousand years hence
instead of twenty or thirty years ago, but that any one should encourage a
regret that his lot in life was not cast a few centuries back, seems
inexplicable on any rational grounds. The utter folly of praising the good
old times may be illustrated by a reference to the wretched condition of
most European cities; but we shall confine ourselves to the single case of
Paris, now one of the most beautiful capitals in the world.

In the thirteenth century the streets of Paris were not paved; they were
muddy and filthy to a very horrible degree, and swine constantly loitered
about and fed in them. At night there were no public lights, and
assassinations and robberies were far from infrequent. At the beginning of
the fourteenth century public lighting was begun on a limited scale; and
at best only a few tallow candles were put up in prominent situations. The
improvement, accordingly, did little good, and the numerous bands of
thieves had it still pretty much their own way. Severity of punishment
seldom compensates the want of precautionary measures. It was the general
custom at this period to cut off the ears of a condemned thief after the
term of his imprisonment had elapsed. Thia was done that offenders might
be readily recognized should they dare again to enter the city, banishment
from which was a part of the sentence of such as were destined to be
cropped. But they often found it easier to fabricate false ears than to
gain a livelihood away from the arena of their exploits; and this measure,
severe and cruel as it was, was found inefficient to rid the capital of
their presence.

Among the various adventures with thieves, detailed by an author
contemporaneous with Louis XIII., the following affords a rich example of
the organization of the domestic brigands of the time, and of the wretched
security which the capital afforded to its inhabitants.

A celebrated advocate named Polidamor had by his reputation for riches
aroused the covetousness of some chiefs of a band of brigands, who
flattered themselves that could they catch him they would obtain
possession of an important sum. They placed upon his track three bold
fellows, who, after many fruitless endeavors, encountered him one evening
accompanied only by a single lackey. Seizing fast hold of himself and
attendant, they rifled him in a twinkling; and as he had accidentally left
his purse at home, they took his rich cloak of Spanish cloth and silk,
which was quite new, and of great value. Polidamor, who at first resisted,
found himself compelled to yield to force, but asked as a favor to be
allowed to redeem his mantle. This was agreed to at the price of thirty
pistoles; and the rogues appointed a rendezvous the next day, at six in
the evening, on the same spot, for the purpose of effecting the exchange.
They recommended him to come alone, assuring him that his life would be
endangered should he appear accompanied with an escort. Polidamor repaired
to the place at the appointed hour, and after a few moments of expectation
he saw a carriage approaching in which were seated four persons in the
garb of gentlemen. They descended from the vehicle, and one of them,
advancing towards the advocate, asked him in a low voice if he were not in
search of a cloak of Spanish cloth and silk. The victim replied in the
affirmative, and declared himself prepared to redeem it at the sum at
which it had been taxed. The thieves having assured themselves that he was
alone, seized him, and made him get into the carriage; and one of them
presenting a pistol to his breast, bade him hold his tongue under pain of
instant death, while another blindfolded him. As the advocate trembled
with fear, they assured him that no harm was intended, and bade the
coachman drive on.

After a rapid flight, which was yet long enough to inspire the prisoner
with deadly terror, the carriage stopped in front of a large mansion, the
gate of which opened to receive them, and closed again as soon as they had
passed the threshold. The robbers alighted with their captive, from whose
eyes they now removed the bandage. He was led into an immense saloon,
where were a number of tables, upon which the choicest viands were
profusely spread, and seated at which was a company of gentlemanly-looking
personages, who chatted familiarly together, without the slightest
demonstration of confusion or alarm. His guardians again enjoined him to
lay aside all fear, informed him that he was in good society, and that
they had brought him there solely that they might enjoy the pleasure of
his company at supper. In the mean while water was served to the guests,
that they might wash their hands before sitting at table. Every man took
his place, and a seat was assigned to Polidamor at the upper and
privileged end of the board. Astonished, or rather stupefied at the
strange circumstances of his adventure, he would willingly have abstained
from taking any part in the repast; but he was compelled to make a show of
eating, in order to dissemble his mistrust and agitation. When the supper
was ended and the tables were removed, one of the gentlemen who had
assisted in his capture accosted him with polite expressions of regret at
his want of appetite. During the interchange of courtesies which ensued,
one of the bandits took a lute, another a viol, and the party began to
amuse themselves with music. The advocate was then invited to walk into a
neighboring room, where he perceived a considerable number of mantles
ranged in order. He was desired to select his own, and to count out the
thirty pistoles agreed upon, together with one for coach-hire, and one
more for his share of the reckoning at supper. Polidamor, who had been
apprehensive that the drama of which his mantle had been the occasion
might have a very different _dénouement_, was but too well pleased to be
quit at such a cost, and he took leave of the assembly with unfeigned
expressions of gratitude. The carriage was called, and before entering it
he was again blindfolded; his former conductors returned with him to the
spot where he had been seized, where, removing the bandage from his eyes,
they allowed him to alight, presenting him at the same moment with a
ticket sealed with green wax, and having these words inscribed in large
letters, _"Freed by the Great Band_." This ticket was a passport securing
his mantle, purse, and person against all further assaults. Hastening to
regain his residence with all speed, he was assailed at a narrow turning
by three other rascals, who demanded his purse or his life. The advocate
drew his ticket from his pocket, though he had no great faith in it as a
preservative, and presented it to the thieves. One of them, provided with
a dark lantern, read it, returned it, and recommended him to make haste
home, where he at last arrived in safety.

Early in the seventeenth century the Parisian rogues availed themselves of
the regulations against the use of snuff to pillage the snuff-takers. As
the sale of this article was forbidden by law to any but grocers and
apothecaries, and as even they could only retail it to persons provided
with the certificate of a medical man, the annoyance of such restrictions
was loudly complained of. The rogues, ever ready to profit by
circumstances, opened houses for gaming—at that period almost a universal
vice—where "snuff at discretion" was a tempting bait to those long
accustomed to a gratification all the more agreeable because it was
forbidden. Here the snuff-takers were diligently plied with wine, and then
cheated of their money; or, if too temperate or suspicious to drink to
excess, they were unceremoniously plundered in a sham quarrel. To such a
length was this practice carried, that an ordinance was at length issued
in 1629, strictly forbidding all snuff-takers from assembling in public
places or elsewhere, "_pour satisfaire leur goût_!"

The thieves of the good old times were not only more numerous in
proportion to the population than they are at present, but were also
distinguished by greater audacity and cruelty. They had recourse to the
most diabolical ingenuity to subdue the resistance and to prevent the
outcries of their victims. Under the rule of Henry IV. a band of brigands
arose, who, in the garb, and with the manners of gentlemen, introduced
themselves into the best houses under the pretext of private business, and
when alone with the master, demanded his money at the dagger’s point. Some
of them made use of a gag—a contrivance designated at the period the
_poire d’angoisse_. This instrument was of a spherical shape, and pierced
all over with small holes; it was forced into the mouth of the person
intended to be robbed, and upon touching a spring sharp points protruded
from every hole, at once inflicting the most horrible anguish, and
preventing the sufferer from uttering a single cry. It could not be
withdrawn but by the use of the proper key, which contracted the spring.
This device was adopted universally by one savage band, and occasioned
immense misery not only in Paris but throughout France.

An Italian thief, an enterprising and ingenious rogue, adopted a singular
expedient for robbing women at their devotions in church. He placed
himself on his knees by the side of his intended prey, holding in a pair
of artificial hands a book of devotion, to which he made a show of the
most devout attention, while with his natural hands he cut the watch or
purse-string of his unsuspecting neighbor. This stratagem, favored by the
fashion, then general, of wearing mantles, met with great success, and of
course soon produced a host of clumsy imitators, and excited the vigilance
of the police, who at length made so many seizures of solemn-faced
devotees provided with wooden kid-gloved hands, that it fell into complete
discredit, and was at last abandoned by the profession.

Cunning as were the rogues of a past age, they were liable to capture like
their modern successors. A gentleman having resorted to Paris on business,
was hustled one day in the precincts of the palace, and robbed of his
well-filled purse. Furious at the loss of a considerable sum, he swore to
be avenged. He procured a clever mechanic, who, under his directions,
contrived a kind of hand-trap for the pocket, managed in such a manner as
to preclude the possibility of an attempt at purse-stealing without
detection. Having fixed the instrument in its place, impatient for the
revenge he had promised himself, he sallied forth to promenade the public
walks, mingled with every group, and stopped from time to time gazing
about him with the air of a greenhorn. Several days passed before any
thing resulted from his plan; but one morning, while he was gaping at the
portraits of the kings of France in one of the public galleries, he finds
himself surrounded and pushed about, precisely as in the former instance;
he feels a hand insinuating itself gently into the open snare, and hears
immediately the click of the instrument, which assures him that the
delinquent is safely caught. Taking no notice, he walks on as if nothing
had happened, and resumes his promenade, drawing after him the thief, whom
pain and shame prevented from making the least effort to disengage his
hand. Occasionally the gentleman would turn round, and rebuke his
unwilling follower for his importunity, and thus drew the eyes of the
whole crowd upon his awkward position. At last, pretending to observe for
the first time the stranger’s hand in his pocket, he flies into a violent
passion, accuses him of being a cut-purse, and demands the sum he had
previously lost, without which he declares the villain shall be hanged. It
would seem that compounding a felony was nothing in those days; for it is
upon record that the thief, though caught in the act, was permitted to
send a messenger to his comrades, who advanced the money, and therewith
purchased his liberty.

The people were forbidden to employ particular materials in the
fabrication of their clothing, to ride in a coach, to decorate their
apartments as they chose, to purchase certain articles of furniture, and
even to give a dinner party when and in what style they chose. Under the
Valois régime strict limits were assigned to the expenses of the table,
determining the number of courses of which a banquet should consist, and
that of the dishes of which each course was to be composed. Any guest who
should fail to denounce an infraction of the law of which he had been a
witness, was liable to a fine of forty livres; and officers of justice,
who might be present, were strictly enjoined to quit the tables of their
hosts, and institute immediate proceedings against them. The rigor of
these regulations extended, even to the kitchen, and the police had the
power of entry at all hours, to enforce compliance with the statutes.

But it was during the prevalence of an epidemic that it was least
agreeable to live in France in the good old times. No sooner did a
contagious malady, or one that was supposed to be so, make its appearance,
than the inhabitants of Paris were all forbidden to remove from one
residence to another, although their term of tenancy had expired, until
the judge of police had received satisfactory evidence that the house they
desired to leave had not been affected by the contagion. When a house was
infected, a bundle of straw fastened to one of the windows warned the
public to avoid all intercourse with the inmates. At a later period two
wooden crosses were substituted for the straw, one of which was attached
to the front door, and the other to one of the windows in an upper story.
In 1596 the provost of Paris having learned that the tenants of some
houses infected by an epidemic which was then making great ravages, had
removed these badges, issued an ordinance commanding that those who
transgressed in a similar manner again should suffer the loss of the right
hand—a threat which was found perfectly efficient.

By an ordinance of 1533, persons recovering from a contagious malady,
together with their domestics, and all the members of their families, were
forbidden to appear in the streets for a given period without a white wand
in their hands, to warn the public of the danger of contact. Three years
after the authorities were yet more severe against the convalescents, who
were ordered to remain shut up at home for forty days after their cure;
and even when the quarantine had expired, they were not allowed to appear
in the streets until they had presented to a magistrate a certificate from
the commissary of their district, attested by a declaration of six
householders, that the forty days had elapsed. In the preceding century
(in 1498) an ordinance still more extraordinary had been issued. It was at
the coronation of Louis XII. when a great number of the nobles came to
Paris to take part in the ceremony. The provost, desiring to guard them
from the danger of infection, published an order that all persons of both
sexes, suffering under certain specified maladies, should quit the capital
in twenty-four hours, _under the penalty of being thrown into the river_!





THE LEGEND OF THE WEEPING CHAMBER.


                          From Household Words.


A strange story was once told me by a Levantine lady of my acquaintance,
which I shall endeavor to relate—as far as I am able with the necessary
abridgments—in her own words. The circumstances under which she told it
were peculiar. The family had just been disturbed by the visit of a
ghost—a real ghost, visible, if not palpable. She was not what may be
called superstitious; and though following with more or less assiduity the
practices of her religion, was afflicted now and then with a fit of
perfect materialism. I was surprised, therefore, to hear her relate, with
every appearance of profound faith, the following incidents:—

There is an old house in Beyrout, which, for many successive years, was
inhabited by a Christian family. It is of great extent, and was of yore
fitted for the dwelling of a prince. The family had, indeed, in
early-times been very rich; and almost fabulous accounts are current of
the wealth of its founder, Fadlallah Dahân. He was a merchant; the owner
of ships, the fitter-out of caravans. The regions of the East and of the
West had been visited by him; and, after undergoing as many dangers and
adventures as Sinbad, he had returned to spend the latter days of his life
in his native city. He built, accordingly, a magnificent dwelling, the
courts of which he adorned with marble fountains, and the chambers with
silk divans; and he was envied on account of his prosperity.

But, in the restlessness of his early years, he had omitted to marry, and
now found himself near the close of his career without an heir to inherit
his wealth and to perpetuate his name. This reflection often disturbed
him; yet he was unwilling to take a wife because he was old. Every now and
then, it is true, he saw men older than he, with fewer teeth and whiter
beards, taking to their bosoms maidens that bloomed like peaches just
beginning to ripen against a wall; and his friends, who knew he would give
a magnificent marriage-feast, urged him to do likewise. Once he looked
with pleasure on a young person of not too tender years, whose parents
purposely presented her to him; but having asked her in a whisper whether
she would like to marry a withered old gentleman like himself, she frankly
confessed a preference for his handsome young clerk, Harma, who earned a
hundred piastres a month. Fadlallah laughed philosophically, and took care
that the young couple should be married under happy auspices.

One day he was proceeding along the street gravely and slowly—surrounded
by a number of merchants proud to walk by his side, and followed by two or
three young men, who pressed near in order to be thought of the company,
and thus establish their credit—when an old woman espying him, began to
cry out, "Yeh! yeh! this is the man who has no wife and no child—this is
the man who is going to die and leave his fortune to be robbed by his
servants or confiscated by the governor! And yet, he has a sagacious
nose"—(the Orientals have observed that there is wisdom in a nose)—"and a
beard as long as my back! Yeh! yeh! what a wonderful sight to see!"

Fadlallah Dahân stopped, and retorted, smiling: "Yeh! yeh! this is the
woman that blames an old man for not marrying a young wife. Yeh! yeh! what
a wonderful sight to see!"

Then the woman replied, "O my lord, every pig’s tail curls not in the same
direction, nor does every maiden admire the passing quality of youth. If
thou wilt, I will bestow on thee a wife, who will love thee as thou lovest
thyself, and serve thee as the angels serve Allah. She is more beautiful
than any of the daughters of Beyrout, and her name is Selima, a name of
good augury."

The friends of Fadlallah laughed, as did the young men who followed in
their wake, and urged him to go and see this peerless beauty, if it were
only for a joke. Accordingly, he told the woman to lead the way. But she
said he must mount his mule, for they had to go some distance into the
country. He mounted, and, with a single servant, went forth from the
gates—the woman preceding—and rode until he reached a village in the
mountains. Here, in a poor little house, he found Selima; clothed in the
very commonest style, engaged in making divan cushions. She was a
marvellously beautiful girl, and the heart of the merchant at once began
to yearn towards her; yet he endeavored to restrain himself, and said,
"This beautiful thing is not for me." But the woman cried out, "Selima,
wilt thou consent to love this old man?" The girl gazed in his face
awhile, and then, folding her hands across her bosom, said, "Yes; for
there is goodness in his countenance." Fadlallah wept with joy; and,
returning to the city, announced his approaching marriage to his friends.
According to custom, they expressed civil surprise to his face; but, when
his back was turned, they whispered that he was an old fool, and had been
the dupe of a she-adventurer.

The marriage took place with ceremonies of royal magnificence; and Selima,
who passed unmoved from extreme poverty to abundant riches, seemed to
merit the position of the greatest lady in Beyrout. Never was woman more
prudent than she. No one ever knew her previous history, nor that of her
mother. Some said that a life of misery, perhaps of shame, was before
them, when this unexpected marriage took place. Selima’s gratitude to
Fadlallah was unbounded; and out of gratitude grew love. The merchant
daily offered up thanks for the bright diamond which had come to shine in
his house.

In due time a child was born; a boy lively as his mother; and they named
him Halil. With what joy he was received, what festivities announced the
glad intelligence to the town, may easily be imagined. Selima and
Fadlallah resolved to devote themselves to his education, and determined
that he should be the most accomplished youth of Bar-er-Shâm. But a long
succession of children followed, each more beautiful than the former—some
boys, some girls; and every new comer was received with additional delight
and still grander ceremonies; so that the people began to say, "Is this a
race of sovereigns?"

Now, Halil grew up to the age of twelve—still a charming lad; but the
parents always fully occupied by the last arrival, had not carried out
their project of education. He was as wild and untamed as a colt, and
spent more of his time in the street than in the company of his mother;
who, by degrees, began to look upon him with a kind of calm friendship due
to strangers. Fadlallah, as he took his accustomed walk with his merchant
friends, used from time to time to encounter a ragged boy fighting in the
streets with the sons of the Jew butcher; but his eyes beginning to grow
dim, he often passed without recognizing him. One day, however, Halil,
breathless and bleeding, ran up and took refuge beneath the skirts of his
mantle from a crowd of savage urchins. Fadlallah was amazed, and said, "O,
my son—for I think thou art my son—what evil hath befallen thee, and
wherefore do I see thee in this state?" The boy, whose voice was choked by
sobs, looked up into his face, and said, "Father, I am the son of the
richest merchant of Beyrout, and behold, there is no one so little cared
for as I."

Fadlallah’s conscience smote him, and he wiped the boy’s bleeding face
with the corner of his silk caftan, and blessed him; and, taking him by
the hand, led him away. The merchants smiled benignly one to the other,
and, pointing with their thumbs, said, "We have seen the model youth!"

Whilst they laughed and sneered, Fadlallah, humbled yet resolved, returned
to his house, leading the ragged Halil, and entered his wife’s chamber.
Selima was playing with her seventh child, and teaching it to lisp the
word "Baba"—about the amount of education which she had found time to
bestow on each of her offspring. When she saw the plight of her eldest son
she frowned, and was about to scold him; but Fadlallah interposed, and
said, "Wife, speak no harsh words. We have not done our duty by this boy.
May God forgive us; but we have looked on these children that have bloomed
from thee, more as playthings than as deposits for which we are
responsible. Halil has become a wild out-of-doors lad, doubting with some
reason of our love. It is too late to bring him back to the destiny we had
dreamt of; but he must not be left to grow up thus uncared for. I have a
brother established in Bassora; to him will I send the lad to learn the
arts of commerce, and to exercise himself in adventure, as his father did
before him. Bestow thy blessing upon him, Selima (here the good old man’s
voice trembled), and may God in his mercy forgive both thee and me for the
neglect which has made this parting necessary. I shall know that I am
forgiven, if, before I go down into the tomb, my son return a wise and
sober man; not unmindful that we gave him life, and forgetting that, until
now, we have given him little else."

Selima laid her seventh child in its cradle of carved wood, and drew Halil
to her bosom; and Fadlallah knew that she loved him still, because she
kissed his face, regardless of the blood and dirt that stained it. She
then washed him and dressed him, and gave him a purse of gold, and handed
him over to his father; who had resolved to send him off by the caravan
that started that very afternoon. Halil, surprised and made happy by
unwonted caresses, was yet delighted at the idea of beginning an
adventurous life; and went away, manfully stifling his sobs, and
endeavoring to assume the grave deportment of a merchant. Selima shed a
few tears, and then, attracted by a crow and a chuckle from the cradle,
began to tickle the infant’s soft double chin, and went on with her
interrupted lesson, "Baba, Baba!"

Halil started on his journey, and having passed through the Valley of
Robbers, the Valley of Lions, and the Valley of Devils—this is the way in
which Orientals localize the supposed dangers of travelling—arrived at the
good city of Bassora; where his uncle received him well, and promised to
send him, as supercargo on board the first vessel he dispatched to the
Indian seas. What time was spent by the caravan upon the road, the
narrative does not state. Travelling is slow work in the East; but almost
immediately on his arrival in Bassora, Halil was engaged in a love
adventure. If travelling is slow, the approaches of manhood are rapid. The
youth’s curiosity was excited by the extraordinary care taken to conceal
his cousin Miriam from his sight; and having introduced himself into her
garden, beheld, and, struck by her wonderful beauty, loved her. With an
Oriental fondness he confessed the truth to his uncle, who listened with
anger and dismay, and told him that Miriam was betrothed to the Sultan.
Halil perceived the danger of indulging his passion, and promised to
suppress it; but whilst he played a prudent part, Miriam’s curiosity was
also excited, and she too beheld and loved her cousin. Bolts and bars
cannot keep two such affections asunder. They met and plighted their troth
and were married secretly, and were happy. But inevitable discovery came.
Miriam was thrown into a dungeon; and the unhappy Halil, loaded with
chains, was put on board a vessel, not as supercargo, but as prisoner,
with orders that he should be left in some distant country.

Meanwhile a dreadful pestilence fell upon Beyrout, and among the first
sufferers was an eighth little one that had just learned to say "Baba!"
Selima was almost too astonished to be grieved. It seemed to her
impossible that death should come into her house, and meddle with the
fruits of so much suffering and love. When they came to take away the
little form which she had so often fondled, her indignation burst forth,
and she smote the first old woman who stretched out her rough
unsympathetic hand. But a shriek from her waiting-woman announced that
another victim was singled out; and the frantic mother rushed like a
tigress to defend the young that yet remained to her. But the enemy was
invisible; and (so the story goes) all her little ones drooped one by one
and died; so that on the seventh day Selima sat in her nursery gazing
about with stony eyes, and counting her losses upon her fingers—Iskender,
Selima, Wardy, Fadlallah, Hanna, Hennenah, Gereges—seven in all. Then she
remembered Halil, and her neglect of him; and, lifting up her voice, she
wept aloud; and, as the tears rushed fast and hot down her cheeks, her
heart yearned for her absent boy, and she would have parted with worlds to
have fallen upon his breast—would have given up her life in return for one
word of pardon and of love.

Fadlallah came in to her; and he was now very old and feeble. His back was
bent, and his transparent hand trembled as it clutched a cane. A white
beard surrounded a still whiter face; and as he came near his wife, he
held out his hand towards her with an uncertain gesture, as if the room
had been dark. This world appeared to him but dimly. "Selima," said he,
"the Giver hath taken. We, too, must go in our turn. Weep, my love, but
weep with moderation, for those little ones that have gone to sing in the
golden cages of Paradise. There is a heavier sorrow in my heart. Since my
first-born, Halil, departed for Bassora, I have only written once to learn
intelligence of him. He was then well, and had been received with favor by
his uncle. We have never done our duty by that boy." His wife replied, "Do
not reproach me; for I reproach myself more bitterly than thou canst do.
Write, then, to thy brother to obtain tidings of the beloved one. I will
make of this chamber a weeping chamber. It has resounded with merriment
enough. All my children learned to laugh and to talk here. I will hang it
with black, and erect a tomb in the midst; and every day I will come and
spend two hours, and weep for those who are gone and for him who is
absent." Fadlallah approved her design; and they made a weeping chamber,
and lamented together every day therein. But their letters to Bassora
remained unanswered; and they began to believe that fate had chosen a
solitary tomb for Halil.

One day a woman, dressed in the garb of the poor, came to the house of
Fadlallah with a boy about twelve years old. When the merchant saw them he
was struck with amazement, for he beheld in the boy the likeness of his
son Halil; and he called aloud to Selima, who, when she came, shrieked
with amazement. The woman told her story, and it appeared that she was
Miriam. Having spent some months in prison, she had escaped and taken
refuge in a forest in the house of her nurse. Here she had given birth to
a son, whom she had called by his father’s name. When her strength
returned, she had set out as a beggar to travel over the world in search
of her lost husband. Marvellous were the adventures she underwent, God
protecting her throughout, until she came to the land of Persia, where she
found Halil working as a slave in the garden of the Governor of Fars.
After a few stolen interviews, she had again resumed her wanderings to
seek for Fadlallah, that he might redeem his son with wealth; but had
passed several years upon the road.

Fortune, however, now smiled upon this unhappy family, and in spite of his
age, Fadlallah set out for Fars. Heaven made the desert easy, and the road
short for him. On a fine calm evening he entered the gardens of the
governor, and found his son gaily singing as he trimmed an orange tree.
After a vain attempt to preserve an incognito, the good old man lifted up
his hands, and shouting, "Halil, my first-born!" fell upon the breast of
the astonished slave. Sweet was the interview in the orange grove, sweet
the murmured conversation between the strong young man and the trembling
patriarch, until the perfumed dew of evening fell upon their heads.
Halil’s liberty was easily obtained, and father and son returned in safety
to Beyrout. Then the Weeping Chamber was closed, and the door walled up;
and Fadlallah and Selima lived happily until age gently did its work at
their appointed times: and Halil and Miriam inherited the house and the
wealth that had been gathered for them.

The supernatural part of the story remains to be told. The Weeping Chamber
was never again opened; but every time that a death was about to occur in
the family, a shower of heavy tear-drops was heard to fall upon its marble
floor, and low wailings came through the walled doorway. Years, centuries
passed away, and the mystery repeated itself with unvarying uniformity.
The family fell into poverty, and only occupied a portion of the house,
but invariably before one of its members sickened unto death, a shower of
heavy drops, as from a thunder-cloud, pattered on the pavement of the
Weeping Chamber, and was heard distinctly at night through the whole
house. At length the family quitted the country in search of better
fortunes elsewhere, and the house remained for a long time uninhabited.

The lady who narrated the story went to live in the house, and passed some
years without being disturbed; but one night she was lying awake, and
distinctly heard the warning shower dripping heavily in the Weeping
Chamber. Next day the news came of her mother’s death, and she hastened to
remove to another dwelling. The house has since been utterly abandoned to
rats, mice, beetles, and an occasional ghost seen sometimes streaming
along the rain-pierced terraces. No one has ever attempted to violate the
solitude of the sanctuary where Selima wept for the seven little ones
taken to the grave, and for the absent one whom she had treated with
unmotherly neglect.





THE BULL FIGHT OF MADRID.


                    BY THE AUTHOR OF "THE CASTILIAN."


It was one of those clear, bright days, peculiar to a Spanish summer, when
the deep blue skies seem to reflect their warmth in radiance over the
earth; a slumberous influence hung over the tranquil streets of Madrid,
and although it was still early in the morning, the fervid rays of the sun
gave a certain indication of the meridian power he was about to display in
a few hours.

Such was the day appropriated for the splendid and soul-stirring
celebration of a bull-fight; and accordingly, the inhabitants soon began,
by an unusual bustle, to evince the absorbing interest they are accustomed
to take in this favorite amusement. Before the hour of nine, the beautiful
street of Alcala was thronged with a promiscuous multitude, eager to
witness the first exhibition of the morning; the Spanish bull-fight being
in fact composed of two acts, if I may so term them, the morning and the
evening encounters.

On such days, a general cessation of labor takes place throughout the
city, and the whole population is occupied with speculations on the
approaching festival. On the morning in question, the inhabitants of
Madrid, the lower classes in particular, attired in their holiday finery,
began at an early hour to issue from their narrow and obscure dormitories,
and, with tolerably cleanly appearance and much importance of demeanor, to
take up a position in that famous _Puerta del sol_ which, on less
momentous occasions, seems destined only as a lounge for all the
_ennuyés_, news-hunters, and _petit-maitres_ of Madrid. The Manolos, too,
began to congregate in great numbers, casting around those terrible
glances of recklessness and conscious courage, which, in the estimation of
foreigners, are the certain prognostics of as many concealed daggers.

I soon made up my mind to add one to the vast concourse now on the alert
to witness this grand and terrific spectacle, although, for many reasons,
I prudently resolved to postpone my share of the entertainment until the
evening.

It is at this hour that the higher classes prefer visiting the arena: a
number of the more desperate _amateurs_, however, regardless of the
influence of a meridian sun, do not hesitate to present themselves at the
morning exhibitions.

At about four in the afternoon, the _Calle de Alcala_ was, if possible,
more crowded than it had been in the morning. This majestic street, which
commands a full view of the superb triumphal arch which bears its name,
now presented a most striking and animated scene: various groups,
fancifully contrasted in dress and deportment, were all hurrying towards
the same spot. Here you might see the gorgeous equipage of the haughty
grandee, sweeping by in all the imposing consciousness of pomp and
greatness, while carriages of more humble pretensions were rattling as
briskly, if not as proudly, along the gay and lively street. The
_Calesines_, too, were seen in great numbers hurrying to the scene of
anticipated pleasure, and diversifying, by the singularity of their
appearance, and the ringing of small bells, the stately _cortege_ of more
splendid equipages.

Next, an army of _majos_ attracted attention by their fanciful dresses,
and the easy swagger with which they accompanied their _morenas_, who were
not the less conspicuous for their graceful though somewhat confident
demeanor. They were all, of course, attired in their peculiar costume,
bedizened with ribbons, and the short saya reaching only to the middle of
the calf, and showing the most polished ancle and the prettiest foot in
the world. These gay and lively individuals were picturesquely contrasted
with crowds of monks and friars, of all orders and colors—

  White, black, and gray, with all their trumpery—

here and there intermingled with military idlers, in the uniforms of their
several regiments.

Here you might see the rosy and jolly abbate, ambling along upon a mule,
having an appearance scarcely less clerical than himself, jostling the
less fortunate friar on the back of the humbler donkey, and the sturdy
mendicant, as he strode along on foot, supported only by his staff. The
streets, and every avenue leading to the _Plaza de los Toros_, were lined
with noisy vendors of delicious fruits, who made a grateful display upon
their stalls of the Seville orange and the cooling water-melon; whilst a
number of Valencians carried about large _vasijas_, or trays of lemonade,
and other refreshments, for the accommodation of the thirsty pedestrians,
who had no time to squander upon a visit to the _neveras_, or ice-houses.
The effect of this animated picture was farther heightened by the cries of
the venders, the harmony of some neighboring barber’s guitar, the
continual jingling of the mules’ bells, and the clicking of castanets.

Amidst this stunning, yet not unpleasing variety of sounds, we at length
reached the _Plaza de los Toros_, and it was with some difficulty we
obtained places in the stage seats. A vast concourse of persons of all
classes were already assembled, and I observed with a smile the effect
which the novelty of the scene had produced upon an English friend, whom I
had, with great difficulty, prevailed upon to accompany me; having, as he
declared, but little taste for such brutal and demoralizing exhibitions.
He seemed quite excited, and made some passing observation relative to the
Roman Circus, to which the present exhibition bore no unapt resemblance. I
directed his attention to many of his countrymen, as well as other
foreigners, who, after having been quite as clamorous as himself against
the sport, had terminated their philosophical philippics by becoming
constant visitors both at the morning and afternoon encounters. We arrived
at the scene of action just in time to witness _El despejo_, or the
clearing of the arena; a ceremony which is effected by a band of soldiers,
who enter the place and drive every loiterer away, to the sound of drums
and fifes. In a few minutes, not a single person was to be seen in the
circus; and, consequently, the body of spectators, thus driven back upon
the crowd, gave rise to various energetic expostulations, hearty curses,
and not a few random cuffs. The only inconvenience, however, of these
frequent _melées_, was the loss of a few ribbons and a quantity of hair,
of which the _manolus_ most assiduously set about easing themselves. This
operation is a source of considerable amusement to those who stand aloof
from the field of strife. We had been happy in securing good places, and
had nothing to complain of but the immediate vicinity of an amateur, or
_aficionado_, who kept his tongue in continual motion, and favored his
neighbors with a tremendous display of erudition on the _tauromachia_.

Whilst the immense multitude were beguiling their impatience in a thousand
ways, and among others by bandying jests—eating
oranges—smoking—whistling—love-making and quarrelling—the champions of the
fète, namely, the _picadores_, the _espadas_, and the _chulos_, were very
piously engaged in prayer in a chapel contiguous to the circus, it being
customary for combatants to solicit the protection of the holy Virgin
against the tremendous animal they are about to encounter before they
venture to provoke its ferocity.

While they proceed in their laudable occupation, we will return to the
circus, which now presented a most striking spectacle. The corregidor and
the corporation of the town had already taken their seats near the
splendid box fitted up for the use of the king, directly opposite to the
entrance from which the bull was expected to rush into the arena. Above
this entrance was a platform, occupied by a band of musicians, who
continued at intervals to mingle their animating strains with the clamor
of the noisy multitude. An officer of the town now entered the arena,
mounted on a fine charger. He was dressed in complete sables, and carried
in his hand the staff of office. Attended by alguazils, he
advanced,—saluted the box where the king was _not_,—and then proceeded to
the master of the ceremonies, from whom he received the keys of the cells,
where the terrible animals who were to take so conspicuous parts in the
evening spectacle were confined.

At this critical juncture, a breathless silence pervaded the spectators,
who by their eager looks evinced the absorbing interest they took in the
soul-stirring spectacle. Anon, a band of martial instruments struck up;—a
general buzz arose on every side, and, amidst the overwhelming din that
prevailed throughout the circus, the _picadores_ and the rest of their
party made their entrance into the arena. First came the _picadores_, with
their horses blindfold, wearing enormous boots to protect them from the
blows of the bull; next paced on the _espadas_, or _matadores_, on foot,
attired in rich silk dresses, each wearing a robe of a different color,
together with ribbons or some other distinctive mark of favor from his
mistress. The procession closed with a numerous troop of _chulos_, or
_banderilleros_, a set of young men lightly and fancifully apparelled,
whose business is to distract the attention of the bull from a fallen
cavalier, and to harass the animal with the _banderillas_. In this
splendid troop we perceived some traces of the ancient spirit of chivalry,
although, strange to say, the favorite sport of the fine cavaliers of the
land is now confined to the lowest orders. It is only from the
slaughter-house that the bull-fighters now, for the most part, proceed.

The procession moved on, at a slow and stately pace, amidst strains of
music and the vociferations of the lower classes, many of whom soon
recognized in the heroes of the fète, some near relation, some dear
friend, or at least, well-known acquaintance, whom they were desirous of
encouraging by their shouts. The champions having made their respective
obeisances to the royal box and to the corregidor, retired to the places
set apart for them in the arena.

The _picadores_, according to the order of precedence, ranged themselves
in the circus, close to the _baranda_, or wooden barrier, which, though
elevated to the height of five feet, is sometimes scarcely sufficient to
prevent the most furious amongst the bulls from breaking over it. Suddenly
the music ceased—the silence was intense—the signal is given—the doors
were flung open—and, with one tremendous burst, forth sprang the bull into
the middle of the circus! It was a fearful animal; not large, but of that
peculiar color and breed which are accounted the most ferocious.

  Dark is his hide on either side, but the blood within doth boil,
  And the dun hide glows as if on fire, as he paws to the turmoil,
  His eyes are jet, and they are set in crystal rings of snow;
  But now they stare with one red glare of brass upon the foe.
  Upon the forehead of the bull the horns stand close and near,
  From out the broad and wrinkled skull like daggers they appear;
  His neck is massy, like the trunk of some old knotted tree,
  Whereon the monster’s shagged mane like billows curled ye see.
  His legs are short, his hams are thick, his hoofs are black as night,
  Like a strong flail he holds his tail in the fierceness of his might;
  Like something molten out of iron, or hewn forth from the rock,
  Harpado of Xarama stands, to bide the Alcayde’s shock.(6)

The appearance of the bull was hailed by loud acclamations from the
multitude; whilst hats, handkerchiefs, and scarfs fluttered in the air, in
every direction.

The noble animal appeared at first as though he were undecided how to act,
or on whom to wreak his fierce vengeance. He turned on every side, and
scanned the appalling number and firmness of his tormentors; gradually he
became more and more excited, till, exasperated by the clamors of the
impatient multitude, he tore the ground with his hoofs, tossed his head in
proud indignation, and then stared intently before him, as if to awe the
circus with the lightnings of his angry eye. Again he lowered his head,
and blew the dust in clouds with the burning breath of his distended
nostrils, and lashed his sides with his tail, as if to work himself up to
the proper pitch of frenzy; at length, with a sudden bound, he rushed
furiously against the first _picador_. The cavalier received the charge
with perfect coolness and intrepidity, and having succeeded in planting
his _pica_ in the higher part of the animal’s neck, the theatre rung with
acclamations at the strength and dexterity with which he kept his
tremendous opponent for some moments fixed to the spot. Smarting with
pain, the bull then retired for a short time; but his rage prevailing over
his fears, he again rushed forward, and was received by a second
_picador_. Less fortunate, however, than his companion, he was unable to
withstand the overwhelming shock; and, after a fruitless effort to stem
the animal’s fury with his _pica_, it at length broke, and the bull, with
one tremendous thrust on the horse’s breast, overthrew its rider.
Fortunately for the fallen _picador_, he was protected by the bulk of his
horse; and the bull, as it often happens, sated his fierceness on the
helpless animal, whose blood spouted round the arena, from a wound
evidently mortal. The excitement of the spectators now became intense;
when the bull, having fully disabled his enemy, advanced toward the third
cavalier. The champion, however, had penetration enough to perceive that
the bull was of a dangerous kind, and evinced no particular solicitude to
come to closer quarters with him. He kept, therefore, retreating, under
pretext of gaining an advantageous position; but the people, who guessed
his real motive, unanimously protested against such dilatory proceedings.
Men and women, old and young, began to assail the luckless, or rather,
prudent _picador_, with a violent storm of abuse.

During the whole of this noisy altercation, our erudite neighbor, the
_aficionado_, had been very scientifically descanting on the various
points of the combat, to our no small annoyance; for he could not rest a
moment in his seat, and was continually intercepting our view. The
_picador_, provoked by the bitter sarcasms lavished upon him by the more
vulgar part of the spectators, now advanced with an air of determination a
little farther into the arena; but the sagacious bull kept retreating as
his enemy advanced, in order to render escape more difficult, and his
vengeance certain. At length he rushed on the cavalier with such fury and
overwhelming force, that both _picador_ and horse rolled on the ground:
unluckily, the man not being very dexterous, could seek no protection from
the horse, but lay exposed to the fury of his powerful antagonist.

Cries of horror and alarm for the safety of the unfortunate _picador_ were
now heard on every side, and strange to say, those very persons, who had
but just driven him to encounter the danger, were now the most clamorous
in shouting for protection for him. The _chulos_ lost no time in applying
their art to extricate their companion, by harassing the animal on all
sides, who was thus compelled to abandon his prey in order to meet his new
tormentors. Thus the fallen cavalier was rescued from his jeopardy, whilst
his poor horse, dreadfully gored, ran wildly about the arena. The bull, as
if satisfied with these feats, now stood tranquilly looking on the
spectators, who filled the air with _vivas_ in praise of his prowess.

The trumpet again sounded the signal for the second part of the combat,
and forthwith the _chulos_ advanced nimbly with their _banderillas_, each
striving to fix his weapon in the neck of the animal, as in their
hazardous course he passed under their extended arms. The smart of the
_banderillas_ tended to goad the bull to greater fury, and tormented on
every side he bellowed out in agony, and bounded from place to place,
turning first to one, and then to another of his aggressors.

Thus, after he had vented his rage, foaming at the mouth and flashing fire
from his eyes, the moment arrived when it was deemed expedient to put an
end to his protracted sufferings, and at a given signal the _chulos_
retired and made place for the _prima-espada_.

This was Candido, who though arrived at an advanced age, still retained
much of the strength and agility of his youth, which, combined with the
experience he had acquired in the game, rendered him a very formidable
opponent. He advanced with a stately pace, bearing in one hand a piece of
scarlet cloth to entice the animal, and in the other his sword. Having
arrived in front of the seat of the presiding authorities, he made a
graceful salute, and then performed the same ceremony before his friends,
who hailed him with many hearty _vivas_; whilst a deadly silence was
observed on the part of the admirers of his rival Leoncito. Candido
proceeded slowly, and warily towards the bull, endeavoring to entice him
by waving the red cloth. The animal, however, would not suddenly rush
against his foe; but calmly watched for the moment when he might find him
less upon his guard.

Candido, with all the skill of a practised _matador_, appeared to guess
the sinister intentions of the bull, and followed his every movement with
an active eye—nay, he seemed to penetrate into the inmost feelings of the
animal.—Irritated by the defiance, the bull sprang upon his foe; but was
baffled in his vengeance, for he pierced only the floating piece of cloth;
the _matador_ very adroitly turning aside, and plunging his sword into his
flank as he passed. The wound however was not mortal, and the combat was
renewed. The bull, somewhat intimidated, did not again charge his
adversary; but preferred awaiting his approach;—after some appropriate
evolutions, Candido at last boldly advanced towards him, and with a
successful thrust pierced him to the heart. Nothing had been wanting to
complete the success of Candido but the solitary triumph of retaining his
sword in his hand after the death-blow was inflicted, this being
considered the _ne plus ultra_ of the art. The bull had no sooner fallen
to the ground than a set of most beautiful mules, splendidly caparisoned,
and ornamented with a profusion of ribbons and small flags, were brought
into the circus to convey from it the lifeless carcass. This operation was
performed amid the stormy sounds of martial music, and the shouts of the
multitude; the tremendous animal was dragged from the field, leaving in
its progress a long crimson track upon the scattered sand.

The signal now sounded for a second fight; the doors were once more thrown
open, and a huge bull rushed forward, and without a moment’s loss ran
furiously at the nearest _picador_. He was, however, soon sobered, and
smarting with the pain of the first wound he received, prudently
retreated, in no hurry to taste a like favor from the second cavalier. In
vain did the _picadores_ provoke him by advancing into the arena, he
invariably declined the re-offered combat. The spectators, impatient at
this delay, grew expressively clamorous, some crying shame! shame! and
others _vaca! vaca!_ (poor cow! poor cow!)—but all these energetic
remonstrances were lost upon the pacific animal.

With much difficulty, and after a pretty long interval, the three wounds
of the _pica_ (according to rule) were at length inflicted; and the
_chulos_ came forward to perform their part. It was here that the same
difficulty arose, for alas! it could not be expected that the poor bull,
who had shown no relish whatever for the _pica_, should evince any taste
for the _banderillas_. Consequently a great confusion arose, and a
simultaneous call for _banderillas de fuego_, was heard on every side.
This it was expected would prove a stimulus to the too tranquil
temperament of the animal.

Accordingly the furs was planted upon his neck; but scarcely had the
fireworks began to crack and whiz around his head, than stunned no doubt
by the noise as well as the pain, he actually turned and fled. The
_chulos_ ran after him, and thus continued _nolens volens_ to thrust their
spears into his unresisting carcass, until it was thought expedient to
desist in order to give him the _coup de grace_. Leoncito the second
_espada_ then came forward, and was hailed with joyful acclamations by his
partisans, especially the _manolas_, for he was a young, light-made,
dapper man. It proved however an exceedingly difficult task to kill the
bull according to the rules of art, owing to the animal’s unequivocal
disinclination for the combat. Leoncito was a brave, daring man; but
hardly so well skilled as Candido. He rushed boldly against the bull, and
strove to inflict upon him a mortal wound. He missed, however, his aim at
the right place, and the animal began to pour forth its blood in a stream.
This is considered an enormous fault in the art—and it met with a becoming
storm of groans and hisses. The bull, agonized by his wounds, ran wildly
about. Leoncito gave him another blow—when he sat down, and quietly looked
around him, as the wounds were not immediately mortal. This reposing
attitude gave immense annoyance both to the combatants and the spectators.
Of course it was out of all question to inflict on so gentle and resigned
an enemy another _estocada_—and yet the public could not afford to wait
the bull’s leisure to die, as it was necessary to continue the sport. To
expedite, therefore, the animal’s last moments, and the progress of public
business, the _eachetero_, a butcher, came forward and performed his
function of inflicting the death-blow on occasions when, owing to the
perversity of the bull or the clumsiness of the _matador_, his final
assistance becomes requisite. Grasping firmly a short sharp dagger, he by
a steady and well directed blow put a period to the agonies of the
animal—applauses and abuse were then liberally bestowed upon Leoncito;
after which the fight was suffered to proceed, and the third bull sprang
into the arena. We will not, however, follow the perils and chances of
this encounter. It may e sufficient to mention, that the sport went on
much upon the same principle as before. The usual number of horses were
killed, good spanking falls were endured by the combatants, and the same
tumult and confusion prevailed throughout the circus. The combat had now
lasted three hours, and the shadows of evening were gradually descending
over the scene. Yet the spectators appeared by no means satisfied; some
even grew clamorous, and required that a fourth bull should be brought
forward. Amongst these unreasonable requisitionists, the _aficionado_
particularly distinguished himself. He was (unhappily for his neighbors)
blessed with most stentorian lungs, of which he made a liberal use, upon
the most trifling occasion,—no other bull, however, was produced, and
accordingly the spectators began slowly and discontentedly to disperse.

The fight being ended, the _picadores_ and the rest of the troop withdrew
to the little chapel, to return thanks for their escape. However, the
veracity expected from an historian compels me to say, that their evening
prayers were by no means of the same length as those which had preceded
the encounter of the morning. At the entrance of the chapel we perceived
many a dark-complexioned _manola_—many a terrible looking,
fierce-whiskered, cigar-smoking _majo_—awaiting the egress of their
friends; who, as soon as their devotions were concluded, stalked out with
a martial and haughty air to receive the congratulations of their
comrades. Meantime, the vast concourse of people so lately assembled
together, had gradually dispersed through the various avenues of the
Prado, affording the beholder a most striking and enlivening picture. The
Prado itself, that beautiful promenade, which has attracted the attention
of all who have visited Spain, now presented a most brilliant spectacle:
it was crowded with carriages, as well as with pedestrians, all pressing
to enjoy the coolness of the evening in that delightful spot. Having
strolled a few times up and down this fashionable promenade, we retired to
the _Neverria de Solos_, contiguous to the Prado, to take our _refresco_.
To this place, as to many others of the like nature, the more elegant
class of society retire early in the evening to eat ices, and drink
lemonade and other refreshing beverages. From hence each person retires to
his own _tertulia_ for the evening, and thus ends a day wholly consecrated
to pleasure.

Bull fights are now daily decreasing, both in number and splendor of
appearance, from what they were in former times. Either the Spaniards are
losing their relish for such spectacles, or the scarcity of good
_picadores_ and _espades_ detracts from the interest which attaches to
them. Not long since, the _matadores_ were favorites with the public, and
were regarded with considerable interest even by their superiors. Many
singular and gallant adventures are related of them and ladies of rank. It
was a common custom, no great while ago, to throw purses of gold to the
combatants, upon the achievement of some skilful feat. But unhappily the
secret of long purses is lost, and there is but little chance of a
stranger seeing any money thrown away in Spain at the present time.

The most renowned of the Matadores were Romero and Pepe-Hillo, the author
of a treatise entitled Tauromachia. The first retired from the arena full
of honors and considerable wealth. But being desirous of obtaining for his
son a canonship, he was commanded, in order to obtain that favor from the
queen, Maria Louisa, to re-appear in the arena, on some grand festival.

Romero joyfully obeyed; but his age and feebleness were inadequate to cope
with the fearful bull, and he would certainly have been killed, had not
his friends forcibly withdrawn him from the arena.

The will, however, was taken for the deed, and his son was accordingly
made a canon. With regard to Pepe-Hillo, like a gallant general, he met
his death in the field of his exploits. On a certain occasion, contrary to
the opinion of his friends, who knew him to be suffering from a wound in
the hand, he appeared in the arena. Unhappily he had to encounter a
tremendous animal. The bull hurled him on high twice; and when the
unfortunate man fell on the ground he was frightfully gored, and shortly
afterwards expired, amidst the most excruciating torments.





THE LADY AND THE FLOWER.


BY G. P. R. JAMES, ESQ.

  There be of British arms and deeds,
    Who sing in noble strain,
  Of Poictiers’ field, and Agincourt,
    And Cressy’s bloody plain.

  High tales of merry England,
    Full often have been told,
  For never wanted bard to sing
    The actions of the bold.

  But now I tune another string,
    To try my minstrel power,
  My story’s of a gallant knight,
    A lady, and a flower.

  The noble sun that shines on all,
    The little or the great,
  As bright on cottage doorway small,
    As on the castle gate,

  Came pouring over fair Guienne
    From the far eastern sea;
  And glistened on the broad Garonne,
    And slept on Blancford lea.

  The morn was up, the morn was bright,
    In southern summer’s rays,
  And Nature caroll’d in the light,
    And sung her Maker’s praise.

  Fair Blancford, thou art always fair,
    With many a shady dell,
  And bland variety and change,
    Of forest and of fell.

  But Blancford on that morn was gay,
    With many a pennon bright,
  And glittering arms and panoply
    Shone in the morning light.

  For good Prince Edward, England’s pride,
    Now lay in Blancford’s towers,
  And weary sickness had consumed,
    The hero’s winter hours.

  But now that brighter hopes had come,
    With summer’s brighter ray,
  He called his gallant knights around,
    To spend a festal day.

  With tournament and revelry,
    To pass away the hours,
  And win fair Mary from her sire,
  The Lord of Blancford’s towers.

  But why fair Mary’s brow was sad
    None in the castle knew,
  Nor why she watched one garden bed,
  Where none but wild pinks grew.

  Some said that seven nights before
    A page had sped away,
  To where Lord Clifford with his power,
    On Touraine’s frontier lay.

  To Blancford no Lord Clifford came,
    And many a tale was told,
  For well ’twas known that he had sought,
    Fair Mary’s love of old.

  And some there said Lord Clifford’s love
    Had cooled at Mary’s pride,
  And some there said that other vows
    His heart inconstant tied.

  Foul slander, ready still to soil,
    All that is bright and fair,
  With more than Time’s destructiveness,
    Who never learned to spare.

  The morn was bright, but posts had come,
    Bringing no tidings fair,
  For knit was Edward’s royal brow,
    And full of thoughtful care.

  The lists were set, the parted sun
    Shone equal on the plain,
  And many a knight there manfully
    Strove fresh applause to gain.

  Sir Henry Talbot, and Sir Guy
    Of Brackenbury, he
  Who slew the giant Iron-arm,
    On Cressy’s famous lea,

  Were counted best, and claimed the Prince
    To give the sign that they
  Might run the tilt, and one receive
    The honors of the day.

  "Speed, knights, perhaps those arms that shine
    In peace," prince Edward said,
  "Before a se’nnight pass, may well,
    In Gallic blood be died.

  "For here we learn that hostile bands,
    Have gathered in Touraine,
  And Clifford, with his little troop,
    Are prisoners or slain.

  "For with five hundred spears, how bold
    Soe’er his courage show,
  He never could withstand the shock,
    Of such a host of foe."

  Fair Mary spoke not, but the blood
    Fled truant from her cheek,
  And left it pale, as when day leaves
    Some mountain’s snowy peak.

  But then there camp the cry of horse,
    The east lea pricking o’er,
  And to the lists a weary page
    A tattered pennon bore.

  Fast came a knight with blood-stained arms,
    And dusty panoply,
  And beaver down, and armed lance,
    In chivalric array.

  No crest, no arms, no gay device,
    Upon his shield he wore,
  But a small knot beside his plume,
    Of plain wild pinks he bore.

  For love, for love and chivalry,
    Lord Clifford rides the plain,
  And foul he lies who dares to say,
    His honor e’er know stain.

  And Mary’s cheek ’gan blushing bright,
    And Mary’s heart beat high,
  And Mary’s breath that fear oppressed
    Came in a long glad sigh.

  Straight to the Prince the knight he rode,
    "I claim these lists," he cried,
  "Though late into the field I come,
    My suit be not denied;

  "For we have fought beside the Loire,
    And stained our arms in blood;
  Not ever lost one step of ground,
    So long as rebels stood.

  "Hemmed in, I one time never thought
    To die in British land,
  Or see my noble prince again,
    Or kiss his royal hand.

  "But well fought every gallant squire,
    And well fought every knight;
  And rebels have been taught to feel
    The force of British might.

  "And now in humble terms they sue,
    To know thy high command,
  And here stand I these lists to claim,
    For a fair lady’s hand.

  "For Mary’s love, and chivalry,
    I dare the world to fight,
  And foul and bitterly he lies,
    Who dares deny my right"

  "No, no, brave Clifford," Edward said,
    "No lists to-day for thee,
  Thy gallant deeds beside the Loire,
    Well prove thy chivalry.

  "Sir Guy, Sir Henry, and the rest,
    Have well acquit their arms,
  But Edward’s thanks are Clifford’s due,
    As well as Mary’s charms."

  "My lord, you are her sire," he said,
    "Give kind consent and free,
  And who denies our Clifford’s right,
    Shall ride a tilt with me."

  Gay spake the prince, gay laughed the throng,
    And Mary said not nay,
  And bright with smile, and dance, and song,
    Went down the festal day.

  And when Lord Clifford to the board
    Led down his Mary fair,
  A knot of pinks was in his cap,
    A knot was in her hair.

  For it had been their sign of love,
    And loved by them was still,
  Till death came quietly on their heads,
    And bowed them to his will.

  And now, though years have passed away,
    And all that years have seen,
  And Clifford’s deeds and Mary’s charms,
    Are as they ne’er had been,

  Some wind, as if in memory
    Has borne the seeds on high,
  To deck the ruin’s crumbling wall,
    And catch the passing eye.

  It tells a tale to those who hear;
    For beauty, strength, and power,
  Are but the idols of a day,
    More short-lived than a flower.

  Joy on, joy on, then, while ye may,
    Nor waste the moments dear;
  Nor give yourself a cause to sigh,
    Nor teach to shed a tear.





AN OLD MAID’S FIRST LOVE.


                    From Chamber’s Edinburgh Journal.


I went once to the south of France for my health; and being recommended to
choose the neighborhood of Avignon, took my place, I scarcely know why, in
the diligence all the way from Paris. By this proceeding I missed the
steam-voyage down the Rhone, but fell in with some very pleasant people,
about whom I am going to speak. I travelled in the _intérieur_, and from
Lyon had no one for companion but a fussy little lady, of a certain age,
who had a large basket, a parrot in a cage, a little lapdog, a bandbox, a
huge blue umbrella, which she could never succeed in stowing any where,
and a moth-eaten muff. In my valetudinarian state I was not pleased with
this inroad—especially as the little lady had a thin, pinched-up face, and
obstinately looked out of the window, while she popped about the
_intérieur_ as if she had just taken lodgings and was putting them in
order, throwing me every now and then some gracious apology in a not
unpleasant voice. "Mince as you please, madam," thought I; "you are a
bore." I am sorry to add that I was very unaccommodating, gave no
assistance in the stowing away of the umbrella, and when Fanfreluche came
and placed his silken paws upon my knees, pushed him away very rudely. The
little old maid—it was evident this was her quality—apologized for her dog
as she had done for herself, and went on arranging her furniture—an
operation not completed before we got to St. Saphorin.

For some hours a perfect silence was preserved, although my companion
several times gave a short dry cough, as if about to make an observation.
At length, the digestion of a hurried dinner being probably completed, I
felt all of a sudden quite bland and sociable, and began to be mightily
ashamed of myself. "Decidedly," thought I, "I must give this poor woman
the benefit of my conversation." So I spoke, very likely with that
self-satisfied air assumed sometimes by men accustomed to be well
received. To my great vexation the old maid had by this time taken
offence, and answered in a very stiff and reserved manner. Now the whole
absurdity of my conduct was evident to me, and I determined to make
amends. Being naturally of a diplomatic turn, I kept quiet for awhile, and
then began to make advances to Fanfreluche. The poor animal bore no
malice, and I won his heart by stroking his long ears. Then I gave a piece
of sugar to the parrot; and having thus effected a practicable breach,
took the citadel by storm by pointing out a more commodious way of
arranging the great blue umbrella.

We were capital friends thenceforward; and I soon knew the history of
Mlle. Nathalie Bernard by heart. A mightily uninteresting history it was
to all but herself; so I shall not repeat it: suffice to say, that she had
lived long on her little income, as she called it, at Lyon, and was now on
her way to Avignon, where a very important object called her. This was no
other than to save her niece Marie from a distasteful marriage, which her
parents, very good people, but dazzled by the wealth of the unamiable
suitor, wished to bring about.

"And have you," said I, "any reasonable hope of succeeding in your
mission?"

"_Parbleu!_" replied the old maid, "I have composed a little speech on
ill-assorted unions, which I am sure will melt the hearts of my sister and
my brother-in-law; and if that does not succeed—why, I will make love to
the _futur_ myself, and whisper in his ear that a comfortable little
income available at once, and a willing old maid, are better than a
cross-grained damsel with expectations only. You see I am resolved to make
any sacrifice to effect my object."

I laughed at the old maid’s disinterestedness, which was perhaps greater
than at first appeared. At least she assured me that she had refused
several respectable offers, simply because she liked the independence of a
single life; and that if she had remained single to that age, it was a
sign that marriage had nothing attractive for her in itself. We discussed
the point learnedly as the diligence rolled; and what with the original
turn of my companion’s mind, the sportive disposition of Fanfreluche, and
the occasional disjointed soliloquies of Coco, the parrot, our time passed
very pleasantly. When night came Mlle. Nathalie ensconced herself in the
corner behind her parcels and animals, and endeavored to sleep; but the
jolting of the diligence, and her own lively imagination, wakened her
every five minutes; and I had each time to give her a solemn assurance, on
my word of honor as a gentleman, that there was no particular danger of
our being upset into the Rhone.

We were ascending a steep hill next day; both had got out to walk. I have
omitted to note that it was autumn. Trees and fields were touched by the
golden fingers of the season. The prospect was wide, but I forget the
precise locality. On the opposite side of the Rhone, which rolled its
rapid current in a deepening valley to our right, rose a range of hills,
covered with fields that sloped wonderfully, and sometimes gave place to
precipices or wood-lined declivities. Here and there the ruins of some old
castle—reminiscences of feudal times—rose amid lofty crags, and traced
their jagged outline against the deep blue sky of Provence. Nathalie
became almost sentimental as she gazed around on this beautiful scene.

We had climbed about half of the hill: the diligence was a little way
behind: the five horses were stamping and striking fire from the pavement
as they struggled up with the ponderous vehicle: the other passengers had
lingered in the rear with the conductor, who had pointed out a little
_auberge_ among some trees. We here saw a man preceding us upon the road
carrying a little bundle at the end of a stick over his shoulder: he
seemed to advance painfully. Our attention was attracted—I scarcely knew
why. He paused a moment—then went on with an uncertain step—paused again,
staggered forward, and fell on his face just as we came up. Mlle.
Nathalie, with a presence of mind that surprised me, had her
smelling-bottle out in an instant, and was soon engaged in restoring the
unfortunate traveller to consciousness. I assisted as well as I was able,
and trust that my good-will may atone for my awkardness. Nathalie did
every thing; and, just as the diligence reached us, was gazing with
delight on the languid opening of a pair of as fine eyes as I have ever
seen, and supporting in her lap a head covered with beautiful curls. Even
at that moment, as I afterwards remembered, she looked upon the young man
as a thing over which she had acquired a right of property. "He is going
our way," said she: "let us lift him into the diligence."

"A beggarly Parisian; yo, yo!" quoth the postilion as he passed, clacking
his long whip.

"Who will answer for his fare?" inquired the conductor.

"I will," replied Nathalie, taking the words out of my mouth.

In a few minutes the young man, who looked bewildered and could not speak,
was safely stowed among Nathalie’s other parcels; and the crest of the
hill being gained, we began rolling rapidly down a steep descent. The
little old maid, though in a perfect ecstasy of delight—the incident
evidently appeared to her quite an adventure—behaved with remarkable
prudence. While I was puzzling my head to guess by what disease this poor
young man had been attacked, she was getting ready the remedies that
appeared to her the most appropriate, in the shape of some excellent cakes
and a bottle of good wine, which she fished out of her huge basket. Her
_protégé_, made tame by hunger, allowed himself to be treated like a
child. First she gave him a very small sip of Burgundy, then a diminutive
fragment of cake; and then another sip and another piece of cake—insisting
on his eating very slowly. Being perfectly useless, I looked quietly on,
and smiled to see the suhmissiveness with which this fine, handsome fellow
allowed himself to be fed by the fussy old maid, and how he kept his eyes
fixed upon her with an expression of wondering admiration.

Before we arrived at Avignon we knew the history of the young man. He was
an artist, who had spent several years studying in Paris, without friends,
without resources, except a miserable pittance which his mother, a poor
peasant woman living in a village not far from Aix, had managed to send
him. At first he had been upheld by hope; and although he knew that his
mother not only denied herself necessaries, but borrowed money to support
him, he was consoled by the idea that the time would come when, by the
efforts of his genius, he would be able to repay every thing with the
accumulated interest which affection alone would calculate. But his
expenses necessarily increased, and no receipts came to meet them. He was
compelled to apply to his mother for further assistance. The answer was
one word—"impossible." Then he endeavored calmly to examine his position,
came to the conclusion that for several years more he must be a burden to
his mother if he obstinately pursued his career, and that she must be
utterly ruined to insure his success. So he gave up his art, sold every
thing he had to pay part of his debts, and set out on foot to return to
big village and become a peasant, as his father had been before him. The
little money he had taken with him was gone by the time he reached Lyon.
He had passed through that city without stopping, and for more than two
days, almost for two nights, had incessantly pursued his journey, without
rest and without food, until he had reached the spot where, exhausted with
fatigue and hunger, he had fallen, perhaps to perish had we not been there
to assist him.

Nathalie listened with eager attention to this narrative, told with a
frankness which our sympathy excited. Now and then she gave a convulsive
start, or checked a hysterical sob, and at last fairly burst into tears. I
was interested as well as she, but retained more calmness to observe how
moral beauty almost vainly straggled to appear through the insignificant
features of this admirable woman. Her little eyes, reddened with weeping;
her pinched-up nose, blooming at the point; her thin lips, probably
accustomed to sarcasm; her cheeks, with a leaded citron hue; her hair that
forked up in unmanageable curls—all combined to obscure the exquisite
expression of respect and sympathy, perhaps already of love, sparkling
from her kindled soul, that could just be made out by an attentive eye. At
length, however, she became for a moment perfectly beautiful, as, when the
young painter had finished his story, with an expression that showed how
bitterly he regretted his abandoned art, she took both his hands in hers,
and exclaimed: "No, _mon enfant_, you shall not be thus disappointed. Your
genius"—she already took it for granted he had genius—"shall have an
opportunity for development. Your mother cannot do what is necessary—she
has played her part. I will be a—second mother to you, in return f«r the
little affection you can bestow on me without ingratitude to her to whom
you owe your life."

"My life has to be paid for twice," said he, kissing her hand. Nathalie
could not help looking round proudly to me. It was so flattering to
receive the gallant attentions of so handsome a young man, that I think
she tried to forget how she had bought them.

In the exuberance of her hospitality, the little old maid invited both
Claude Richer and myself to spend some time in the large farmhouse of her
brother-in-law. I declined, with a promise to be a frequent visitor; but
Claude, who was rather commanded than asked, could do nothing but accept.
I left them at the diligence office, and saw them walk away, the little
Nathalie affecting to support her feeble companion. For the honor of human
nature let me add, that the conductor said nothing about the fare. "It
would have been indelicate," he said to me, "to remind Mlle. Nathalie of
her promise in the young man’s presence. I know her well; and she will pay
me at a future time. At any rate I must show that there is a heart under
this waistcoat." So saying, the conductor thumped his breast with simple
admiration of his own humanity, and went away, after recommending me to
the Café de Paris—indeed and excellent house.

I shall say nothing of a variety of little incidents that occurred to me
at Avignon, nor about my studies on the history of the popes who resided
there. I must reserve myself entirely for the development of Nathalie’s
romance, which I could not follow step by step, but the chief features of
which I was enabled to catch during a series of visits I paid to the
farmhouse. Nathalie herself was very communicative to me at first, and
scarcely deigned to conceal her sentiments. By degrees, however, as the
catastrophe approached, she became more and more reserved; and I had to
learn from others, or to guess the part she played.

The farmhouse was situated on the other side of the river, in a small
plain, fertile and well wooded. Old Cossu, the owner, was a fine jolly
fellow, but evidently a little sharp in money matters. I was surprised at
first that he received the visit of Claude favorably; but when it came out
that a good part of his capital belonged to Nathalie, every circumstance
of deference to her was explained. Mère Cossu was not a very remarkable
personage; unless it be remarkable that she entertained the most profound
veneration for her husband, quoted his commonest sayings as witticisms,
and was ready to laugh herself into convulsions if he sneezed louder than
usual. Marie was a charming little person; perhaps a little too demure in
her manners, considering her wicked black eyes. She was soon very friendly
with Claude and me, but seemed to prefer passing her time in whispered
conversations with Nathalie. I was let into the secret that their
conversation turned principally on the means of getting rid of the
husband-elect—a great lubberly fellow, who lived some leagues off, and
whose red face shone over the garden-gate, in company with a huge nosegay,
regularly every Sunday morning. In spite of the complying temper of old
Cossu in other respects when Nathalie gave her advice, he seemed
obstinately bent on choosing his own son-in-law. Parents are oftener
correct than romancers will allow, in their negative opinions on this
delicate subject, but I cannot say as much for them when they undertake to
be affirmative.

I soon observed that Nathalie was not so entirely devoted to the
accomplishment of the object for which she had undertaken her journey as
she had promised; and, above all, that she spoke no more of the
disinterested sacrifice of herself as a substitute for Marie. I
maliciously alluded to this subject in one of our private confabulations,
and Nathalie, instead of being offended, frankly answered that she could
not make big Paul Boneau happy and assist Claude in his studies at the
same time. "I have now," she said, "an occupation for the rest of my
life—namely, to develop this genius, of which France will one day be
proud; and I shall devote myself to it unremittingly."

"Come, Nathalie," replied I, taking her arm in mine as we crossed the
poplar-meadow, "have you no hope of a reward?"

"I understand," quoth she frankly; "and I will not play at cross-purposes
with you. If this young man really loves his art, and his art alone, as he
pretends, could he do better than reward me—as you call it—for my
assistance? The word has a cruel signification, but you did not mean it
unkindly."

I looked at her wan, sallow countenance, that had begun for some days to
wear an expression of painful anxiety. At that moment I saw over a
hedge—but she could not—Claude and Marie walking in a neighboring field,
and pausing now and then to bend their heads very close together in
admiration of some very common flower. "Poor old maid," thought I, "you
will have no reward save the consciousness of your own pure intentions."

The minute development of this drama without dramatic scenes would perhaps
be more instructive than any elaborate analysis of human passions in
general; but it would require a volume, and I can only here give a mere
summary. Nathalie, in whom alone I felt particularly interested, soon
found that, she had deceived herself as to the nature of her sentiments
for Claude—that instead of regarding him with almost maternal solicitude,
she loved him with an intensity that is the peculiar characteristic of
passions awakened late in life, when the common consolation is
inadmissible—"after all, I may find better." This was her last, her only
chance of a happiness, which she had declared to me she had never dreamed
of, but which in reality she had only declined because it did not present
itself to her under all the conditions required by her refined and
sensitive mind. Claude, who was an excellent fellow, but incapable of
comprehending her or sacrificing himself, never swerved from grateful
deference to her; but I could observe, that as the state of her feelings
became more apparent, he took greater care to mark the character of his
sentiments for her, and to insist with some affectation on the depth of
his filial affection. Nathalie’s eyes were often red with tears—a fact
which Claude did not choose perhaps to notice, for fear of an explanation.
Marie, on the contrary, became more blooming every day, while her eloquent
eyes were still more assiduously bent upon the ground. It was evident to
me that she and Claude understood one another perfectly well.

At length the same thing became evident to Nathalie. How the revelation
was made to her I do not know; but sudden it must have been, for I met her
one day in the poplar-field, walking hurriedly along with an extraordinary
expression of despair in her countenance. I know not why, but the thought
at once occurred to me that the Rhone ran rapid and deep not far off, and
I threw myself across her path. She started like a guilty thing, but did
not resist when I took her hand and led her back slowly towards the
farmhouse. We had nearly reached it in silence when she suddenly stopped,
and bursting into tears turned away into a by-lane where was a little
bench under an elm. Here she sat down and sobbed for a long time, while I
stood by. At length she raised her head and asked me: "Do morality and
religion require self-sacrifice even to the end—even to making half a life
a desert, even to heart-breaking, even unto death?"

"It scarcely belongs to a selfish mortal to counsel such virtue," I
replied; "but it is because it is exercised here and there, now and then,
once in a hundred years, that man can claim some affinity with the divine
nature."

A smile of ineffable sweetness played about the poor old girl’s lips. She
wiped her eyes, and began talking of the changing aspect of the season,
and how the trees day by day more rapidly shed their leaves, and how the
Rhone had swelled within its ample bed, and of various topics apparently
unconnected with her frame of mind, but all indicating that she felt the
winter was coming—a long and dreary winter for her. At this moment
Fanfreluche, which had missed her, came down the lane, barking with fierce
joy; and she took the poor little beast in her arms, and exhaled the last
bitter feeling that tormented her in these words: "Thou at least lovest
me—because I have fed thee!" In her humility she seemed now to believe
that her only claim to love was her charity; and that even this claim was
not recognized except by a dog!

I was not admitted to the secret of the family conclave that took place,
but learned simply that Nathalie pleaded with feverish energy the love
that had grown up between Marie and Claude as an insuperable bar to the
proposed marriage between Paul Boneau and her niece. Matters were arranged
by means of large sacrifices on the part of the heroic maid. Paul’s face
ceased to beam over the garden-gate on a Sunday morning; and by degrees
the news got abroad that Marie was betrothed to the young artist. One day
a decent old woman in _sabots_ came to the farmhouse: it was Claude’s
mother, who had walked from Aix to see him. It was arranged that Claude
should pursue his studies a year longer, and then marry. Whether any
explanation took place I do not know; but I observed that the young man
sometimes looked with the same expression of wondering admiration I had
observed in the diligence at the little Nathalie—more citron-hued than
ever. At length she unhooked the cage of Coco, the parrot, took
Faufreluche under one arm and her blue umbrella under the other, and went
away in company with the whole family, myself included, every one carrying
a parcel or a basket to the diligence office. What a party that was! Every
one was in tears except Nathalie. She bore up manfully, if I may use the
word; laughed, and actually joked; but just as I handed Coco in, her
factitious courage yielded, and she burst into an agony of grief. With
officious zeal I kept at the window until the diligence gave a lurch and
started; and then turning round I looked at Claude and Marie, who were
already mingling their eyes in selfish forgetfulness of their
benefactress, and said solemnly: "There goes the best woman ever created
for this unworthy earth." The artist, who, for an ordinary man, did not
lack sentiment, took my hand and said: "Sir, I will quarrel with any man
who says less of that angel than you have done."

The marriage was brought about in less time than had been agreed upon.
Nathalie of course did not come; but she sent some presents and a pleasant
letter of congratulation, in which she called herself "an inveterate old
maid." About a year afterwards I passed through Lyon and saw her. She was
still very yellow, and more than ever attentive to Fanfreluche and Coco. I
even thought she devoted herself too much to the service of these two
troublesome pets, to say nothing of a huge cat which she had added to her
menagerie, as a kind of hieroglyphic of her condition. "How fare the
married couple?" cried she, tossing up her cork-screw curls. "Still cooing
and billing?"

"Mademoiselle," said I, "they are getting on pretty well. Claude, finding
the historic pencil not lucrative, has taken to portrait-painting; and
being no longer an enthusiastic artist, talks even of adopting the more
expeditious method of the Daguerreotype. In the meantime, half the
tradesmen of Avignon, to say nothing of Aix, have bespoken caricatures of
themselves by his hand. Marie makes a tolerable wife, but has a terrible
will of her own, and is feared as well as loved."

Nathalie tried to laugh; but the memory of her old illusions coming over
her, she leaned down towards the cat she was nursing, and sparkling tears
fell upon its glossy fur.





MADEMOISELLE DE CAMARGO.


From advance sheets of a capital book entitled "Men and Women of the XIXth
           Century, by Argene Houssaye," in press by Redfield.


Mademoiselle de Camargo almost came into the world dancing. It is related
that Gritry, when he was scarcely four years of age, had an idea of
musical tunes. Mademoiselle de Camargo danced at a much earlier age. She
was still in arms when the combined airs of a violin and a hautboy caught
her ear. She jumped about full of life, and during the whole time that the
music was playing, she danced, there is no other word for it, keeping time
with great delight. It must be stated that she was of Spanish origin. She
was born at Brussels, the 15th of April, 1710, of a noble family, that had
supplied several cardinals to the sacred college, and is of considerable
distinction in Spanish history, both ecclesiastical and national. Her name
was Marianne. Her mother had danced, but with the ladies of the court, for
her own pleasure, and not for that of others. Her father, Ferdinand de
Cupis de Camargo, was a frank Spanish noble, that is to say he was poor;
he lived at Brussels, upon the crumbs of the table of the Prince de Ligne,
without counting the debts he made. His family, which was quite numerous,
was brought up by the grace of God; the father frequented the tavern,
trusting to the truth that there is a God that rules over children!

Marianne was so pretty that the Princess de Ligne used to call her her
fairy daughter. Light as a bird, she used to spring into the elms, and
jump from branch to branch. No fawn in its morning gayety had more
capricious and easy movements; no deer wounded by the huntsman ever sprang
with more force and grace. When she was ten years old, the Princess de
Ligne thought that this pretty wonder belonged of right to Paris, the city
of wonders, Paris, where the opera was then displaying its thousand and
thousand enchantments. It was decided that Mademoiselle de Camargo should
be a dancing-girl at the opera. Her father objected strenuously:
"Dancing-girl! the daughter of a gentleman, a grandee of Spain!"—"Goddess
of dance, if you please," said the Princess of Ligne, in order to quiet
him. He resigned himself to taking a journey to Paris in the prince’s
carriage. He arrived in the style of a lord at the house of Mademoiselle
Prévost, whom the poets of the day celebrated under the name of
Terpsichore. She consented to give lessons to Marianne de Camargo. Three
months after his departure, M. de Camargo returned to Brussels, with the
air of a conqueror. Mademoiselle de Prévost had predicted that his
daughter would be his glory and his fortune.

After having danced at a fête given by the Prince de Ligne, Marianne de
Camargo made her first appearance at the Brussels theatre, where she
reigned for three years as first _danseuse_. Her true theatre was not
there; in spite of her triumph at Brussels, her imagination always carried
her to Paris; notwithstanding when she quitted Brussels she went to Rouen.
Finally, after a long residence in that city, she was permitted to make
her first appearance at the opera. It was on the 5th of May, 1726, for the
famous day of her debût has not been forgotten, that she appeared with all
the brilliancy of sixteen upon the first stage in the world. Mademoiselle
Prévost, already jealous, from a presentiment perhaps, had advised her to
make her first appearance in the _Characters of the Dance_, a step almost
impossible, which the most celebrated dancers hardly had dared to attemp,
at the height even of their reputation. Mademoiselle de Camargo, who
danced like a fairy, surpassed all her predecessors; her triumph was so
brilliant that on the next day all the fashions took their name after her:
hair _à la Camargo_, dresses _à la Camargo_, sleeves _à la Camargo_. All
the ladies of the court imitated her grace; there were not a few that
would have liked to have copied her face!

I have not told all yet: Mademoiselle de Camargo was made by love and for
love. She was beautiful and pretty at the same time. There could be
nothing so sweet and impassioned as her dark eyes, nothing so enchanting
as her sweet smile! Lancret, Pater, J. B. Vanloo, all the painters that
were then celebrated, tried to portray her charming face.

On the second night of Mademoiselle de Camargo’s appearance on the stage,
there were twenty duels and quarrels without end at the door of the opera;
every one wanted to get in. Mademoiselle Prévost, alarmed at such a
triumph, intrigued with such success that Mademoiselle de Camargo was soon
forced to fall back to the position of a mere _figurante_. She and her
admirers had reason to be indignant. She was obliged to resign herself to
dancing unobserved with the company. But she was not long in avenging
herself with effect. One day, while she was dancing with a group of
demons, Demoulins, called the devil, did not make his appearance to dance
his solo, when the musicians had struck up, expecting his entrance. A
sudden inspiration seizes Mademoiselle de Camargo; she leaves the other
_figurantes_, she springs forward to the middle of the stage, and
improvises Demoulins’s _pas de seul_, but with more effect and capricious
variety. Applause re-echoed throughout the theatre. Mademoiselle de
Prévost swore that she would ruin her youthful rival; but it was too late.
Terpsichore was dethroned. Mademoiselle de Camargo was crowned on that day
queen of the opera, absolute queen, whose power was unlimited! She was the
first who dared to make the discovery that her petticoats were too long.
Here I will let Grimm have his say: "This useful invention, which puts the
amateur in the way of forming an intelligent judgment of the legs of a
dancing-girl, was thought at that time to be the cause of a dangerous
schism. The Jansenists of the pit exclaimed heresy, scandal; and were
opposed to the shortened petticoats. The Molinists, on the contrary, held
that this innovation was in character with the spirit of the primitive
church, which was opposed to the sight of pirouettes and pigeon-wings,
embarrassed by the length of a petticoat. The Sorbonne of the opera had
for a long time great trouble in establishing the wholesome doctrine on
this point of discipline, which so much divided the faithful."

Monsieur Ferdinand de Camargo grew old with a severe anxiety about the
virtue and the salary of his daughter: he only preserved the salary.
Intoxicated with her triumph, Mademoiselle de Camargo listened too
willingly to all the lords of the court that frequented the company of the
actresses behind the scenes; it would have been necessary for the king to
appoint an historiographer, in order to record all the passions of this
_danseuse_. There was a time when all the world was in love with her.
Every one swore by Camargo; every one sang of Camargo; every one dreamed
about Camargo. The madrigals of Voltaire and of the gallant poets of that
gallant era are not forgotten.

However, the glory of Mademoiselle de Camargo was extinguished by degrees.
Like fashion that had patronized her, she passed away by degrees, never to
return. When she insisted upon retiring, although she was only forty years
of age, no one thought of preventing her: she was hardly regretted. There
was no inquiry made as to whither she had gone; she was only spoken of at
rare intervals, and then she was only alluded to as a memory of the past.
She had become something of a devotee, and very charitable. She knew by
name all the poor in her neighborhood. She occasionally was visited by
some of the notabilities of a past day, forgotten like herself.

In the _Amusements of the Heart and Mind_, a collection designed, as is
well known, to form the mind and the heart, Mademoiselle de Camargo is
charged with having had a thousand and more lovers! Without giving the lie
to this accusation, can I not prove it false by relating, in all its
simplicity, a fact which proves a profound passion on her part? A pretty
woman may dance at the opera, smile upon numberless admirers, live
carelessly from day to day, in the noisy excitement of the world; still,
there will be some blessed hours, when the heart, though often laid waste,
will flourish again all of a sudden. Love is like the sky, which looks
blue, even when reflected in the stream formed by the storm. It is thus
that love is occasionally found pure in a troubled heart. But, moreover,
this serious passion of Mademoiselle de Camargo was experienced by her in
all the freshness of her youth.

One morning, Grimm, Pont-de-Veyle, Duclos, Helvetius, presented themselves
in a gay mood, at the humble residence of the celebrated dancer. She was
then living in an old house in the Rue Saint-Thomas-du-Louvre. An aged
serving-woman opened the door.—"We wish to see Mademoiselle de Camargo,"
said Helvetius, who had great difficulty in keeping his countenance. The
old woman led them into a parlor that was furnished with peculiar and
grotesque-looking furniture. The wainscoting was covered with pastels
representing Mademoiselle de Camargo in all her grace, and in her
different characters. But the parlor was not adorned by her portraits
only; there was a _Christ on_ _the Mount of Olives_, a _Magdalen at the
Tomb_, a _Veiled Virgin_, a _Venus_, the _Three Graces_, some _Cupids_,
half concealed beneath some rosaries and sacred relics, and _Madonnas_,
covered with trophies from the opera!

The goddess of the place did not keep them a long time waiting; a door
opened, half-a-dozen dogs of every variety of breed sprang into the
parlor: it must be said, to the praise of Mademoiselle de Camargo, that
these were not lap-dogs. She appeared behind them, carrying in her arms
(looking like a fur muff) an Angora cat of fine growth. As she had not
followed the fashion for ten years or more, she appeared to have come from
the other world.—"You see, gentlemen," pointing to her dogs, "all the
court I have at present, but in truth those courtiers there are well worth
all others. Here, Marquis! down, Duke! lie down, Chevalier! Do not be
offended, gentlemen, that I receive you in such company; but how was I to
know?..."—Grimm first spoke.—"You will excuse, mademoiselle, this
unannounced visit when you know the important object of it."—"I am as
curious as if I were only twenty years old," said Mademoiselle de Camargo;
"but, alas! when I was twenty, it was the heart that was curious; but now,
in the winter of life, I am no longer troubled on that score."—"The heart
never grows old," said Helvetius, bowing.—"That is a heresy, sir: those
only dare to advance such maxims who have never been in love. It is love
that never grows old, for it dies in childhood. But the heart—"—"You see,
madame, that your heart is still young; what you have just said proves
that you are still full of fire and inspiration."—"Yes, yes," said
Mademoiselle de Camargo, "you are perhaps right; but when the hair is gray
and the wrinkles are deep, the heart is a lost treasure; a coin that is no
longer current."—While saying this, she lifted up Marquis by his two paws,
and kissed him on the head: Marquis was a fine setter-dog, with a
beautiful spotted skin.—"They, at least, will love me to the last. But it
seems to me we are talking nonsense; have we nothing better to talk about?
Come, gentlemen, I am all attention!"

The visitors looked at each other with some embarrassment; they seemed to
be asking of each other who was to speak first. Pont-de-Veyle collected
his thoughts, and spoke as follows: "Mademoiselle, we have been
breakfasting together; we had a gay time of it, like men of spirit.
Instead of bringing before us, as the Egyptians in olden times, mummies,
in order to remind us that time is the most precious of all things, we
called up all those gay phantoms which enchanted our youth: need I say
that you were not the least charming of them? who did not love you? who
did not desire to live with you one hour, even at the expense of a wound?
Happiness never costs too much—" Mademoiselle Camargo interrupted the
speaker: "O gentlemen, do not, I beg, blind me with the memory of the
past; do not awaken a buried passion! Let me die in peace! See, the tears
are in my eyes!"—The visitors, affected, looked with a certain degree of
emotion at the poor old lady who had loved so much. "It is strange," said
Helvetius to his neighbor, "we came here to laugh, but we are travelling
quite another road; however, I must say, nothing could be more ludicrous
than such a caricature, if it were not of a woman." "Proceed, sir," said
Mademoiselle de Camargo to Pont-de-Veyle. "To tell you the truth, madame,
the worst fellow in the company, or rather he who had drank the most,
declared that he was, of all your lovers, the one you most loved. ’The
mere talk of a man who has had too much wine,’ said one of us. But our
impertinent emptied his glass, and backed his statement. The discussion
became very lively. We talked, we drank, and we talked. When the last
bottle was empty, and the dispute was likely to end in a duel, and we
talked without knowing, probably, what we said, the most sober of the
company proposed to go and ask you yourself which of your lovers you loved
the most. Is it the Count de Melun? is it the Duke de Richelieu? is it the
Marquis de Croismare? the Baron de Viomesnil? the Viscount de Jumilhac? is
it Monsieur de Beaumont, or Monsieur d’Aubigny? is it a poet? is it a
soldier? is it an abbé?" "Pshaw! pshaw!" said Mademoiselle de Camargo,
smiling; "you had better refer to the _Court Calendar_!" "What we want to
know is not the names of those who have loved you, but, I repeat, the name
of him whom you loved the most." "You are fools," said Mademoiselle de
Camargo, with an air of sadness and a voice that showed emotion; "I will
not answer you. Let us leave our extinct passions in their tombs, in
peace. Why unbury all those charming follies which have had their day?"
"Come," says Grimm to Duclos, "do not let us grow sentimental; that would
be too absurd. Mademoiselle de Camargo," said he, playing with the dogs at
the same time, "which was the epoch of short petticoats? for that is one
of the points of our philosophical dispute."

The aged _danseuse_ did not answer. Taking Pont-de-Veyle by the hand, all
of a sudden, she said in rising: "Monsieur, follow me." He obeyed with
some surprise. She conducted him to her bedchamber; it was like a basket
of odds and ends; it looked like a linendraper’s shop in confusion; it was
all disorder; it was quite evident that the dogs were at home there.
Mademoiselle de Camargo went to a little rosewood chest of drawers,
covered with specimens of Saxony porcelain, more or less chipped and
broken. She opened a little ebony box, exposing its contents to the eyes
of Pont-de-Veyle. "Do you see?" said she, with a sigh. Pont-de-Veyle saw a
torn letter, the dry bouquet of half a century, the kind of flowers of
which it was composed could hardly be recognized. "Well?" asked
Pont-de-Veyle. "Well, do you understand?" "Not at all." "Look at that
portrait." She pointed with her finger to a wretched portrait in oils,
covered with dust and spider’s web. "I begin to understand." "Yes," said
she, "that is his portrait. As for myself, I never look at it. The one
here," striking her breast, "is more like. A portrait is a good thing for
those who have no time for memory."

Pont-de-Veyle looked in turn with much interest at the letter, the faded
bouquet, and the wretched portrait. "Have you ever met this person?"
"Never." "Let us return, then." "No; I beg let me hear the story." "Is it
not enough to have seen his portrait? You can now settle your dispute with
a word, since you know whether he whom I loved the most resembles your
friend who had taken so much wine." "He does not resemble him the least in
the world." "Well, that is all: I forgive your visit. Farewell! When you
breakfast with your friends, you can take up my defence somewhat. You can
tell those libertines without pity, that I have saved myself by my heart,
if we can be saved that way.... Yes, yes; it is my plank of safety, in the
wreck!"

Saying these words, Mademoiselle de Camargo approached the door of the
saloon. Pont-de-Veyle followed her, carrying the ebony-box. "Gentlemen,"
said he, to his merry friends, "our drunken toper was a coxcomb; I have
seen the portrait of the best beloved of the goddess of this mansion; now,
you must join your prayers to mine, to prevail upon Mademoiselle de
Camargo to relate to us the romance of her heart; I only know the preface,
which is melancholy and interesting; I have seen a letter, a bouquet, and
a portrait." "I will not tell you a word," muttered she; "women are
charged with not being able to keep a secret; there is, however, more than
one that they never tell. A love-secret is a rose which embalms our
hearts; if it is told, the rose loses its perfume. I who address you,"
said Mademoiselle de Camargo, in brightening up, "I have only kept my love
in all its freshness by keeping it all to myself. There were only La
Carton and that old rogue Fontenelle who ever got hold of my secret.
Fontenelle was in the habit of dining frequently with me; one day, finding
me in tears, he was so surprised, he who never wept himself, from
philosophy, doubtless, that he tormented me for more than an hour for a
solution of the enigma. He was almost like a woman; he drew from me, by
his cat-like worrying, the history of my love. Would you believe it? I
hoped to touch his heart, but it was like speaking to the deaf. After
having listened to the end without saying a word, he muttered with his
little weak voice, ’_It is pretty!_’ La Carton, however, wept with me. It
is worth being a poet and a philosopher in order not to understand such
histories."

Mademoiselle de Camargo was silent; a deep silence followed, and every
look was upon her. "Speak, speak! we are all attention," said Helvetius,
"we are more worthy of hearing your story than the old philosopher, who
loved no one but himself." "After all," she replied, carried away by the
delight of her remembrance, "it will be spending a happy hour; I speak of
myself, and as for happy or unhappy hours, not many more are to pass
during my life, for I feel that I am passing away. But I do not know how
to begin; a fire flashes before my eyes; I cannot see, I am so overcome.
To begin: I was twenty.... But I shall never have the courage to read my
history aloud before so many people." "Fancy, Mademoiselle de Camargo,"
said Helvetius, "that you are reading a romance." "Well, then," said she,
"I will begin without ceremony."

"I was twenty years old. You are all aware, for the adventure caused a
great deal of scandal, you all know how the Count de Melun carried me off
one morning along with my sister Sophy. This little mad-cap, who had a
great deal of imagination, having discovered me reading a letter of the
count’s, in which he spoke of his design, she swore upon her thirteen
years that he must carry her off too. I was far from conceding any such
claim. It was always taken for granted that children know nothing; but at
the opera, and in love, there are no children. The Count de Melun, by
means of a bribe, had gained over the chambermaid. I was very culpable; I
knew all, and had not informed my father. But my father wearied me
somewhat; he preached in the desert; that is to say he preached to me
about virtue. He was always talking to me about our noble descent, of our
cousin, who was a cardinal, of our uncle, who was a grand inquisitor of
the Inquisition. Vanity of vanities! all was vanity with him, while with
me all was love. I did not trouble myself about being of an illustrious
family; I was handsome, I was worshipped, and, what was still better, I
was young.

"In the middle of the night I heard my door open; it was the Count de
Melun. I was not asleep, I was expecting him. It is not every woman who
would like it that is run away with. I was going to be run away with.

"Love is not only charming in itself, it is so also from its romance. A
passion without adventure is like a mistress without caprice. I was seated
upon my bed. ’Is it you, Jacqueline?’ I said, affecting fright. ’It is I,’
said the count, falling upon his knees. ’You, sir! Your letter was not a
joke then?’ ’My horses are at hand; there is no time to lose; leave this
sad prison: my hotel, my fortune, my heart, all are at your service.’ At
that moment a light appeared at the door. ’My father!’ I cried, with
affright, as I concealed myself behind the bed curtains. ’All is lost,’
muttered the count. It was Sophy. I recognized her light step. She
approached with the light in her hand, and in silence, toward the count.
’My sister,’ said she, with some degree of excitement, but without losing
her presence of mind, ’here I am, all ready.’ I did not understand; I
looked at her with surprise; she was all dressed, from head to foot. ’What
are you saying? You are mad.’ ’Not by any means; I want to be run away
with, like yourself.’ The Count de Melun could not help laughing.
’Mademoiselle,’ he said to her, ’you forget your dolls and toys. ’Sir,’
replied she, with dignity, ’I am thirteen years old. It was not yesterday
that I made my _début_ at the opera; I take a part on the stage in the
ravishment of Psyche.’ ’Good,’ says the count, ’we will carry you off
too.’ ’It is as well,’ whispered the count in my ear; ’this is the only
way of getting rid of her.’

"I was very much put out by this contretemps, which gave a new
complication to our adventure. My father might forgive my being carried
off, but Sophy! I tried to dissuade her from her mad enterprise. I offered
her my ornaments; she would not listen to reason. She declared, that if
she was not carried off with me she would inform against us, and thus
prevent the adventure. ’Do not oppose her.’ said the count; ’with such a
tendency she will be sure to be carried off sooner or later.’—’Well, let
us depart together,’ The chambermaid, who had approached with the
stealthy, quiet step of a cat, told us to hurry, for she was afraid that
the noise of the horses, that were pawing the ground near by, would awaken
Monsieur de Camargo. We were off; the carriage drove us to the count’s
hotel, rue de la Culture-Saint-Gervais. Sophy laughed and sung. In the
morning I wrote to the manager of the opera, that by the advice of my
physician it was impossible for me to appear for three weeks. To tell you
the truth, gentlemen, in a week’s time I went myself to inform the manager
that I would dance that evening. This, you perceive, is not very
flattering to the Count de Melun; but there are so few men in this world
who are sufficiently interesting for a week together. I loved the count,
doubtless, but I wanted to breathe a little without him. I desired the
excitement of the theatre. I opened my window, constantly, as if I would
fly out of it.

"As soon as I appeared at the opera my father followed my track, and
discovered the retreat of his daughters. One evening behind the scenes, he
went straight to the count and insulted him. The count answered him, with
great deference, that he would avoid the chance of taking the life of a
gallant gentleman who had given birth to such a daughter as I was. My
father did his best to prove and establish his sixteen quarterings, the
count was not willing to fight him. It was about that time that my father
presented his famous petition to the Cardinal de Fleury: ’Your petitioner
would state to the Lord Cardinal, that the Count de Melun, having carried
off his two daughters in the night, between the 10th and 11th of the month
of May, 1728, holds them imprisoned in his hotel, rue de la
Culture-Saint-Gervais. Your petitioner having to do with a person of rank,
is obliged to have recourse to his majesty’s ministers; he hopes, through
the goodness of the king, justice will be done him, and that the Count de
Melun will be commanded to espouse the elder daughter of your petitioner,
and endow the younger.’

"A father could not have done better. The Cardinal de Fleury amused
himself a good deal with the petition, and recommended me, one day that we
were supping together, for full penance, to make over to my father my
salary at the opera. But I find I am not getting on with my story. But
what would you have? The beginning is always where we dwell with the
greatest pleasure. I had been living in the count’s hotel a year; Sophy
had returned to my father’s house, where she did not remain long; but it
is not her history that I am relating. One morning a cousin of the count
arrived at the hotel in a great bustle; he was about spending a season in
Paris, in all the wildness of youth. He took us by surprise at breakfast;
he took his seat at table, without ceremony, on the invitation of the
count.

"In the beginning he did not strike my fancy; I thought him somewhat of a
braggadocio. He cultivated his mustachios with, great care (the finest
mustachios in the world), and spoke quite often enough of his prowess in
battle. Some visitor interrupting us, the count went into his library, and
left us together, _tête-à-tête_. Monsieur de Marteille’s voice, until then
proud and haughty in its tone, softened a little. He had at first looked
at me with the eye of a soldier; he now looked at me with the eye of a
pupil.—’Excuse, madame,’ said he, with some emotion, ’my rude soldier-like
bearing; I know nothing of fine manners; I have never passed through the
school of gallantry. Do not be offended at any thing I may say.’—’Why,
sir,’ said I, smiling, ’you do not say any thing at all.’—’Ah, if I knew
how to speak! but, in truth, I would feel more at home before a whole army
than I do before your beautiful eyes. The count is very happy in having
such a beautiful enemy to contend with.’—While speaking thus, he looked at
me with a supplicating tenderness which contrasted singularly with his
look of the hero. I do not know what my eyes answered him. The count then
came in, and the conversation took another turn.

"Monsieur de Marteille accepted the earnest invitation of his cousin to
stay at his hotel. He went out; I did not see him again till evening. He
did not know who I was; the count called me Marianne, and,
unintentionally, perhaps, he had not spoken a word to his cousin about the
opera, or my grace and skill as a dancer. At supper, Monsieur de Marteille
had no longer the same frank gayety of the morning; a slight uneasiness
passed like a cloud over his brow; more than once I caught his melancholy
glance.—’Cheer up your cousin,’ I said to the count.—’I know what he
wants,’ answered Monsieur de Melun; ’I will take him to-morrow to the
opera. You will see that in that God-forsaken place he will find his
good-humor again.’—I felt jealous, without asking myself why.

"Next day the _Triumph of Bacchus_ was played. I appeared as Ariadne, all
covered with vine-leaves and flowers. I never danced so badly. I had
recognized Monsieur de Marteille among the gentlemen of the court. He
looked at me with a serious air. I had hoped to have had an opportunity to
speak with him before the end of the ballet, but he had already gone. I
was offended at his abrupt departure.—’How!’ said I to myself, ’he sees me
dance, and this is the way he makes me his compliments.’—Next morning, he
breakfasted with us; he did not say a word about the evening; finally, not
being able to resist my impatience, ’Well, Monsieur de Marteille,’ said I
to him, somewhat harshly, ’you left early last night; it was hardly polite
of you.’—’Ah! when you were to dance no more!’ said he, with a sigh. This
was the first time that I was ever spoken to thus. Fearing that he had
said too much, and in order to divert Monsieur de Melun, who observed him
with a look of surprise, he began to speak of a little singer of no great
moment, who had a voice of some freshness.

"In the afternoon, the count detained at home for some reason or other,
begged his cousin to accompany me in a ride to the woods. He was to join
us on horseback. The idea of this ride made my heart beat violently. It
was the first time that I had listened with pleasure to the beatings of my
heart.

"We started on a fine summer’s day. Every thing was like a holyday: the
sky, the houses, the trees, the horses, and the people. A veil had fallen
from my eyes. For some minutes we remained in the deepest silence; not
knowing what to do, I amused myself by making a diamond that I wore
glisten in the rays of the sun that entered the carriage. Monsieur de
Marteille caught hold of my hand. We both said not a word the whole time.
I tried to disengage my hand; he held it the harder. I blushed; he turned
pale. A jolt of the carriage occurred very opportunely to relieve us from
our embarrassment; the jolt had lifted me from my seat; it made me fall
upon his bosom.—’Monsieur,’ said I, starting. ’Ah, madame, if you knew how
I love you!’—He said this with a tenderness beyond expression; it was love
itself that spoke! I had no longer the strength to get angry. He took my
hand again and devoured it with kisses. He did not say another word; I
tried to speak, but did not know what to say myself. From time to time our
looks met each other; it was then that we were eloquent. Such eternal
pledges, such promises of happiness!

"Notwithstanding, we arrived at the woods. All of a sudden, as if seized
with a new idea, he put his head out of the window, and said something to
the coachman. I understood, by the answer of La Violette, the coachman,
that he was not willing to obey; but Monsieur de Marteille having alluded
to a caning and fifty pistoles, the coachman made no further objections. I
did not understand very well what he was about. After an hour’s rapid
travelling, as I was looking with some anxiety as to where we were, he
tried to divert me by telling me some episodes of his life. Although I did
not listen very intelligently to what he said, I heard enough to find out
that I was the first woman he had ever loved. They all say so, but he told
the truth, for he spoke with his eyes and his heart. I soon found out that
we were no longer on our right road; but observe how far the feebleness of
a woman in love will go: I hadn’t the courage to ask him why he had
changed our route. We crossed the Seine in a boat, between Sèvres and St.
Cloud; we regained the woods, and after an hour’s ride through them, we
reached an iron park-gate, at the extremity of the village of Velaisy.

"Monsieur de Marteille had counted without his host. He expected not to
have found a soul in his brother’s chateau, but, since the evening before,
his brother had returned from a journey to the coast of France. Seeing
that the chateau was inhabited, Monsieur de Marteille begged me to wait a
little in the carriage. As soon as he had gone, the coachman came to the
door.—’Well, madame, we breathe at last! my opinion is that we should make
our escape. Depend upon the word of La Violette, we shall be in less than
two hours at the hotel.’—’La Violette,’ said I, ’open the door.’—I ran a
great risk. La Violette obeyed.—’Now,’ said I to him, when I had alighted
upon the ground, ’you may go!’—He looked at me with the eye of an old
philosopher, mounted his box, and snapped his whip; but he had hardly
started, when he thought it better to return.—’I will not return without
madame, for if I return alone, I shall be sure of a good heating, and of
being discharged.’—’Indeed, La Violette! as you please.’ At that moment I
saw the count returning.—’It is all for the best,’ he cried out, in the
distance; ’my brother has only two days to spend in Paris: he has stopped
here to give his orders; he wishes, at all hazards, to see Camargo dance!
I told him that she was to appear this evening. He will leave in a moment.
You must wait in the park till he is gone. I will return to him, for I
must take my leave of him, and wish him a pleasant journey.

"An hour afterward we were installed in the chateau. La Violette remained,
at our order, with his carriage and horses. In the evening there was great
excitement at the opera. It was solemnly announced to the public that
Mademoiselle de Camargo had been carried off! The Count de Melun surprised
at not finding us in the woods, had gone to the theatre. He was hissed; he
swore revenge. He sought every where; he found neither his horses, nor his
carriage, nor his mistress. For three months the opera was in mourning!
Thirty bailiffs were on my track; but we made so little noise in our
little chateau, hid away in the woods, that we were never discovered."

Mademoiselle de Camargo became pale; she was silent, and looked at her
listeners as if she would say by her looks that had been lighted up at
that celestial flame which had passed over her life: "Oh, how we loved
each other during those three months!"

She continued as follows: "That season has filled a greater space in my
life than all the rest of my days. When I think of the past, it is there
where my thoughts travel at once. How relate to you the particulars of our
happiness? When destiny protects us, happiness is composed of a thousand
charming nothings that the hearts of others cannot understand. During
those three months I was entirely happy; I wished to live for ever in this
charming retreat for him that I loved a thousand times more than myself. I
wished to abandon the opera, that opera that the Count de Melun could not
make me forget for a week!

"Monsieur de Marteille possessed all the attraction of a real passion; he
loved me with a charming simplicity; he put in play, without designing it,
all the seductions of love. What tender words! what impassioned looks!
what enticing conversation! Each day was a holyday, each hour a rapture. I
had no time to think of the morrow.

"Our days were spent in walks, in the shade of the woods, in the thousand
windings of the park. In the evening I played the harpsichord, and I sang.
It often occurred that I danced, danced for him. In the middle of a dance
that would have excited a furor at the opera, I fell at his feet,
completely overcome; he raised me up, pressed me to his heart and forgave
me for having danced. I always hear his beautiful voice, which was like
music, but such music as I dream of, and not such as Rameau has
composed... But now I am speaking without knowing what I say."

Mademoiselle de Camargo turned toward Pont-de-Veyle. "Monsieur," said she,
"open that box or rather hand it to me." She took the box, opened it, and
took the bouquet from it. "But above all, gentlemen, I must explain to you
why I have preserved this bouquet." While saying this she attempted to
smell the vanished odor of the bouquet.

"One morning," she resumed, "Monsieur de Marteille awoke me
early—’Farewell!’ he said, pale and trembling.—’What are you saying?’
cried I with affright.—’Alas,’ replied he, embracing me, I did not wish to
tell you before, but for a fortnight I have had orders to leave.
Hostilities are to be resumed in the Low Countries; I have no longer a
single hour either for you or for me; I have over forty leagues to travel
to-day.’—’Oh, my God, what will become of me?’ said I weeping. ’I will
follow you.’—’But, my dear Marianne, I shall return.’—’You will return in
an age! Go, cruel one, I shall be dead when you return.’

"An hour was spent in taking leave and in tears; he was obliged to go; he
went.

"I returned to weep in that retreat, that was so delightful the evening
before. Two days after his departure, he wrote me a very tender letter, in
which he told me that on the next day, he would have the consolation of
engaging in battle. ’I hope,’ added he, ’that the campaign will not be a
long one; some days of hard fighting, and then I return to your feet.’
What more shall I tell you? He wrote me once again."

Mademoiselle de Camargo unfolded slowly the torn letter. "Here is the
second letter:—


                                                               Oct 17.

    "’No, I shall not return, my dear, I am going to die, but without
    fear, without reproach. Oh! if you were here, Marianne! What
    madness! in a hospital where, all of us, all, be we what we may,
    are disfigured with wounds, and dying! What an idea to dash ahead
    in the fight, when I only thought of seeing you again. As soon as
    I was wounded, I asked the surgeon if I should live long enough to
    reach Paris: "You have but an hour," he answered me pitilessly...
    They brought me here with the others. In a word, we should learn
    to resign ourselves to what comes from Heaven. I die content with
    having loved you; console yourself; return to the opera. I am not
    jealous of those who shall succeed me, for will they love you as I
    have done? Farewell, Marianne, death approaches, and death never
    waits; I thank it for having left me sufficient time to bid you
    farewell. Now, it will be I who will wait for you.

    "’Farewell, farewell, I press you to my heart, which ceases to
    beat.’"


After having wiped her eyes, Mademoiselle de Camargo continued as follows:
"Shall I describe to you all my sorrows, all my tears, all my anguish!
Alas! as he had said, I returned to the opera. I did not forget Monsieur
de Marteille, in the tempest of my folly. Others have loved me. I have
loved no one but Monsieur de Marteille; his memory has beamed upon my life
like a blessing from heaven. When I reappeared at the opera, I was seen
attending mass; I was laughed at for my devotion. They did not understand,
philosophers as they were, that I prayed to God, in consequence of those
words of Monsieur de Martielle: ’Now it will be I who will wait for you.’

"When I left the chateau, I plucked a bouquet in the park, thinking that I
was plucking the flowers that had bloomed for him; I brought away this
bouquet, along with the portrait that you see there. I had vowed, in
leaving our dear retreat, to go every year, at the same season, to gather
a bouquet in the park. Will you believe it? I never went there again!"

Mademoiselle de Camargo thus finished her history. "Well, my dear
philosopher," said Helvetius to Duclos, in descending the steps, "you have
just read a book that is somewhat curious."—"A bad book," answered Duclos,
"but such books are always interesting."

In April, 1770, the news spread that Mademoiselle de Camargo had just died
a good catholic. "This created a great surprise," says a journal of the
day, "in the republic of letters, for she was supposed to have been dead
twenty years." Her last admirer and her last friend, to whom she had
bequeathed her dogs and her cats, had caused her body to be interred with
a magnificence unexampled at the opera. "All the world," says Grimm,
"admired that white pall, the symbol of chastity, that all unmarried
persons are entitled to in their funeral ceremony."





MY NOVEL:


                    OR, VARIETIES IN ENGLISH LIFE.(7)


BY PISISTRATUS CAXTON.




BOOK IX.—INITIAL CHAPTER.


Now that I am fairly in the heart of my story, these preliminary chapters
must shrink into comparatively small dimensions, and not encroach upon the
space required by the various personages whose acquaintance I have picked
up here and there, and who are now all crowding upon me like poor
relations to whom one has unadvisedly given a general invitation, and who
descend upon one simultaneously about Christmas time. Where they are to be
stowed, and what is to become of them all, heaven knows; in the meanwhile,
the reader will have already observed that the Caxton family themselves
are turned out of their own rooms, sent a-packing, in order to make way
for the new comers.

And now that I refer to that respected family, I shall take occasion
(dropping all metaphor) to intimate a doubt, whether, should these papers
be collected and republished, I shall not wholly recast the Initial
Chapters in which the Caxtons have been permitted to reappear. They assure
me, themselves, that they feel a bashful apprehension lest they may be
accused of having thrust irrelevant noses into affairs which by no means
belong to them—an impertinence which, being a peculiarly shy race, they
have carefully shunned in the previous course of their innocent and
segregated existence. Indeed, there is some cause for that alarm, seeing
that not long since, in a journal professing to be critical, this _My
Novel, or Varieties in English Life_, was misnomed and insulted as "a
Continuation of _The Caxtons_," with which biographical work it has no
more to do (save in the aforesaid introductions to previous Books in the
present diversified and compendious narrative) than I with Hecuba, or
Hecuba with me. Reserving the doubt herein suggested for maturer
deliberation, I proceed with my new Initial Chapter. And I shall stint the
matter therein contained to a brief comment upon PUBLIC LIFE.

Were you ever in public life, my dear reader? I don’t mean by that
question, to ask whether you were ever Lord Chancellor, Prime Minister,
Leader of the Opposition, or even a member of the House of Commons. An
author hopes to find readers far beyond that very egregious but very
limited segment of the Great Circle. Were you ever a busy man in your
vestry, active in a municipal corporation, one of a committee for
furthering the interests of an enlightened candidate for your native
burgh, town, or shire?—in a word, did you ever resign your private
comforts as men in order to share the public troubles of mankind? If ever
you have so far departed from the Lucretian philosophy, just look back—was
it life at all that you lived?—were you an individual distinct existence—a
passenger in the railway?—or were you merely an indistinct portion of that
common flame which heated the boiler and generated the steam that set off
the monster train?—very hot, very active, very useful, no doubt; but all
your identity fused in flame, and all your forces vanishing in gas.

And you think the people in the railway carriages care for you?—do you
think that the gentleman in the worsted wrapper is saying to his neighbor
with the striped rug on his comfortable knees, "How grateful we ought to
be for that fiery particle which is crackling and hissing under the
boiler! It helps us on the fraction of an inch from Vauxhall to Putney?"
Not a bit of it. Ten to one but he is saying—"Not sixteen miles an hour!
What the deuce is the matter with the stoker?"

Look at our friend Audley Egerton. You have just had a glimpse of the real
being that struggles under the huge copper;—you have heard the hollow
sound of the rich man’s coffers under the tap of Baron Levy’s friendly
knuckle—heard the strong man’s heart give out its dull warning sound to
the scientific ear of Dr. F vanishes the separate existence, lost again in
the flame that heats the boiler, and the smoke that curls into air from
the grimy furnace.

Look to it, O Public Man, whoever thou art, and whatsoever thy degree—see
if thou canst not compound matters, so as to keep a little nook apart for
thy private life; that is, for _thyself_! Let the great Popkins Question
not absorb wholly the individual soul of thee, as Smith or Johnson. Don’t
so entirely consume thyself under that insatiable boiler, that when thy
poor little monad rushes out from the sooty furnace, and arrives at the
stars, thou mayest find no vocation for thee there, and feel as if thou
hadst nothing to do amidst the still splendors of the Infinite. I don’t
deny to thee the uses of "Public Life;" I grant that it is much to have
helped to carry that great Popkins Question; but Private Life, my friend,
is the life of thy Private soul; and there may be matters concerned with
that which, on consideration, thou mayest allow, cannot be wholly mixed up
with the great Popkins Question—and were not finally settled when thou
didst exclaim—"I have not lived in vain—the Popkins Question is carried at
last!" O immortal soul, for one quarter of an hour _per diem_—de-Popkinise
thine immortality!




CHAPTER II.


It had not been without much persuasion on the part of Jackeymo, that
Riccabocca had consented to settle himself in the house which Randal had
recommended to him. Not that the exile conceived any suspicion of the
young man beyond that which he might have shared with Jackeymo, viz., that
Randal’s interest in the father was increased by a very natural and
excusable admiration of the daughter. But the Italian had the pride common
to misfortune,—he did not like to be indebted to others, and he shrank
from the pity of those to whom it was known that he had held a higher
station in his own land. These scruples gave way to the strength of his
affection for his daughter and his dread of his foe. Good men, however
able and brave, who have suffered from the wicked, are apt to form
exaggerated notions of the power that has prevailed against them. Jackeymo
had conceived a superstitious terror of Peschiera, and Riccabocca, though
by no means addicted to superstition, still had a certain creep of the
flesh whenever he thought of his foe.

But Riccabocca—than whom no man was more physically brave, and no man, in
some respects, more morally timid—feared the Count less as a foe than as a
gallant. He remembered his kinsman’s surpassing beauty—the power he had
obtained over women. He knew him versed in every art that corrupts, and
void of all the conscience that deters. And Riccabocca had unhappily
nursed himself into so poor an estimate of the female character, that even
the pure and lofty nature of Violante did not seem to him a sufficient
safeguard against the craft and determination of a practised and
remorseless intriguer. But of all the precautions he could take, none
appeared more likely to conduce to safety, than his establishing a
friendly communication with one who professed to be able to get at all the
Count’s plans and movements, and who could apprise Riccabocca at once
should his retreat be discovered. "Forewarned is forearmed," said he to
himself, in one of the proverbs common to all nations. However, as with
his usual sagacity he came to reflect upon the alarming intelligence
conveyed to him by Randal, viz., that the Count sought his daughter’s
hand, he divined that there was some strong personal interest under such
ambition; and what could be that interest save the probability of
Riccabocca’s ultimate admission to the Imperial grace, and the Count’s
desire to assure himself of the heritage to an estate that he might be
permitted to retain no more? Riccabocca was not indeed aware of the
condition (not according to usual customs in Austria) on which the Count
held the forfeited domains. He knew not that they had been granted merely
on pleasure; but he was too well aware of Peschiera’s nature to suppose
that he would woo a bride without a dower, or be moved by remorse in any
overture of reconciliation. He felt assured, too—and this increased all
his fears—that Peschiera would never venture to seek an interview himself;
all the Count’s designs on Violante would be dark, secret, and
clandestine. He was perplexed and tormented by the doubt, whether or not
to express openly to Violante his apprehensions of the nature of the
danger to be apprehended. He had told her vaguely that it was for her sake
that he desired secrecy and concealment. But that might mean any thing:
what danger to himself would not menace her? Yet to say more was so
contrary to a man of his Italian notions and Machiavellian maxims! To say
to a young girl, "There is a man come over to England on purpose to woo
and win you. For heaven’s sake take care of him; he is diabolically
handsome; he never fails where he sets his heart." "Cospetto!" cried the
doctor aloud, as these admonitions shaped themselves to speech in the
camera-obscura of his brain; "such a warning would have undone a Cornelia
while she was yet an innocent spinster." No, he resolved to say nothing to
Violante of the Count’s intention, only to keep guard, and make himself
and Jackeymo all eyes and all ears.

The house Randal had selected pleased Riccabocca at first glance. It stood
alone, upon a little eminence; its upper windows commanded the high road.
It had been a school, and was surrounded by high walls, which contained a
garden and lawn sufficiently large for exercise. The garden doors were
thick, fortified by strong bolts, and had a little wicket lattice, shut
and opened at pleasure, from which Jackeymo could inspect all visitors
before he permitted them to enter.

An old female servant from the neighborhood was cautiously hired;
Riccabocca renounced his Italian name, and abjured his origin. He spoke
English sufficiently well to think he could pass as an Englishman. He
called himself Mr. Richmouth (a liberal translation of Riccabocca). He
bought a blunderbuss, two pair of pistols, and a huge house-dog. Thus
provided for, he allowed Jackeymo to write a line to Randal and
communicate his arrival.

Randal lost no time in calling. With his usual adaptability and his powers
of dissimulation, he contrived easily to please Mrs. Riccabocca, and to
increase the good opinion the exile was disposed to form of him. He
engaged Violante in conversation on Italy and its poets. He promised to
buy her books. He began, though more distantly than he could have
desired—for her sweet stateliness awed him in spite of himself—the
preliminaries of courtship. He established himself at once as a familiar
guest, riding down daily in the dusk of evening, after the toils of
office, and retiring at night. In four or five days he thought he had made
great progress with all. Riccabocca watched him narrowly, and grew
absorbed in thought after every visit. At length one night, when he and
Mrs. Riccabocca were alone in the drawing-room, Violante having retired to
rest, he thus spoke as he filled his pipe:—

"Happy is the man who has no children! Thrice happy he who has no girls."

"My dear Alphonso!" said the wife, looking up from the wristband to which
she was attaching a neat mother-o’-pearl button. She said no more; it was
the sharpest rebuke she was in the custom of administering to her
husband’s cynical and odious observations. Riccabocca lighted his pipe
with a thread paper, gave three great puffs, and resumed:

"One blunderbuss, four pistols, and a house-dog called Pompey, who would
have made mince-meat of Julius Cæsar!"

"He certainly eats a great deal, does Pompey!" said Mrs. Riccabocca,
simply. "But if he relieves your mind!"

"He does not relieve it in the least, ma’am," groaned Riccabocca; "and
that is the point I was coming to. This is a most harassing life, and a
most undignified life. And I who have only asked from Heaven dignity and
repose! But, if Violante were once married, I should want neither
blunderbuss, pistol, nor Pompey. And it is that which would relieve my
mind, _cara mia_;—Pompey only relieves my larder!"

Now Riccabocca had been more communicative to Jemima than he had been to
Violante. Having once trusted her with one secret, he had every motive to
trust her with another; and he had accordingly spoken out his fears of the
Count di Peschiera. Therefore she answered, laying down the work, and
taking her husband’s hand tenderly—

"Indeed, my love, since you dread so much (though I own that I must think
unreasonably) this wicked, dangerous man, it would be the happiest thing
in the world to see dear Violante well married; because, you see, if she
is married to one person, she cannot be married to another; and all fear
of this Count, as you say, would be at an end."

"You cannot express yourself better. It is a great comfort to unbosom
one’s self to a wife, after all!" quoth Riccabocca.

"But," said the wife, after a grateful kiss—"but where and how can we find
a husband suitable to the rank of your daughter?"

"There—there—there," cried Riccabocca, pushing back his chair to the
farther end of the room—"that comes of unbosoming one’s self! Out flies
one’s secret; it is opening the lid of Pandora’s box; one is betrayed,
ruined, undone!"

"Why, there’s not a soul that can hear us!" said Mrs. Riccabocca,
soothingly.

"That’s chance, ma’am! If you once contract the habit of blabbing out a
secret when nobody’s by, how on earth can you resist it when you have the
pleasurable excitement of telling it to all the world? Vanity,
vanity—woman’s vanity! Woman never could withstand rank—never!" The Doctor
went on railing for a quarter of an hour, and was very reluctantly
appeased by Mrs. Riccabocca’s repeated and tearful assurances that she
would never even whisper to herself that her husband had ever held any
other rank than that of Doctor.—Riccabocca, with a dubious shake of the
head, renewed—

"I have done with all pomp and pretension. Besides, the young man is a
born gentleman; he seems in good circumstances; he has energy and latent
ambition; he is akin to L’Estrange’s intimate friend; he seems attached to
Violante. I don’t think it probable that we could do better. Nay, if
Peschiera fears that I shall be restored to my country, and I learn the
wherefore, and the ground to take, through this young man—why, gratitude
is the first virtue of the noble!"

"You speak, then, of Mr. Leslie?"

"To be sure—of whom else?"

Mrs. Riccabocca leaned her cheek on her hand thoughtfully. "Now you have
told me _that_, I will observe him with different eyes."

"_Anima mia_, I don’t see how the difference of your eyes will alter the
object they look upon!" grumbled Riccabocca, shaking the ashes out of his
pipe.

"The object alters when we see it in a different point of view!" replied
Jemima, modestly. "This thread does very well when I look at it in order
to sew on a button, but I should say it would never do to tie up Pompey in
his kennel."

"Reasoning by illustration, upon my soul!" ejaculated Riccabocca, amazed.

"And," continued Jemima, "when I am to regard one who is to constitute the
happiness of that dear child, and for life, can I regard him as I would
the pleasant guest of an evening? Ah, trust me, Alphonso—I don’t pretend
to be wise like you—but, when a woman considers what a man is likely to
prove to woman—his sincerity—his honor—his heart—oh, trust me, she is
wiser than the wisest man!"

Riccabocca continued to gaze on Jemima with unaffected admiration and
surprise. And, certainly, to use his phrase, since he had unbosomed
himself to his better half—since he had confided in her, consulted with
her, her sense had seemed to quicken—her whole mind to expand.

"My dear," said the sage, "I vow and declare that Machiavelli was a fool
to you. And I have been as dull as the chair I sit upon, to deny myself so
many years the comfort and counsel of such a—but _corpo di Baccho!_ forget
all about rank; and so now to bed."

"One must not holloa till one’s out of the wood," muttered the ungrateful,
suspicious villain, as he lighted the chamber candle.




CHAPTER III.


Riccabocca could not confine himself to the precincts within the walls to
which he condemned Violante. Resuming his spectacles, and wrapped in his
cloak, he occasionally sallied forth upon a kind of outwatch or
reconnoitring expedition—restricting himself, however, to the immediate
neighborhood, and never going quite out of sight of his house. His
favorite walk was to the summit of a hillock overgrown with stunted
bushwood. Here he would seat himself musingly, often till the hoofs of
Randal’s horse rang on the winding road, as the sun set, over fading
herbage, red and vaporous, in autumnal skies. Just below the hillock, and
not two hundred yards from his own house, was the only other habitation in
view—a charming, thoroughly English cottage, though somewhat imitated from
the Swiss—with gable ends, thatched roof, and pretty projecting casements,
opening through creepers and climbing roses. From his height he commanded
the gardens of this cottage, and his eye of artist was pleased, from the
first sight, with the beauty which some exquisite taste had given to the
ground. Even in that cheerless season of the year, the garden wore a
summer smile; the evergreens were so bright and various, and the few
flowers, still left, so hardy and so healthful. Facing the south, a
colonnade, or covered gallery, of rustic woodwork had been formed, and
creeping plants, lately set, were already beginning to clothe its columns.
Opposite to this colonnade there was a fountain which reminded Riccabocca
of his own at the deserted Casino. It was indeed singularly like it: the
same circular shape, the same girdle of flowers around it. But the jet
from it varied every day—fantastic and multiform, like the sports of a
Naïad—sometimes shooting up like a tree, sometimes shaped as a
convolvulus, sometimes tossing from its silver spray a flower of
vermilion, or a fruit of gold—as if at play with its toy like a happy
child. And near the fountain was a large aviary, large enough to inclose a
tree. The Italian could just catch a gleam of rich color from the wings of
the birds, as they glanced to and fro within the network, and could hear
their songs, contrasting the silence of the free populace of air, whom the
coming winter had already stilled.

Riccabocca’s eye, so alive to all aspects of beauty, luxuriated in the
view of this garden. Its pleasantness had a charm that stole him from his
anxious fear and melancholy memories.

He never saw but two forms within the demesnes, and he could not
distinguish their features. One was a woman, who seemed to him of staid
manner and homely appearance: she was seen but rarely. The other a man,
often pacing to and fro the colonnade, with frequent pauses before the
playful fountain, or the birds that sang louder as he approached. This
latter form would then disappear within a room, the glass door of which
was at the extreme end of the colonnade; and if the door were left open,
Riccabocca could catch a glimpse of the figure bending over a table
covered with books.

Always, however, before the sun set, the man would step forth more
briskly, and occupy himself with the garden, often working at it with good
heart, as if at a task of delight; and then, too, the woman would come
out, and stand by as if talking to her companion. Riccabocca’s curiosity
grew aroused. He bade Jemima inquire of the old maid-servant who lived at
the cottage, and heard that its owner was a Mr. Oran—a quiet gentleman,
and fond of his book.

While Riccabocca thus amused himself, Randal had not been prevented,
either by his official cares or his schemes on Violante’s heart and
fortune, from furthering the project that was to unite Frank Hazeldean and
Beatrice di Negra. Indeed, as to the first, a ray of hope was sufficient
to fire the ardent and unsuspecting lover. And Randal’s artful
misrepresentation of Mrs. Hazeldean’s conversation with him, removed all
fear of parental displeasure from a mind always too disposed to give
itself up to the temptation of the moment. Beatrice, though her feelings
for Frank were not those of love, became more and more influenced by
Randal’s arguments and representations, the more especially as her brother
grew morose, and even menacing, as days slipt on, and she could give no
clue to the retreat of those whom he sought for. Her debts, too, were
really urgent. As Randal’s profound knowledge of human infirmity had
shrewdly conjectured, the scruples of honor and pride, that had made her
declare she would not bring to a husband her own incumbrances, began to
yield to the pressure of necessity. She listened already, with but faint
objections, when Randal urged her not to wait for the uncertain discovery
that was to secure her dowry, but by a private marriage with Frank escape
at once into freedom and security. While, though he had first held out to
young Hazeldean the inducement of Beatrice’s dowry as reason of
self-justification in the eyes of the Squire, it was still easier to drop
that inducement, which had always rather damped than fired the high spirit
and generous heart of the poor Guardsman. And Randal could conscientiously
say, that when he had asked the Squire if he expected fortune with Frank’s
bride, the Squire had replied, "I don’t care." Thus encouraged by his
friend and his own heart, and the softening manner of a woman who might
have charmed many a colder, and fooled many a wiser man, Frank rapidly
yielded to the snares held out for his perdition. And though as yet he
honestly shrank from proposing to Beatrice or himself a marriage without
the consent, and even the knowledge, of his parents, yet Randal was quite
content to leave a nature, however good, so thoroughly impulsive and
undisciplined, to the influences of the first strong passion it had ever
known. Meanwhile, it was easy to dissuade Frank from even giving a hint to
the folks at home. "For," said the wily and able traitor, "though we may
be sure of Mrs. Hazeldean’s consent, and her power over your father, when
the step is once taken, yet we cannot count for certain on the Squire—he
is so choleric and hasty. He might hurry to town—see Madame di Negra,
blurt out some compassionate, rude expressions which would wake her
resentment, and cause her instant rejection. And it might be too late if
he repented afterwards—as he would be sure to do."

Meanwhile Randal Leslie gave a dinner at the Clarendon Hotel (an
extravagance most contrary to his habits), and invited Frank, Mr.
Borrowell, and Baron Levy.

But this house-spider, which glided with so much ease after its flies,
through webs so numerous and mazy, had yet to amuse Madame di Negra with
assurances that the fugitives sought for would sooner or later be
discovered. Though Randal baffled and eluded her suspicion that he was
already acquainted with the exiles, ("the persons he had thought of were,"
he said, "quite different from her description;" and he even presented to
her an old singing-master, and a sallow-faced daughter, as the Italians
who had caused his mistake), it was necessary for Beatrice to prove the
sincerity of the aid she had promised to her brother, and to introduce
Randal to the Count. It was no less desirable to Randal to know, and even
win the confidence of this man—his rival.

The two met at Madame di Negra’s house. There is something very strange,
and almost mesmerical, in the _rapport_ between two evil natures. Bring
two honest men together, and it is ten to one if they recognize each other
as honest; differences in temper, manner, even politics, may make each
misjudge the other. But bring together two men, unprincipled and
perverted—men who, if born in a cellar, would have been food for the hulks
or gallows—and they recognize each other by instant sympathy. The eyes of
Franzini, Count of Peschiera, and Randal Leslie no sooner met, than a
gleam of intelligence shot from both. They talked on indifferent
subjects—weather, gossip, politics—what not. They bowed and they smiled;
but, all the while, each was watching, plumbing the other’s heart; each
measuring his strength with his companion; each inly saying, "This is a
very remarkable rascal; am I a match for him?" It was at dinner they met;
and, following the English fashion, Madame di Negra left them alone with
their wine.

Then, for the first time, Count di Peschiera cautiously and adroitly made
a covered push towards the object of the meeting.

"You have never been abroad, my dear sir? You must contrive to visit me at
Vienna. I grant the splendor of your London world; but, honestly speaking,
it wants the freedom of ours—a freedom which unites gayety with polish.
For as your society is mixed, there are pretension and effort with those
who have no right to be in it, and artificial condescension and chilling
arrogance with those who have to keep their inferiors at a certain
distance. With us, all being of fixed rank and acknowledged birth,
familiarity is at once established." "Hence," added the Count, with his
French lively smile—"hence there is no place like Vienna for a young
man—no place like Vienna for _bonnes fortunes_."

"Those make the paradise of the idle," replied Randal, "but the purgatory
of the busy. I confess frankly to you, my dear Count, that I have as
little of the leisure which becomes the aspirer to _bonnes fortunes_ as I
have the personal graces which obtain them without an effort;" and he
inclined his head as in compliment.

"So," thought the Count, "woman is not his weak side. What is?"

"_Morbleu!_ my dear Mr. Leslie—had I thought as you do some years since, I
had saved myself from many a trouble. After all, Ambition is the best
mistress to woo; for with her there is always the hope, and never the
possession."

"Ambition, Count," replied Randal, still guarding himself in dry
sententiousness, "is the luxury of the rich, and the necessity of the
poor."

"Aha," thought the Count, "it comes, as I anticipated from the first—comes
to the bribe." He passed the wine to Randal, filling his own glass, and
draining it carelessly: "_Sur mon âme, mon cher_," said the Count, "luxury
is ever pleasanter than necessity; and I am resolved at least to give
ambition a trial—_je vais me réfugier dans le sein du bonheur
domestique_—a married life and a settled home. _Peste!_ If it were not for
ambition, one would die of ennui. Apropos, my dear sir, I have to thank
you for promising my sister your aid in finding a near and dear kinsman of
mine, who has taken refuge in your country, and hides himself even from
me."

"I should be most happy to assist in your search. As yet, however, I have
only to regret that all my good wishes are fruitless. I should have
thought, however, that a man of such rank had been easily found, even
through the medium of your own ambassador."

"Our own ambassador is no very warm friend of mine; and the rank would be
no clue, for it is clear that my kinsman has never assumed it since he
quitted his country."

"He quitted it, I understand, not exactly from choice," said Randal,
smiling. "Pardon my freedom and curiosity, but will you explain to me a
little more than I learn from English rumor (which never accurately
reports upon foreign matters still more notorious), how a person who had
so much to lose, and so little to win, by revolution, could put himself
into the same crazy boat with a crew of hare-brained adventurers and
visionary professors?

"Professors!" repeated the Count; "I think you have hit on the very answer
to your question; not but what men of high birth were as mad as the
_canaille_. I am the more willing to gratify your curiosity, since it will
perhaps serve to guide your kind search in my favor. You must know, then,
that my kinsman was not born the heir to the rank he obtained. He was but
a distant relation to the head of the house which he afterwards
represented. Brought up in an Italian university, he was distinguished for
his learning and his eccentricities. There, too, I suppose, brooding over
old wives’ tales about freedom, and so forth, he contracted his
_carbonaro_, chimerical notions for the independence of Italy. Suddenly,
by three deaths, he was elevated, while yet young, to a station and honors
which might have satisfied any man in his senses. _Que diable!_ what could
the independence of Italy do for _him_! He and I were cousins; we had
played together as boys; but our lives had been separated till his
succession to rank brought us necessarily together. We became exceedingly
intimate. And you may judge how I loved him," said the Count, averting his
eyes slightly from Randal’s quiet, watchful gaze, "when I add, that I
forgave him for enjoying a heritage that, but for him, had been mine."

"Ah, you were next heir?"

"And it is a hard trial to be very near a great fortune, and yet just miss
it."

"True," cried Randal, almost impetuously. The Count now raised his eyes,
and again the two men looked into each other’s souls.

"Harder still, perhaps," resumed the Count, after a short pause—"harder
still might it have been to some men to forgive the rival as well as the
heir."

"Rival! How?"

"A lady, who had been destined by her parents to myself, though we had
never, I own, been formally betrothed, became the wife of my kinsman."

"Did he know of your pretensions?"

"I do him the justice to say he did not. He saw and fell in love with the
young lady I speak of. Her parents were dazzled. Her father sent for me.
He apologized—he explained; he set before me, mildly enough, certain
youthful imprudences or errors of my own, as an excuse for his change of
mind; and he asked me not only to resign all hope of his daughter, but to
conceal from her new suitor that I had ever ventured to hope."

"And you consented?"

"I consented."

"That was generous. You must indeed have been much attached to your
kinsman. As a lover I cannot comprehend it; perhaps, my dear Count, you
may enable me to understand it better—as a man of the world."

"Well," said the Count, with his most _roué_ air, "I suppose we _are_ both
men of the world?"

"_Both!_ certainly," replied Randal, just in the tone which Peachum might
have used in courting the confidence of Lockit.

"As a man of the world, then, I own," said the Count, playing with the
rings on his fingers, "that if I could not marry the lady myself (and that
seemed to me clear), it was very natural that I should wish to see her
married to my wealthy kinsman."

"Very natural; it might bring your wealthy kinsman and yourself still
closer together."

"This is really a very clever fellow!" thought the Count, but he made no
direct reply.

"_Enfin_, to cut short a long story, my cousin afterwards got entangled in
attempts, the failure of which is historically known. His projects were
detected—himself denounced. He fled, and the Emperor, in sequestrating his
estates, was pleased, with rare and singular clemency, to permit me, as
his nearest kinsman, to enjoy the revenues of half those estates during
the royal pleasure; nor was the other half formally confiscated. It was no
doubt his Majesty’s desire not to extinguish a great Italian name; and if
my cousin and his child died in exile, why, of that name, I, a loyal
subject of Austria—I, Franzini, Count di Peschiera, would become the
representative. Such, in a similar case, has been sometimes the Russian
policy towards Polish insurgents."

"I comprehend perfectly; and I can also conceive that you, in profiting so
largely, though so justly, by the fall of your kinsman, may have been
exposed to much unpopularity—even to painful suspicion."

"_Entre nous, mon cher_, I care not a stiver for popularity; and as to
suspicion, who is he that can escape from the calumny of the envious? But,
unquestionably, it would be most desirable to unite the divided members of
our house; and this union I can now effect, by the consent of the Emperor
to my marriage with my kinsman’s daughter. You see, therefore, why I have
so great an interest in this research?"

"By the marriage articles you could no doubt secure the retention of the
half you hold; and if you survive your kinsman, you would enjoy the whole.
A most desirable marriage; and, if made, I suppose that would suffice to
obtain your cousin’s amnesty and grace?"

"You say it."

"But even without such marriage, since the Emperor’s clemency has been
extended to so many of the proscribed, it is perhaps probable that your
cousin might be restored?"

"It once seemed to me possible," said the Count, reluctantly; "but since I
have been in England, I think not. The recent revolution in France, the
democratic spirit rising in Europe, tend to throw back the cause of a
proscribed rebel. England swarms with revolutionists; my cousin’s
residence in this country is in itself suspicious. The suspicion is
increased by his strange seclusion. There are many Italians here who would
aver that they had met with him, and that he was still engaged in
revolutionary projects."

"Aver—untruly."

"_Ma foi_—it comes to the same thing; _les absens ont toujours tort_. I
speak to a man of the world. No; without some such guarantee for his
faith, as his daughter’s marriage with myself would give, his recall is
improbable. By the heaven above us, it shall be _impossible_!" The Count
rose as he said this—rose as if the mask of simulation had fairly fallen
from the visage of crime—rose tall and towering, a very image of masculine
power and strength, beside the slight bended form and sickly face of the
intellectual schemer. Randal was startled; but, rising also, he said
carelessly—

"What if this guarantee can no longer be given?—what if, in despair of
return, and in resignation to his altered fortunes, your cousin has
already married his daughter to some English suitor?"

"Ah, that would indeed be, next to my own marriage with her, the most
fortunate thing that could happen to myself."

"How? I don’t understand!"

"Why, if my cousin has so abjured his birthright, and forsworn his rank—if
this heritage, which is so dangerous from its grandeur, pass, in case of
his pardon, to some obscure Englishman—a foreigner—a native of a country
that has no ties with ours—a country that is the very refuge of levellers
and Carbonari—_mort dema vie_—do you think that such would not annihilate
all chance of my cousin’s restoration, and be an excuse even to the eyes
of Italy for formally conferring the sequestered estates on an Italian?
No; unless, indeed, the girl were to marry an Englishman of such name and
birth and connection as would in themselves be a guarantee, (and how in
poverty is this likely?) I should go back to Vienna with a light heart, if
I could say, ’My kinswoman is an Englishman’s wife—shall her children be
the heirs to a house so renowned for its lineage, and so formidable for
its wealth?’ _Parbleu!_ if my cousin were but an adventurer, or merely a
professor, he had been pardoned long ago. The great enjoy the honor not to
be pardoned easily."

Randal fell into deep but brief thought. The Count observed him, not face
to face, but by the reflection of an opposite mirror. "This man knows
something; this man is deliberating; this man can help me," thought the
Count.

But Randal said nothing to confirm these hypotheses. Recovering from his
abstraction, he expressed courteously his satisfaction at the Count’s
prospects, either way. "And since, after all," he added, "you mean so well
to your cousin, it occurs to me that you might discover him by a very
simple English process."

"How?"

"Advertise that, if he will come to some place appointed, he will hear of
something to his advantage."

The Count shook his head. "He would suspect me, and not come."

"But he was intimate with you. He joined an insurrection;—you were more
prudent. You did not injure him, though you may have benefited yourself.
Why should he shun you?"

"The conspirators forgive none who do not conspire; besides, to speak
frankly, he thought I injured him."

"Could you not conciliate him through his wife—whom—you resigned to him?"

"She is dead—died before he left the country."

"Oh, that is unlucky! Still I think an advertisement might do good. Allow
me to reflect on that subject. Shall we now join Madame la Marquise?"

On re-entering the drawing-room, the gentlemen found Beatrice in full
dress, seated by the fire, and reading so intently that she did not remark
them enter.

"What so interests you, _ma sœur_?-the last novel by Balzac, no doubt?"

Beatrice started, and, looking up, showed eyes that were full of tears.
"Oh, no! no picture of miserable, vicious Parisian life. This is
beautiful; there is _soul_ here."

Randal took up the book which the Marchesa laid down; it was the same that
had charmed the circle at Hazeldean—charmed the innocent and
fresh-hearted—charmed now the wearied and tempted votaress of the world.

"Hum," murmured Randal; "the Parson, was right. This is power—a sort of a
power."

"How I should like to know the author! Who can he be—can you guess?"

"Not I. Some old pedant in spectacles."

"I think not—I am sure not. Here beats a heart I have ever sighed to find,
and never found."

"Oh, _naïve enfant_!" cried the Count; "_comme son imagination s’égare en
rêves enchantés_. And to think that, while you talk like an Arcadian, you
are dressed like a princess."

"Ah, I forgot—the Austrian ambassador’s. I shall not go to-night. This
book unfits me for the artificial world."

"Just as you will, my sister. I shall go. I dislike the man, and he me;
but ceremonies before men!"

"You are going to the Austrian Embassy?" said Randal. "I too shall be
there. We shall meet." And he took his leave.

"I like your young friend prodigiously," said the Count, yawning. "I am
sure that he knows of the lost birds, and will stand to them like a
pointer, if I can but make it his interest to do so. We shall see."




CHAPTER IV.


Randal arrived at the ambassador’s before the Count, and contrived to mix
with the young noblemen attached to the embassy, and to whom he was known.
Standing among these was a young Austrian, on his travels, of very high
birth, and with an air of noble grace that suited the ideal of the old
German chivalry. Randal was presented to him, and, after some talk on
general topics, observed, "By the way, Prince, there is now in London a
countryman of yours, with whom you are doubtless familiarly acquainted—the
Count di Peschiera."

"He is no countryman of mine. He is an Italian. I know him but by sight
and by name," said the Prince, stiffly.

"He is of very ancient birth, I believe."

"Unquestionably. His ancestors were gentlemen."

"And very rich."

"Indeed! I have understood the contrary. He enjoys, it is true, a large
revenue."

A young _attaché_, less discreet than the Prince, here observed, "Oh,
Peschiera!—Poor fellow, he is too fond of play to be rich."

"And there is some chance that the kinsman whose revenue he holds, may
obtain his pardon, and re-enter into possession of his fortunes—so I hear,
at least," said Randal, artfully.

"I shall be glad if it be true," said the Prince with decision; "and I
speak the common sentiment at Vienna. That kinsman had a noble spirit, and
was, I believe, equally duped and betrayed. Pardon me, sir; but we
Austrians are not so bad as we are painted. Have you ever met in England
the kinsman you speak of?"

"Never, though he is supposed to reside here; and the Count tells me that
he has a daughter."

"The Count—ha! I heard something of a scheme—a wager of that—that
Count’s—a daughter. Poor girl! I hope she will escape his pursuit; for, no
doubt, he pursues her."

"Possibly she may already have married an Englishman."

"I trust not," said the Prince, seriously; "that might at present be a
serious obstacle to her father’s return."

"You think so?"

"There can be no doubt of it," interposed the _attaché_ with a grand and
positive air; "unless, indeed, the Englishman were of a rank equal to her
own."

Here there was a slight, well-bred murmur and buzz at the doors; for the
Count di Peschiera himself was announced; and as he entered, his presence
was so striking, and his beauty so dazzling, that whatever there might be
to the prejudice of his character, it seemed instantly effaced or
forgotten in that irresistible admiration which it is the prerogative of
personal attributes alone to create.

The Prince, with a slight curve of his lip at the groups that collected
round the Count, turned to Randal and said, "Can you tell me if a
distinguished countryman of yours is in England—Lord L’Estrange?"

"No, Prince—he is not. You know him?"

"Well."

"He is acquainted with the Count’s kinsman; and perhaps from him you have
learned to think so highly of that kinsman?"

The Prince bowed, and answered as he moved away, "When a man of high honor
vouches for another, he commands the belief of all."

"Certainly," soliloquized Randal, "I must not be precipitate. I was very
nearly falling into a terrible trap. If I were to marry the girl, and
only, by so doing, settle away her inheritance on Peschiera!—How hard it
is to be sufficiently cautious in this world!"

While thus meditating, a member of Parliament tapped him on the shoulder.

"Melancholy, Leslie! I lay a wager I guess your thoughts."

"Guess," answered Randal.

"You were thinking of the place you are so soon to lose."

"Soon to lose!"

"Why, if ministers go out, you could hardly keep it, I suppose."

This ominous and horrid member of Parliament, Squire Hazeldean’s favorite
county member, Sir John, was one of those legislators especially odious to
officials—an independent "large-acred" member, who would no more take
office himself than he would cut down the oaks in his park, and who had no
bowels of human feeling for those who had opposite tastes and less
magnificent means.

"Hem!" said Randal, rather surlily. "In the first place, Sir John,
ministers are not going out."

"Oh yes, they will go. You know I vote with them generally, and would
willingly keep them in; but they are men of honor and spirit; and if they
can’t carry their measures, they must resign; otherwise, by Jove, I would
turn round and vote them out myself!"

"I have no doubt you would, Sir John; you are quite capable of it; that
rests with you and your constituents. But even if ministers did go out, I
am but a poor subaltern in a public office. I am no minister—why should I
go out too?"

"Why? Hang it, Leslie, you are laughing at me. A young fellow like you
could never be mean enough to stay in, under the very men who drove out
your friend Egerton!"

"It is not usual for those in the public offices to retire with every
change of Government."

"Certainly not; but always those who are the relations of a retiring
minister—always those who have been regarded as politicians, and who mean
to enter Parliament, as of course you will do at the next election. But
you know that as well as I do—you who are so decided a politician—the
writer of that admirable pamphlet! I should not like to tell my friend
Hazeldean, who has a sincere interest in you, that you ever doubted on a
question of honor as plain as your A, B, C."

"Indeed, Sir John," said Randal, recovering his suavity, while he inly
breathed a dire anathema on his county member, "I am so new to these
things, that what you say never struck me before. No doubt you must be
right; at all events, I cannot have a better guide and adviser than Mr.
Egerton himself."

"No, certainly—perfect gentleman, Egerton! I wish we could make it up with
him and Hazeldean."

_Randal_, (sighing)—"Ah, I wish we could!"

_Sir John._—"And some chance of it now; for the time is coming when all
true men of the old school must stick together."

_Randal._—"Wisely, and admirably said, my dear Sir John. But, pardon me, I
must pay my respects to the ambassador."

Randal escaped, and, passing on, saw the ambassador himself in the next
room, conferring in a corner with Audley Egerton. The ambassador seemed
very grave—Egerton calm and impenetrable, as usual. Presently the Count
passed by, and the ambassador bowed to him very stiffly. As Randal, some
time later, was searching for his cloak below, Audley Egerton unexpectedly
joined him. "Ah, Leslie," said the minister, with more kindness than
usual, "if you don’t think the night air too cold for you, let us walk
home together. I have sent away the carriage."

This condescension in his patron was so singular that it quite startled
Randal, and gave him a presentiment of some evil. When they were in the
street, Egerton, after a pause, began—"My dear Mr. Leslie, it was my hope
and belief that I had provided for you at least a competence; and that I
might open to you, later, a career yet more brilliant. Hush! I don’t doubt
your gratitude; let me proceed. There is a possible chance, after certain
decisions that the Government have come to, that we may be beaten in the
House of Commons, and of course resign. I tell you this beforehand, for I
wish you to have time to consider what, in that case, would be your best
course. My power of serving you would then probably be over. It would, no
doubt (seeing our close connection, and my views with regard to your
future being so well known)—be expected that you should give up the place
you hold, and follow my fortunes for good or ill. But as I have no
personal enemies with the opposite party—and as I have sufficient position
in the world to uphold and sanction your choice, whatever it may be, if
you think it more prudent to retain your place, tell me so openly, and I
think I can contrive that you may do it without loss of character and
credit. In that case confine your ambition merely to rising gradually in
your office, without mixing in politics. If, on the other hand, you should
prefer to take your chance of my return to office, and so resign your own;
and, furthermore, should commit yourself to a policy that may then be not
only in opposition, but unpopular; I will do my best to introduce you into
parliamentary life. I cannot say that I advise the latter."

Randal felt as a man feels after a severe fall—he was literally stunned.
At length he faltered out—"Can you think, sir, that I should ever desert
your fortunes—your party—your cause?"

"My dear Leslie," replied the minister, "you are too young to have
committed yourself to any men or to any party, except, indeed, in that
unlucky pamphlet. This must not be an affair of sentiment, but of sense
and reflection. Let us say no more on the point now; but, by considering
the _pros_ and _cons_, you can better judge what to do, should the time
for option suddenly arrive."

"But I hope that time may not come."

"I hope so too, and most sincerely," said the minister, with deliberate
and genuine emphasis.

"What could be so bad for the country?" ejaculated Randal. "It does not
seem to me possible in the nature of things, that you and your party
should ever go out."

"And when we are once out, there will be plenty of wiseacres to say it is
out of the nature of things that we should ever come in again. Here we are
at the door."




CHAPTER V.


Randal passed a sleepless night; but, indeed, he was one of those persons
who neither need, nor are accustomed to much sleep. However, towards
morning, when dreams are said to be prophetic, he fell into a most
delightful slumber—a slumber peopled by visions fitted to lure on, through
labyrinths of law, predestined chancellors, or wreck upon the rocks of
glory the inebriate souls of youthful ensigns—dreams from which Rood Hall
emerged crowned with the towers of Belvoir or Raby, and looking over
subject lands and manors wrested from the nefarious usurpation of
Thornhills and Hazeldeans—dreams in which Audley Egerton’s gold and
power—rooms in Downing Street, and saloons in Grosvenor Square—had passed
away to the smiling dreamer, as the empire of Chaldæa passed to Darius the
Median. Why visions so belying the gloomy and anxious thoughts that
preceded them should visit the pillow of Randal Leslie, surpasses my
philosophy to conjecture. He yielded, however, passively to their spell,
and was startled to hear the clock strike eleven as he descended the
stairs to breakfast. He was vexed at the lateness of the hour, for he had
meant to have taken advantage of the unwonted softness of Egerton, and
drawn therefrom some promises or proffers to cheer the prospects which the
minister had so chillingly expanded before him the preceding night. And it
was only at breakfast that he usually found the opportunity of private
conference with his busy patron. But Audley Egerton would be sure to have
sallied forth—and so he had—only Randal was surprised to hear that he had
gone out in his carriage, instead of on foot, as was his habit. Randal
soon despatched his solitary meal, and with a new and sudden affection for
his office, thitherward bent his way. As he passed through Piccadilly, he
heard behind a voice that had lately become familiar to him, and turning
round, saw Baron Levy walking side by side, though not arm-in-arm, with a
gentleman almost as smart as himself, but with a jauntier step and a
brisker air—a step that, like Diomed’s, as described by Shakspeare—

  "Rises on the toe—that spirit of his
  In aspiration lifts him from the earth."

Indeed, one may judge of the spirits and disposition of a man by his
ordinary gait and mien in walking. He who habitually pursues abstract
thought, looks down on the ground. He who is accustomed to sudden
impulses, or is trying to seize upon some necessary recollection, looks up
with a kind of jerk. He who is a steady, cautious, merely practical man,
walks on deliberately, his eyes straight before him; and even in his most
musing moods observes things around sufficiently to avoid a porter’s knot
or a butcher’s tray.—But the man with strong ganglions—of pushing lively
temperament, who, though practical, is yet speculative—the man who is
emulous and active, and ever trying to rise in life—sanguine, alert,
bold—walks with a spring—looks rather above the heads of his
fellow-passengers—but with a quick, easy turn of his own, which is lightly
set on his shoulders; his mouth is a little open—his eye is bright, rather
restless, but penetrative—his port has something of defiance—his form is
erect, but without stiffness. Such was the appearance of the Baron’s
companion. And as Randal turned round at Levy’s voice, the Baron said to
his companion, "A young man in the first circles—you should book him for
your fair lady’s parties. How d’ye do, Mr. Leslie? Let me introduce you to
Mr. Richard Avenel." Then, as he hooked his arm into Randal’s, he
whispered, "Man of first-rate talent—monstrously rich—has two or three
parliamentary seats in his pocket—wife gives parties—her foible."

"Proud to make your acquaintance, sir," said Mr. Avenel, lifting his hat.
"Fine day."

"Rather cold, too," said Leslie, who, like all thin persons with weak
digestion, was chilly by temperament; besides, he had enough on his mind
to chill his body.

"So much the healthier,—braces the nerves," said Mr. Avenel; "but you
young fellows relax the system by hot rooms and late hours. Fond of
dancing, of course, sir?" Then, without waiting for Randal’s negative, Mr.
Richard continued rapidly, "Mrs. Avenel has a _soirée dansante_ on
Thursday—shall be very happy to see you in Eaton Square. Stop, I have a
card;" and he drew out a dozen large invitation cards, from which he
selected one and presented it to Randal.—The Baron pressed that young
gentleman’s arm, and Randal replied courteously that it would give him
great pleasure to be introduced to Mrs. Avenel. Then, as he was not
desirous to be seen under the wing of Baron Levy, like a pigeon under that
of a hawk, he gently extricated himself, and, pleading great haste, walked
quickly on towards his office.

"That young man will make a figure some day," said the Baron. "I don’t
know any one of his age with so few prejudices. He is a connection by
marriage to Audley Egerton, who"—

"Audley Egerton!" exclaimed Mr. Avenel; "d ungrateful fellow?"

"Why, what do you know of him?"

"He owed his first seat in Parliament to the votes of two near relations
of mine, and when I called upon him some time ago, in his office, he
absolutely ordered me out of the room. Hang his impertinence; if ever I
can pay him off, I guess I shan’t fail for want of good will!"

"Ordered you out of the room? That’s not like Egerton, who is civil, if
formal—at least, to most men. You must have offended him in his weak
point."

"A man whom the public pays so handsomely should have no weak point. What
is Egerton’s?"

"Oh, he values himself on being a thorough gentleman—a man of the nicest
honor," said Levy with a sneer. "You must have ruffled his plumes there.
How was it?"

"I forget now," answered Mr. Avenel, who was far too well versed in the
London scale of human dignities since his marriage, not to look back with
a blush at his desire of knighthood. "No use bothering our heads now about
the plumes of an arrogant popinjay. To return to the subject we were
discussing. You must be sure to let me have this money next week."

"Rely upon it."

"And you’ll not let my bills get into the market; keep them under lock and
key."

"So we agreed."

"It is but a temporary difficulty—royal mourning, such nonsense—panic in
trade, lest these precious ministers go out. I shall soon float over the
troubled waters."

"By the help of a paper boat," said the Baron, laughing; and the two
gentlemen shook hands and parted.




CHAPTER VI.


Meanwhile Audley Egerton’s carriage had deposited him at the door of Lord
Lansmere’s house, at Knightsbridge. He asked for the Countess, and was
shown into the drawing-room, which was deserted. Egerton was paler than
usual; and, as the door opened, he wiped the unwonted moisture from his
forehead, and there was a quiver in his firm lip. The Countess, too, on
entering, showed an emotion almost equally unusual to her self-control.
She pressed Audley’s hand in silence, and seating herself by his side,
seemed to collect her thoughts. At length she said: "It is rarely indeed
that we meet, Mr. Egerton, in spite of your intimacy with Lansmere and
Harley. I go so little into your world, and you will not voluntarily come
to me."

"Madam," replied Egerton, "I might evade your kind reproach by stating
that my hours are not at my disposal; but I answer you with plain truth—it
must be painful to both of us to meet."

The Countess colored and sighed, but did not dispute the assertion. Audley
resumed. "And therefore, I presume, that on sending for me, you have
something of moment to communicate."

"It relates to Harley," said the Countess, as if in apology; "and I would
take your advice."

"To Harley! speak on, I beseech you."

"My son has probably told you that he has educated and reared a young
girl, with the intention to make her Lady L’Estrange, and hereafter
Countess of Lansmere."

"Harley has no secrets from me," said Egerton, mournfully.

"This young lady has arrived in England—is here—in this house."

"And Harley too?"

"No, she came over with Lady N her daughters. Harley was to follow
shortly, and I expect him daily. Here is his letter. Observe, he has never
yet communicated his intentions to this young person, now intrusted to my
care—never spoken to her as the lover."

Egerton took the letter and read it rapidly, though with attention.

"True," said he, as he returned the letter: "and before he does so, he
wishes you to see Miss Digby and to judge of her yourself—wishes to know
if you will approve and sanction his choice."

"It is on this that I would consult you—a girl without rank;—the father,
it is true, a gentleman, though almost equivocally one,—but the mother, I
know not what. And Harley for whom I hoped an alliance with the first
houses in England!" The Countess pressed her hands convulsively together.

_Egerton._—"He is no more a boy. His talents have been wasted—his life a
wanderer’s. He presents to you a chance of re-settling his mind, of
re-arousing his native powers, of a home besides your own. Lady Lansmere,
you cannot hesitate!"

_Lady Lansmere._—"I do, I do! After all that I have hoped, after all that
I did to prevent"—

_Egerton_ (interrupting her).—"You owe him now an atonement: that is in
your power—it is not in mine."

The Countess again pressed Audley’s hand, and the tears gushed from her
eyes. "It shall be so. I consent—I consent. I will silence, I will crush
back this proud heart. Alas! it wellnigh broke his own! I am glad you
speak thus. I like to think he owes my consent to you. In that there is
atonement for both—both."

"You are too generous, madam," said Egerton, evidently moved, though
still, as ever, striving to repress emotion. "And may I see the young
lady? This conference pains me; you see even my strong nerves quiver; and
at this time I have much to go through—need of all my strength and
firmness."

"I hear, indeed, that the government will probably retire. But it is with
honor: it will be soon called back by the voice of the nation."

"Let me see the future wife of Harley L’Estrange," said Egerton, without
heed of this consolatory exclamation.

The Countess rose and left the room. In a few minutes she returned with
Helen Digby. Helen was wondrously improved from the pale, delicate child,
with the soft smile and intelligent eyes, who had sat by the side of
Leonard in his garret. She was about the middle height, still slight but
beautifully formed; that exquisite roundness of proportion, which conveys
so well the idea of woman, in its undulating pliant grace—formed to
embellish life, and soften away its rude angles—formed to embellish, not
to protect. Her face might not have satisfied the critical eye of an
artist—it was not without defects in regularity; but its expression was
eminently gentle and prepossessing; and there were few who would not have
exclaimed, "What a lovely countenance!" The mildness of her brow was
touched with melancholy—her childhood had left its traces on her youth.
Her step was slow, and her manner shy, subdued, and timid. Audley gazed on
her with earnestness as she approached him; and then coming forward, took
her hand and kissed it. "I am your guardian’s constant friend," said he;
and he drew her gently to a seat beside him, in the recess of a window.
With a quick glance of his eye towards the Countess, he seemed to imply
the wish to converse with Helen somewhat apart. So the Countess
interpreted the glance; and though she remained in the room, she seated
herself at a distance, and bent over a book.

It was touching to see how the austere man of business lent himself to
draw forth the mind of this quiet, shrinking girl; and if you had
listened, you would have comprehended how he came to possess such social
influence, and how well, some time or other in the course of his life, he
had learned to adapt himself to women. He spoke first of Harley
L’Estrange—spoke with tact and delicacy. Helen at first answered by
monosyllables, and then, by degrees, with grateful and open affection.
Audley’s brow grew shaded. He then spoke of Italy; and though no man had
less of the poet in his nature, yet, with the dexterity of one long versed
in the world, and who has been accustomed to extract evidences from
characters most opposed to his own, he suggested such topics as might
serve to arouse poetry in others. Helen’s replies betrayed a cultivated
taste, and a charming womanly mind; but they betrayed also one accustomed
to take its colorings from another’s—to appreciate, admire, revere the
Lofty and the Beautiful, but humbly and meekly. There was no vivid
enthusiasm, no remark of striking originality, no flash of the
self-kindling, creative faculty. Lastly, Egerton turned to England—to the
critical nature of the times—to the claims which the country possessed
upon all who had the ability to serve and guide its troubled destinies. He
enlarged warmly on Harley’s natural talents, and rejoiced that he had
returned to England, perhaps to commence some great career. Helen looked
surprised, but her face caught no correspondent glow from Audley’s
eloquence. He rose, and an expression of disappointment passed over his
grave, handsome features, and as quickly vanished.

"Adieu! my dear Miss Digby; I fear I have wearied you, especially with my
politics. Adieu, Lady Lansmere; no doubt I shall see Harley as soon as he
returns."

Then he hastened from the room, gained his carriage, and ordered the
coachman to drive to Downing-street. He drew down the blinds, and leant
back. A certain languor became visible in his face, and once or twice he
mechanically put his hand to his heart.

"She is good, amiable, docile—will make an excellent wife, no doubt," said
he, murmuringly. "But does she love Harley as he has dreamed of love? No!
Has she the power and energy to arouse his faculties, and restore to the
world the Harley of old? No! Meant by heaven to be the shadow of another’s
sun—not herself the sun—this child is not the one who can atone for the
Past and illume the Future."




CHAPTER VII.


That evening Harley L’Estrange arrived at his father’s house. The few
years that had passed since we saw him last, had made no perceptible
change in his appearance. He still preserved his elastic youthfulness of
form, and singular variety and play of countenance. He seemed unaffectedly
rejoiced to greet his parents, and had something of the gayety and the
tenderness of a boy returned from school. His manner to Helen bespoke the
chivalry that pervaded all the complexities and curves of his character.
It was affectionate but respectful. Hers to him, subdued—but innocently
sweet and gently cordial. Harley was the chief talker. The aspect of the
times was so critical, that he could not avoid questions on politics; and,
indeed, he showed an interest in them which he had never evinced before.
Lord Lansmere was delighted.

"Why, Harley, you love your country, after all?"

"The moment she seems in danger—yes!" replied the Patrician; and the
Sybarite seemed to rise into the Athenian.

Then he asked with eagerness about his old friend Audley; and, his
curiosity satisfied there, he inquired the last literary news. He had
heard much of a book lately published. He named the one ascribed by Parson
Dale to Professor Moss; none of his listeners had read it. Harley pished
at this, and accused them all of indolence and stupidity in his own
quaint, metaphorical style. Then he said—"And town gossip?"

"We never hear it," said Lady Lansmere.

"There is a new plough much talked of at Boodle’s," said Lord Lansmere.

"God speed it. But is there not a new man much talked of at White’s?"

"I don’t belong to White’s."

"Nevertheless, you may have heard of him—a foreigner, a Count di
Peschiera."

"Yes," said Lord Lansmere; "he was pointed out to me in the Park—a
handsome man for a foreigner; wears his hair properly cut; looks
gentlemanlike and English."

"Ah, ah! He is here then!" And Harley rubbed his hands.

"Which road did you take? Did you pass the Simplon?"

"No; I came straight from Vienna."

Then, relating with lively vein his adventures by the way, he continued to
delight Lord Lansmere by his gayety till the time came to retire to rest.
As soon as Harley was in his own room, his mother joined him.

"Well," said he, "I need not ask if you like Miss Digby? Who would not?"

"Harley, my own son," said the mother, bursting into tears, "be happy your
own way; only be happy; that is all I ask."

Harley, much affected, replied gratefully and soothingly to this fond
injunction. And then gradually leading his mother on to converse of Helen,
asked abruptly—"And of the chance of our happiness—her happiness well as
mine—what is your opinion? Speak frankly."

"Of _her_ happiness, there can be no doubt," replied the mother proudly.
"Of yours, how can you ask me? Have you not decided on that yourself?"

"But still it cheers and encourages one in any experiment, however well
considered, to hear the approval of another. Helen has certainly a most
gentle temper."

"I should conjecture so. But her mind—"

"Is very well stored."

"She speaks so little—"

"Yes. I wonder why? She’s surely a woman!"

"Pshaw," said the Countess, smiling in spite of herself. "But tell me more
of the process of your experiment. You took her as a child, and resolved
to train her according to your own ideal. Was that easy?"

"It seemed so. I desired to instil habits of truth—she was already by
nature truthful as the day; a taste for nature and all things natural—that
seemed inborn: perceptions of Art as the interpreter of Nature—those were
more difficult to teach. I think they may come. You have heard her play
and sing?"

"No."

"She will surprise you. She has less talent for drawing; still, all that
teaching could do has been done—in a word, she is accomplished. Temper,
heart, mind—these are all excellent." Harley stopped, and suppressed a
sigh. "Certainly, I ought to be very happy," said he; and he began to wind
up his watch.

"Of course she must love you?" said the Countess, after a pause. "How
could she fail?"

"Love me! My dear mother, that is the very question I shall have to ask."

"Ask! Love is discovered by a glance; it has no need of asking."

"I have never discovered it, then, I assure you. The fact is, that before
her childhood was passed, I removed her, as you may suppose, from my roof.
She resided with an Italian family, near my usual abode. I visited her
often, directed her studies, watched her improvement—"

"And fell in love with her?"

"Fall is such a very violent word. No; I don’t remember to have had a
fall. It was all a smooth inclined plane from the first step, until at
last I said to myself, ’Harley L’Estrange, thy time has come. The bud has
blossomed into flower. Take it to thy breast.’ And myself replied to
myself meekly, ’So be it.’ Then I found that Lady N daughters, was coming
to England. I asked her Ladyship to take my ward to your house. I wrote to
you, and prayed your assent; and, that granted, I knew you would obtain my
father’s. I am here—you give me the approval I sought for. I will speak to
Helen to-morrow. Perhaps, after all, she may reject me."

"Strange, strange—you speak thus coldly, thus lightly; you so capable of
ardent love!"

"Mother," said Harley, earnestly, "be satisfied! _I_ am! Love, as of old,
I feel, alas! too well, can visit me never more. But gentle companionship,
tender friendship, the relief and the sunlight of woman’s smile—hereafter
the voices of children—music that, striking on the hearts of both parents,
wakens the most lasting and the purest of all sympathies: these are my
hope. Is the hope so mean, my fond mother?"

Again the Countess wept, and her tears were not dried when she left the
room.




CHAPTER VIII.


Oh! Helen, fair Helen—type of the quiet, serene, unnoticed, deep-felt
excellence of woman! Woman, less as the ideal that a poet conjures from
the air, than as the companion of a poet on the earth! Woman who, with her
clear sunny vision of things actual, and the exquisite fibre of her
delicate sense, supplies the deficiencies of him whose foot stumbles on
the soil, because his eye is too intent upon the stars! Woman, the
provident, the comforting angel—whose pinions are folded round the heart,
guarding there a divine spring unmarred by the winter of the world! Helen,
soft Helen, is it indeed in thee that the wild and brilliant "lord of
wantonness and ease" is to find the regeneration of his life—the rebaptism
of his soul? Of what avail thy meek prudent household virtues to one whom
Fortune screens from rough trial?—whose sorrows lie remote from thy
ken?—whose spirit, erratic and perturbed, now rising, now falling, needs a
vision more subtle than thine to pursue, and a strength that can sustain
the reason, when it droops, on the wings of enthusiasm and passion?

And thou thyself, O nature, shrinking and humble, that needest to be
courted forth from the shelter, and developed under the calm and genial
atmosphere of holy, happy love—can such affection as Harley L’Estrange may
proffer suffice to thee? Will not the blossoms, yet folded in the petal,
wither away beneath the shade that may protect them from the storm, and
yet shut them from the sun? Thou who, where thou givest love, seekest,
though meekly, for love in return; —to be the soul’s sweet necessity, the
life’s household partner to him who receives all thy faith and
devotion—canst thou influence the sources of joy and of sorrow in the
heart that does not heave at thy name? Hast thou the charm and the force
of the moon, that the tides of that wayward sea shall ebb and flow at thy
will? Yet who shall say—who conjecture how near two hearts may become,
when no guilt lies between them, and time brings the ties all its own?
Rarest of all things on earth is the union in which both, by their
contrasts, make harmonious their blending; each supplying the defects of
the helpmate, and completing, by fusion, one strong human soul! Happiness
enough, where even Peace does but seldom preside, when each can bring to
the altar, if not, the flame, still the incense. Where man’s thoughts are
all noble and generous, woman’s feelings all gentle and pure, love may
follow, if it does not precede;—and if not,—if the roses be missed from
the garland, one may sigh for the rose, but one is safe from the thorn.

The morning was mild, yet somewhat overcast by tho mists which announce
coming winter in London, and Helen walked musingly beneath the trees that
surrounded the garden of Lord Lansmere’s house. Many leaves were yet left
on the boughs; but they were sere and withered. And the birds chirped at
times; but their note was mournful and complaining. All within this house,
until Harley’s arrival, had been strange and saddening to Helen’s timid
and subdued spirits. Lady Lansmere had received her kindly, but with a
certain restraint; and the loftiness of manner, common to the Countess
with all but Harley, had awed and chilled the diffident orphan. Lady
Lansmere’s very interest in Harley’s choice—her attempts to draw Helen out
of her reserve—her watchful eyes whenever Helen shyly spoke, or shyly
moved, frightened the poor child, and made her unjust to herself.

The very servants, though staid, grave, and respectful, as suited a
dignified, old-fashioned household, painfully contrasted the bright
welcoming smiles and free talk of Italian domestics. Her recollections of
the happy warm Continental manner, which so sets the bashful at their
ease, made the stately and cold precision of all around her doubly awful
and dispiriting. Lord Lansmere himself, who did not as yet know the views
of Harley, and little dreamed that he was to anticipate a daughter-in-law
in the ward whom he understood Harley, in a freak of generous romance had
adopted, was familiar and courteous, as became a host. But he looked upon
Helen as a mere child, and naturally left her to the Countess. The dim
sense of her equivocal position—of her comparative humbleness of birth and
fortunes, oppressed and pained her; and even her gratitude to Harley was
made burthensome by a sentiment of helplessness. The grateful long to
requite. And what could she ever do for him?

Thus musing, she wandered alone through the curving walks; and this sort
of mock country landscape—London loud, and even visible, beyond the high
gloomy walls, and no escape from the windows of the square formal
house—seemed a type of the prison bounds of Rank to one whose soul yearns
for simple loving Nature.

Helen’s reverie was interrupted by Nero’s joyous bark. He had caught sight
of her, and came bounding up, and thrust his large head into her hand. As
she stooped to caress the dog, happy at his honest greeting, and tears
that had been long gathering to the lids fell silently on his face, (for I
know nothing that more moves us to tears than the hearty kindness of a
dog, when something in human beings has pained or chilled us,) she heard
behind the musical voice of Harley. Hastily she dried or repressed her
tears, as her guardian came up, and drew her arm within his own.

"I had so little of your conversation last evening, my dear ward, that I
may well monopolize you now, even to the privation of Nero. And so you are
once more in your native land?"

Helen sighed softly.

"May I not hope that you return under fairer auspices than those which
your childhood knew?"

Helen turned her eyes with ingenuous thankfulness to her guardian, and the
memory of all she owed to him rushed upon her heart. Harley renewed, and
with earnest though melancholy sweetness—"Helen, your eyes thank me; but
hear me before your words do. I deserve no thanks. I am about to make to
you a strange confession of egotism and selfishness."

"You!—oh, impossible!"

"Judge yourself, and then decide which of us shall have cause to be
grateful. Helen, when I was scarcely your age—a boy in years, but more,
methinks, a man at heart, with man’s strong energies and sublime
aspirings, than I have ever since been—I loved, and deeply—" He paused a
moment in evident struggle. Helen listened in mute surprise, but his
emotion awakened her own; her tender woman’s heart yearned to console.
Unconsciously her arm rested on his less lightly. "Deeply, and for sorrow.
It is a long tale, that may be told hereafter. The worldly would call my
love a madness. I did not reason on it then—I cannot reason on it now.
Enough; death smote suddenly, terribly, and to me mysteriously, her whom I
loved. The love lived on. Fortunately, perhaps, for me, I had quick
distraction, not to grief, but to its inert indulgence. I was a soldier; I
joined our armies. Men called me brave. Flattery! I was a coward before
the thought of life. I sought death: like sleep, it does not come at our
call. Peace ensued. As when the winds fall the sails droop—so when
excitement ceased, all seemed to me flat and objectless. Heavy, heavy was
my heart. Perhaps grief had been less obstinate, but that I feared I had
cause for self-reproach. Since then I have been a wanderer—a self-made
exile. My boyhood had been ambitious—all ambition ceased. Flames, when
they reach the core of the heart, spread, and leave all in ashes. Let me
be brief: I did not mean thus weakly to complain—I to whom heaven has
given so many blessings! I felt, as it were, separated from the common
objects and joys of men. I grew startled to see how, year by year, wayward
humors possessed me. I resolved again to attach myself to some living
heart—it was my sole chance to rekindle my own. But the one I had loved
remained as my type of woman, and she was different from all I saw.
Therefore I said to myself, ’I will rear from childhood some young fresh
life, to grow up into my ideal.’ As this thought began to haunt me, I
chanced to discover you. Struck with the romance of your early life,
touched by your courage, charmed by your affectionate nature, I said to
myself, ’Here is what I seek.’ Helen, in assuming the guardianship of your
life, in all the culture which I have sought to bestow on your docile
childhood, I repeat, that I have been but the egotist. And now, when you
have reached that age, when it becomes me to speak, and you to listen—now,
when you are under the sacred roof of my own mother—now I ask you, can you
accept this heart, such as wasted years, and griefs too fondly nursed,
have left it? Can you be, at least, my comforter? Can you aid me to regard
life as a duty, and recover those aspirations which once soared from the
paltry and miserable confines of our frivolous daily being? Helen, here I
ask you, can you be all this, and under the name of—Wife?"

It would be in vain to describe the rapid, varying, indefinable emotions
that passed through the inexperienced heart of the youthful listener as
Harley thus spoke. He so moved all the springs of amaze, compassion,
tender respect, sympathy, childlike gratitude, that when he paused and
gently took her hand, she remained bewildered, speechless, overpowered.
Harley smiled as he gazed upon her blushing, downcast, expressive face. He
conjectured at once that the idea of such proposals had never crossed her
mind; that she had never contemplated him in the character of a wooer;
never even sounded her heart as to the nature of such feelings as his
image had aroused.

"My Helen," he resumed, with a calm pathos of voice, "there is some
disparity of years between us, and perhaps I may not hope henceforth for
that love which youth gives to the young. Permit me simply to ask, what
you will frankly answer—Can you have seen in our quiet life abroad, or
under the roof of our Italian friends, any one you prefer to me?"

"No, indeed, no!" murmured Helen. "How could I!—who is like you?" Then,
with a sudden effort—for her innate truthfulness took alarm, and her very
affection for Harley, childlike and reverent, made her tremble lest she
should deceive him—she drew a little aside, and spoke thus: "Oh, my dear
guardian, noblest of all human beings, at least in my eyes, forgive,
forgive me if I seem ungrateful, hesitating; but I cannot, cannot think of
myself as worthy of you. I never so lifted my eyes. Your rank, your
position—"

"Why should they be eternally my curse? Forget them and go on."

"It is not only they," said Helen, almost sobbing, "though they are much;
but I your type, your ideal!—I!—impossible! Oh, how can I ever be any
thing even of use, of aid, of comfort to one like you!"

"You can, Helen—you can," cried Harley, charmed by such ingenuous modesty.
"May I not keep this hand?"

And Helen left her hand in Harley’s, and turned away her face, fairly
weeping. A stately step passed under the wintry trees.

"My mother," said Harley L’Estrange, looking up, "I present to you my
future wife."





REMINISCENCES OF PRINTERS, AUTHORS, AND BOOKSELLERS IN NEW-YORK.(8)


BY JOHN W. FRANCIS, M.D., LL. D.

When the great defender of the Constitution delivered the oration at
Bunker Hill, he pointed to the just completed monument and exclaimed,
"There stands the Orator of the Day." In humble imitation of that
significant act, I also, in attempting to illustrate the interests and the
meaning of this occasion, would point you, gentlemen, to the fact of your
presence here to-night—to the union at one banquet of printers, editors,
publishers, authors, and professional men—as the best evidence of the
importance and attractiveness of the occasion. The art of printing, among
other inestimable blessings, has fused together the most productive
elements of society; it has established a vital relation between intellect
and mechanics, between labor and thought. I see before me in this assembly
those who have achieved enduring literary fame, and those who are the
present guides of public opinion. I see them side by side with the men who
have just put their thoughts and sentiments into a bodily form and
disseminated them on the wings of the press. The association is not only
appropriate, but it is honorable to his memory who united in his life the
humblest manual toil and the loftiest flights of genius; who both set up
types and drew the lightning from heaven, and combined in his own person
the practical printer and the scientific philosopher.

By your courtesy, gentlemen, I have been invited to say a few words
appropriate to the New York-Typographical Society. It is with unfeigned
reluctance that I assume the task. In this presence I behold so many
better qualified for the undertaking than myself, that I am apprehensive I
shall be able neither to do justice to my theme nor satisfy the
expectations which you in your clemency have anticipated. True it is, that
in my early life I was connected with your fraternity by more immediate
ties than at present exist. Circumstances have modified my career, but I
should prove recreant to the best feelings of my heart, turn ingrate to
the pleasantest associations of memory, and forget the most efficient
causes which have favored my journey thus far to mellow years, were I
unmindful of the gratifications I enjoyed while a fellow laborer in your
noble pursuits. The press is the representative of the intellectual man on
earth; it is the expositor of his cogitative powers; the promulgator of
his most recondite labors; the strong arm of his support in the defence
and maintenance of his inherent rights as a member of the social compact;
the vindicator of his claims to the exalted station of one stamped in the
express image of God; it is the charter of freedom to ameliorated man in
the glorious strife of social organization, in the pursuits of life,
liberty, and happiness. Hence I have ever cherished the deepest regard for
those who have appropriated their time and talents to this vast engine of
civilization. I have ever looked upon the vocation as holding the
integrity of our highest privileges on earth; freedom of inquiry, freedom
of utterance, and the vast behests of civil communion, with the kindred of
every nation, and the tongues of every speech.

When I was a boy of ten years of age, I became acquainted with the
biography of Franklin. I had purchased at auction a Glasgow edition of his
Life and Essays. I had read _Robinson Crusoe_, _George Barnwell_, _The
House That Jack Built_, _Æsop’s Fables_, the duodecimo edition of Morse’s
_Geography_, and other common publications of the times. No work that I
have perused, from that juvenile period of my existence up to the present
day, has ever yielded the peculiar gratification which Franklin’s memoirs
gave me, and my admiration and reverence for our illustrious sage have
through all subsequent inquiry into his actions and services, increased in
intensity, in proportion as I have contemplated his wondrous character and
his unparalleled achievements. I think I owe something to my mother for
this happy appreciation of our Franklin. She was by birth a Philadelphian,
and for years, during her residence in Arch street, was favored with
opportunities of again and again beholding Dr. Franklin pass her door, in
company with Dr. Rush and Thomas Paine. "There," the children of the
neighborhood would cry out, "goes Poor Richard, Common Sense, and the
Doctor." It is recorded that Franklin furnished many thoughts in the
famous pamphlet of _Common Sense_, while Paine wrote it, and Rush gave the
title. There is something in the hereditary transmission of the moral and
of the physical qualities; yet I have thought that the benevolent schemes
of Rush, the intrepid patriotism of Paine, and the honest maxims of
Franklin—the topics of daily converse in that day—had some influence in
strengthening the principles which my mother inculcated in her children.

You have told me, gentlemen, that you would be gratified with some
reminiscences touching New-York—social, literary, personal—of men and
books—all having a bearing, more or less immediate, either on the progress
of human development, or the character of our metropolitan city. I know
not how to satisfy either you or myself. To do justice to the subject
would require a different opportunity from the one here enjoyed, and
leisure such as I cannot now command.

The locality upon which we are assembled to-night has its associations. We
meet this evening on the memorable spot in our city’s early topography
denominated the Bayard Farm—a property once in the possession of the
affluent Bayards, of him who was companion in his strife with Governor
Leisler, and whose death for high treason was the issue of that protracted
contest. That he fell a martyr to freedom, our friend Charles F. Hoffman
has ably demonstrated. Within a few doors of this place, on Broadway, very
many years after, but within my recollection, lived that arch negotiator
in public counsels, Talleyrand, the famous ambassador of France to the
United States. He published a small tractate on America, once much read,
and it was he who affirmed that the greatest sight he had ever beheld in
this country, was the illustrious Hamilton, with his pile of books under
his arms, proceeding to the court-room in the old City Hall, in order to
obtain a livelihood, by expounding the law, and vindicating the rights of
his clients.

Here too is the spot where, some short while after, the antics of the
Osage tribe of Indians were displayed for the admiration of the belles and
beaux of New-York, and on that occasion my old colleague, Dr. Mitchill,
gave translations into English of their songs and war-whoop sounds, for
the increased gratification of the literary public of that day, when
Indian literature stood not so high as in these times of Congressional
appropriation, and of Henry Schoolcraft, the faithful and patriotic
expositor of the red-man’s excellences. I think I am safe in saying, also,
that near these grounds occurred the execution of Young, a play-actor,
convicted of murder—a remarkable event in New-York annals, owing to
peculiar circumstances which marked his imprisonment in our old jail, now
converted into the Hall of Records. There were, about the period to which
I now refer, other occurrences of singular influence in those days.

Crowther and Levi Weeks were both confined in this debased prison because
of high crimes, and many were incarcerated for debt. There was,
nevertheless, an atmosphere of some intellect immolated within its cells;
and for the first, and I believe the only time in this country, a
newspaper was issued for some months’ duration from its walls, entitled
_The Prisoner of Hope_. The Wilberforce impulse of that crisis had much to
do with the movement; and no abolition paper of even later dates plead
more earnestly in behalf of enslaved humanity, by graphic illustrations
and literary talent, than did _The Prisoner of Hope_. At that day, many
newspapers had their specific motto, and that of _The Prisoner of Hope_
was in these words:

  Soft, smiling Hope—thou anchor of the mind;
  The only comfort that the wretched find;
  All look to thee when sorrow wrings the heart,
  To heal, by future prospect, present smart.

Naturalists tell us that this eligible site was once characterized by the
graceful foliage of the pride of the American forests, the lofty
plane-tree, the _platanus occidentalis_. It must further increase our
interest in the spot, to be assured that through its shades strolled our
Franklin, in company with that lover of rural scenery, the botanist
Kalm—an occurrence not unlike the interesting one of the excursions of
Linnæus with Hans Sloane, in the Royal Gardens, near London. Here, too,
the wild pigeon was taken in great abundance; while in the Common (now
Park) those primitive inhabitants of the city, the Beekman family, with
the old doctor at their head, shot deer and other game in their field
sports. But enough at present of the locality where this anniversary is
held.

The history of the American periodical press, if given with any thing like
fidelity and minuteness, would occupy several hours; it is a noble
specimen of our triumphs as a free people, and of our determination so to
remain; it has demonstrated the progress of knowledge, and the intrepidity
of New-Yorkers, as much as any one series of facts or occurrences we could
summon for illustration. Everybody within this hall is aware that William
Bradford was the first in time of the newspaper publishers of New-York.
His gazette made its earliest appearance in October, 1725, four years
after James, the brother of Benjamin Franklin, began the _New England
Courant_—this being seventeen years after the commencement of the _Boston
News Letter_, the first regular newspaper commenced in North America. I
advert to this circumstance because we possess the completed file of that
earliest of the journals of our land now in existence. The copy in the
library of the Massachusetts Historical Society was presented that
institution by the famous antiquary, Dr. Eliot; that in our own Historical
Society is the file which was preserved by Professor McKean, of Harvard
University, who bequeathed it to the Rev. T. Alden, from whom I purchased
it and deposited it where it now remains.

From Franklin’s representations, Bradford was a sorry individual, of low
cunning, and sinister; yet I must not deal harshly with him. His, I
believe, was the first printing press set up in New-York: he published the
laws, and other state papers, and he was the grandfather of Bradford,
afterwards Attorney-General of the United States; and as from his loins
proceeded Thomas Bradford, the adventurous and patriotic publisher of
Rees’s _Cyclopædia_—the most enterprising of the craft, and our greatest
patron of engravers—I desire to hold him in grateful memory. Our second
newspaper was the _New-York Weekly Journal_, commenced about three years
after Bradford’s. John Peter Zenger, its proprietor, was a German by
birth, a palatine, and something of a scholar; a man of enlarged
liberality, patriotic, and an advocate of popular rights. He attacked the
measures of the provincial Governor and Council, was subjected to a
prosecution by the officers of the crown, and was brought to trial in
1735, when Andrew Hamilton, the Recorder of Philadelphia, came to this
city and successfully defended him. I have before stated that the late
illustrious Governor Morris considered the decision of that case in behalf
of the press as the dawn of that liberty which subsequently revolutionized
America. To the ladies now present, the lovers of sweet sounds, it may not
be uninteresting to know that the first piano forte (harpsichord) imported
into America, arrived in this city for the musical gratification of the
family of the noble Zenger.

But I can say at this time little concerning newspapers. Our worthy
associate in good works, Edwin Williams, has lately issued a memoir of
much value on the subject, to which I must refer you. I regret that his
catalogue of early journals is somewhat defective. As he justly observes,
our Historical Society is wonderfully rich in these interesting documents.
Our most precious treasures in that way are, unquestionably, the Rivington
_Royal Gazette_, the old _New-York Daily Advertiser_, containing debates
on the State Constitution, the _American Citizen and Republican Watch
Tower_, the _New-York Evening Post_, and the _Commercial Advertiser_,
through a long series, the _New-York American_, the _Independent
Reflector_, containing the patriotic Essays on Toleration, by William
Livingston, of New Jersey, and the _Time-Piece of New-York_, replete with
invective against the Washington Administration—whose editor, Philip
Freneau, verbally assured me that its most vituperative features were from
suggestions of Jefferson, during the crisis in our public affairs provoked
by Citizen Genet. But I must hasten to other topics.

Among the most conspicuous editors and publishers of gazettes whom I have
personally known was Noah Webster, now so famous for his Dictionary. At
the time I knew him, some forty years ago, he was in person somewhat above
the ordinary height, slender, with gray eyes, and a keen aspect;
remarkable for neatness in dress, and characterized by an erect walk, a
broad hat, and a long cue, much after the manner of Albert Gallatin, as
depicted in the engraving in Callender’s _Prospect Before Us_. If with
philologists he is deemed a man of merit, it may with equal justice be
said that he is to be recognized by medical men as an author of
importance, for his _History of Pestilence_.

Next I may note William Coleman, usually called in earlier days, by his
antagonist Cheetham, Field-Marshal Coleman. Mr. Bryant, the able editor of
the _Post_, in his biography of the first fifty years of that prominent
gazette, has well described him. He was a sensitive man, of great tenacity
of opinion, which he cherished by intercourse with many of the leading
patriots and politicians who were among us some thirty years ago. He
almost leaned on the arm of the inflexible Timothy Pickering, and had, in
his younger days, held communion with Hamilton, John Wells and Rufus King.
I shall never forget how the death of the immortal Hamilton subdued his
feeling. When Gouverneur Morris delivered his felicitous eulogy from the
portals of old Trinity Church, over the dead body of the noble martyr,
with grief in every countenance, and anguish in every heart, Coleman’s
acuteness of feeling paralyzed every movement of his frame, and drowned
every faculty of his mind. While on this topic, the decease of Hamilton, I
may state an anecdote, the import of which can be readily understood. It
was not long prior to the time of his death that the new and authentic
edition of _The Federalist_ was published by George F. Hopkins. Hopkins
told me of the delicacy with which Hamilton listened to his proposition to
print a new edition of these papers. "They are demanded by the spirit of
the times and the desire of the people," said Hopkins. "Do you really
think, Mr. Hopkins, that those fugitive essays will be read, if
reprinted?" asked Hamilton; "well, give me a few days to consider," said
he. "Will this not be a good opportunity, Gen. Hamilton," rejoined
Hopkins, "to revise them, and, if so, to make, perhaps, alterations, if
necessary, in some parts?" "No, sir, if reprinted, they must stand exactly
as at first, not a word of alteration. A comma may be inserted or left
out, but the work must undergo no change whatever."

A few days had elapsed when, on the next interview, General Hamilton
agreed to the reprint, with the express condition that he himself must
inspect the revised proofs. Not a word was ever altered. "You think
something of the papers?" says Hamilton to the printer. "Mr. Hopkins, let
them be issued. Heretofore, sir, I have given the people common milk;
hereafter, shortly, sir, I shall give them strong meat." What the Union
lost by that fatal duel, the Deity only knows.

Coleman was a writer of grammatical excellence, though occasionally sadly
at fault in force of diction. Under the influence of some perverse
conceits, he would labor for months to establish a theoretical doctrine,
or to elucidate a useless proposition. It was hardly in the power of
mortals ever to alter his opinions when once formed. That yellow fever was
as contagious as small-pox; that skull-cap (the _scutellaria_) was a
specific for hydrophobia; that Napoleon wanted the requisites of a
military chieftain, were among the crotchets of his brain. The everlasting
tractates which he put forth on these and other subjects, would in the
present day of editorial prowess scarcely be tolerated in a chronicle
depending on public patronage. Coleman had read extensively on medical
topics, and was the principal writer of that able and elaborate Criticism
of Miller’s Report on the Yellow Fever in New-York, addressed to Governor
Lewis, and printed in the second volume of the _American Medical and
Philosophical Register_.

Coleman would underrate the best public services, if rendered by a
political opponent. Chancellor Livingston found no quarters with him for
his instrumentality in the Louisiana purchase. He would ride a hobby to
death. During the many years in which I read the _Post_, I can summon to
recollection no contributions on any subject, made to that paper, that
ever awakened one half the attention which was enlisted by the felicitous
productions of our poet Halleck, and the lamented Dr. Drake, under the
names of Croaker, and Croaker & Co.

For numerous years I have well known Charles Holt, once editor of the
_Bee_, during John Adams’s administration, and afterwards of the New-York
_Columbian_, during Dewitt Clinton’s gubernatorial career. I am unable to
tell you whether he is still among the living. I would estimate his age,
if so, as approaching ninety years. He was a lump of benevolence, and a
strenuous advocate of the great internal improvement policy of New-York.
He comes forcibly to my mind this evening, because in 1798 he wrote a
history of the yellow fever in New London, and every now and then I find
him quoted in medical books as Dr. Holt, just as his predecessor, who
wrote on the yellow fever in Philadelphia, of 1793, stands in bold relief
as Dr. Matthew Carey.

Nathaniel Carter is vividly impressed on my recollection; he had very
considerable literary taste; was many years editor of the New-York
_Statesman_; and after his visit to Europe, published his _Letters_ on his
tour, in two large volumes. His merit was only equalled by his modesty. He
was strongly devoted to Dewitt Clinton and the Erie Canal; with becoming
tenacity he cherished much regard for his eastern brethren, and was the
first I think who introduced his personal friend, our constitutional
expositor, Daniel Webster, to the Bread and Cheese Lunch, founded by J.
Fenimore Cooper, at which sometimes met, in familiar discussions, such
minds as those of Chief Justice Jones, Peter A. Jay, Henry Storrs,
Professor Renwick, John Anthon, Charles King, John Duer, and others of
like intellectual calibre. Carter was of a feeble frame, struggling with
pulmonary annoyance, from which he died early. He was little initiated in
the trickery of political controversy. His heart was filled with the
kindliest feelings of which nature is susceptible.

My acquaintance with the late Colonel Stone, so long connected with the
_Commercial Advertiser_, commenced while he was the efficient editor of
the _Albany Daily Advertiser_. His devotion to the best interests of the
state and country; his extensive knowledge of American history; his
patriotic feeling evinced on all occasions in behalf of our injured
Aborigines; his biographies of Red Jacket and Brandt; his great political
consistency during so many years—all commend him to our kindest and most
grateful recollections. That he was cut off at a comparatively early age,
was the result of his severe and unremitting literary toils. With a
touching patience, he endured an agonizing illness, nor did he cease his
useful labors till exhausted nature forbade further efforts.

About the time of the death of Colonel Stone, New-York lost a valuable
promoter of its substantial interests by the demise of John Pintard. His
career is still fresh in the memories of those who cherish the actions of
the benevolent and humane. He was a native of this city (born in 1759),
where he passed the greater part of his life, and died in 1844, in his
eighty-sixth year. He was connected with the newspaper press in the
earlier times of the _Daily Advertiser_. Pintard was well acquainted with
nearly all the distinguished public characters at the period of the
adoption of our constitution. Possessed of sound attainments by his
Princeton College education, the ardor of his patriotism displayed itself
by his uniting with a body of his college companions, in a military
movement, in the revolutionary contest. He afterwards returned for a while
to his _alma mater_, with the approbation of President Witherspoon. He was
next appointed a sub-commissioner for American prisoners in New-York, and
had frequent intercourse with the notorious Cunningham, the keeper of the
Provost; visited the Sugar House, occupied by the unfortunate prisoners of
war, in Crown street (now Liberty street); the Dutch Church in Nassau
street, the Scotch Church in Little Queen street (now Cedar street), and
also the Friends’ Meeting House in Queen street (now Pearl street), near
Cherry street, all tilled with the wretched victims of tyranny. He
interceded in their behalf with the German General Heister, and with Henry
Clinton, the British commander. He became acquainted with Knyphausen,
William Smith the historian of New-York, Lord Howe, and others, and he has
described, as an eye-witness, the scenes occurring at Washington’s
inauguration, in 1789. He was an advocate of the Federal policy of that
day, and was a member of our State Legislature when it held its sessions
in this city. Time forbids my detailing the objects to which he directed
his attention during a long career of usefulness. Several of our important
municipal regulations still in force were suggested by him. He was an
earnest champion and successful advocate for the incorporation of the Bank
of New-York. He was one of the founders of the Tammany Society, in those
days made up of gentlemen of all political parties, and the express object
of which was to preserve the history and habits of our red brethren. He
urged the plan of a Registry of Mortality in this city, and was appointed
the first City Inspector. The New-York Historical Society must look upon
him as its chief founder. Some of its most precious treasures are fruits
of his munificence. He was among the most strenuous, with Bishop Hobart,
in establishing and increasing the library of the Protestant Episcopal
Seminary, and was not deficient of contributions towards it. He was active
with Elias Boudinot in projecting the American Bible Society. The first
Bank of Savings mainly originated with him. He revived the Chamber of
Commerce after its long repose. He convened the first assemblage of our
citizens at the Park; for the purpose of obtaining a public expression of
opinion in favor of the Canal policy for connecting the Erie and the
Hudson, and this at a period when the spirit of party strife had widely
scattered doubts and ridicule on the contemplated movement. In the war of
1812, when paper money in small bills largely became our currency, Mr.
Pintard was the person who caused those well-known mottoes, "Mind your own
business," "Never despair," "Economy is wealth," and others of a like
import, chiefly drawn from Franklin, to surround the designations of the
value of the money. He had, I believe, done a like service in our
revolutionary times. He carried the measure of having the British names of
our streets changed to the modern ones they are now known by. I have
noticed these few circumstances concerning him, because I wish it to be
impressed on your memories that the editors and proprietors of public
journals are often zealous in good measures not necessarily connected with
their immediate vocation. Pintard enjoyed an intimacy with booksellers and
authors. He and Freneau, a native also of this city, and his contemporary,
had often been in close communion, as patriots of the revolution. This
essential difference, however, obtained between them. Pintard was a
federalist; Freneau an antifederalist. Old Rivington had often a hard time
with them. The sordid tory could neither endure the conservative
republican principles of Pintard, nor the relentless bitterness of the
sarcasm of Freneau. I shall only add that he was a student of many books,
and an observer of men in every walk of life. He was of grave thought, yet
often facetious in conversation. During forty years of medical practice, I
have rarely fell in with one richer in table-talk, or better supplied with
topics in life and letters. In his death, he manifested the strength of
his religious faith, and resigned his spirit with a benignant composure.
But I am forbidden to enlarge on the many excellences and services of the
public-spirited John Pintard.

Were we to dwell upon the excellence of a gazette according to its merits,
I should have much to say of the _Morning Chronicle_, a paper established
in this city in the year 1802. The leading editor was Dr. Peter Irving, a
gentleman of refined address, scholastic attainments, and elegant
erudition. It exhibited great power in its editorial capacity, and was the
vehicle of much literary matter from the abundance and ability of its
correspondence. If I do not greatly err, in this paper Washington Irving
first appeared as an author, by his series of dramatic criticisms, over
the signature of Jonathan Oldstyle. The only poetic writer of whose
effusions I now retain any recollection was Miss Smith, the sister of the
late Thomas E. Smith. Her pieces were known by the signature of Clara; and
in bringing together the effusions of the early female poets, Dr.
Griswold, in his praiseworthy zeal in behalf of American literature, might
well have increased in value his interesting collection by specimens of
the productions of Miss Smith.

The omission, in these reminiscences, of some notice of John Lang, would
be so quickly discovered, that I am necessarily compelled to dwell for a
moment on the character and services of one who, for a long succession of
years, filled a notable place in our newspaper annals. Lang was of Scotch
descent, but the place of his birth, I believe, was New-York. For some
forty or more years, Lang’s _Gazette_ was recognized as the leading
mercantile advertiser, and the patronage which it received from the
business world was such as doubtless secured ample returns to its
proprietor. The distinction of the paper was unquestionably its attention
to the shipping interests of this commercial emporium. As a journal of
either political or miscellaneous matter it was sadly deficient. Lang
adhered to his "arrivals" as the prominent object of consideration, and
the mightiest changes of revolutions, in actions or opinions, found but a
stinted record in his widely-diffused journal. Rarely, indeed, did our
acknowledged politicians or essayists seek its columns for the
promulgation of their ideas, and its editorial displays were generally
tormentingly feeble. Nevertheless, it was in this gazette, then under the
control of Lang and McLean, that General Hamilton first gave to the public
his numbers of _The Federalist_. There is often to be found in one daily
issue of the _Post_, the _Courier and Enquirer_, the _Journal of
Commerce_, the _Herald_, the _Tribune_, or the _Times_ of these days, more
thought, nice disquisition, and real knowledge which awakens the
contemplation of the statesman and politician, than the _New-York Gazette_
contained during a twelvemonth; and yet it flourished. The traits of
Lang’s character were unwavering devotion to his pursuits; no one could
excel him in the kindness of his demeanor; unconscious of the penury of
his intellectual powers, he at times, unwittingly became the pliant agent
of designing individuals, and from the blunders into which he was led, his
baptismal name, John, seemed easily converted into that of Solomon, by
which specification much of his correspondence was maintained. He bore the
pleasantry with grateful composure.

With a characteristic anecdote I must dismiss the name of Lang. The
discussions of a point in chronology, which occurred on the commencement
of the present century, awakened some attention with mathematicians and
astronomers abroad, and among many with us. The learned and pious Dr.
Kunze, after much investigation, addressed a communication on the vexed
question to Mr. Lang. He had adverted to the Gregorian style in his
letter, and had mentioned Pope Gregory. The faithful _Gazette_ printed the
article Tom Gregory: the venerable Doctor hastened to his friend, and
remonstrated on the injury he had done him, and requested the _erratum_ to
specify, instead of Tom Gregory, Pope Gregory XIII. Again an alteration
was made, and the _Gazette_ requested its readers, for Tom Gregory to read
Pope Tom Gregory XIII. Only one more attempt at correction was made, when
the compositor had its typography so changed that it read Tom Gregory, the
Pope. The learned divine, with a heavy heart, in a final interview with
the erudite editor, begged him to make no further improvements, as he
dreaded the loss of all the reputation his years of devotion to the
subject had secured to him. This Dr. Kunze was long a prominent minister
of the German Lutheran Church of this city. He was the preceptor in
Philadelphia of Henry Stuber, author of the continuation of the life of
our Socrates, Dr. Franklin: a work executed with much ability. He was a
physician, and a most delectable character. Many years ago, I was so
fortunate as to procure some materials for a biography of him, and Dr.
Sparks has courteously given them a place in his invaluable edition of Dr.
Franklin’s works. Justice to the departed Lang demands that I should add
that he was a gentleman of the old school, of great moral excellence, and
as a husband and a father most exemplary; deeply devoted to the interests
of this city, and evincing a philanthropic spirit on every becoming
occasion. He died at an advanced age; but his career was shortened by the
great fire, in this city, in 1835. That vast destruction in his beloved
New-York was an oppressive weight upon his heart.

Major Noah has so recently departed from among us, and the expectation
that his active life will soon find a biographer is so general, that it
seems unnecessary on the present occasion to speak at any length
concerning him. I knew him well some thirty-five years. In religion a Jew,
he was tolerant of all creeds, with equal amenity; his natural parts were
of a remarkable order; few excelled him in industry, none in temperance
and sobriety. He wrote for many journals, and established several. By his
_Travels in Africa_ he became known as an author. His work on the
_Abolition of Imprisonment for Debt_ was widely read. He was lively in
converse, and a most social companion. His literary compositions, though
not always pure in style, often showed a nice sense of the ludicrous and a
love of humor. He abounded in anecdote. Mr. Matthews, from his personal
knowledge, has not overdrawn the character of Noah. He possessed the organ
of benevolence on a large scale. It is to be regretted that by his
political vacillations his talents finally lost all influence in public
councils and affairs.

We are susceptible of the pleasures and the pains of memory. A retrospect
will confirm this declaration on many occasions. It is so in our
contemplations of a newspaper; and in no instance have I been more
sensible of this than when considering the origin, the career, and the
termination of the _New-York American_. Its prominent projector was
Johnson Verplanck, a native of this city, of a conspicuous family, whose
mental qualities were of a robust order, and whose classical attainments
entitled him to distinction. With the countenance and assistance of
enlightened associates, he soon acquired for the _American_ a reputation
for eminent talents, great independence in opinion, and the most perfect
freedom in scrutinizing public acts, and in literary and artistic
criticism. Mr. Verplanck was one of the writers of the _Buck Tail Bards_,
a satirical poem, of Hudibrastic flavor. He died in 1829. The _American_
fell then into other hands, and for a long succession of years was
editorially sustained by one who had often previously enriched its columns
with his lucubrations. I allude to Charles King, now President of Columbia
College. It was soon demonstrated to the satisfaction of its patrons,
that, although under a new government, and its supplies derived from
another source, its nutrition was not less wholesome and productive. For
many years it claimed the admiration of the conservators of constitutional
right and of critical taste. It was conducted with a manly boldness. Its
tone gave dignity to political disquisition, though its manner was
sometimes dreaded by objects of its animadversion: if its censures were
occasionally severe, its approbation was the more highly appreciated: it
was a record of historical value; nor can I comprehend why, in this age of
universal reading in journalism, its career was closed. Its many volumes
must hereafter be ranked with the once famous _National Gazette_ of Robert
Walsh, and the _National Intelligencer_ of Gales & Seaton. Its
distinguished editor, satisfied that for so long a period he had performed
his part in the promotion of sound principles, with singleness of purpose,
in behalf of the city, the state and the nation, may have sought that
relief from mental care which is often secured by change of occupation.
When I cast a thought over the hours I have spent in reading the
_American_, I feel as Whitfield has expressed himself on a different
occasion, "I am glad, but I am sorry;" glad that I have had so long the
pleasure of being informed by its perusal; sorry that the opportunity no
longer exists.

In closing this short list of editors, I feel justified in deviating for a
moment in my chronology by a word or two on the character and death of one
whom I have ever considered the ablest writer we have had in our public
journals. He has been already incidentally mentioned. I allude to James
Cheetham. He succeeded as editor of Greenleaf’s paper, calling it the
_American Citizen_. Cheetham was an English radical; had left Manchester
for this country, and was by trade a hatter. His personal appearance was
impressive; tall, athletic, with a martial bearing in his walk, a forehead
of great breadth and dimensions, and penetrating gray eyes, he seemed
authoritative wherever he might be. He arrived in this country at a period
of perplexing excitement in the times of Adams’s administration and
Jefferson’s entrance into the presidency. He found many to countenance his
radicalism, as Tennis Wortman, James Dennison, Charles Christian and
others—men whom we might call liberals, both in religion and in politics.
Accidental circumstances made me well acquainted with him, so early as the
summer of 1803. He was then universally known as the champion of
Jefferson, of Governor George Clinton, and of De Witt Clinton. He was a
most unflinching partisan writer, and with earnestness asserted the
advantages arising from the possession of Louisiana, countenanced Blind
Palmer, the lecturer on Deism, and congratulated the public on the return
to America of Thomas Paine. He ever remained an active advocate of old
George Clinton, but his friendship was suddenly turned into hatred of
Paine, and his life of that once prominent but wretched individual
demonstrates the rancor of his temper. The murderous death of Hamilton, I
think, had a strong influence on him. No sooner had he breathed his last
than Cheetham extolled him as the greatest of patriots. Many speak of
Cheetham as at times holding the pen of Junius—a judgment sustained by
some of his political assaults and essays. He possessed a magnificent
library, was a great reader, and studied Burke and Shakspeare more than
any other authors. I know nothing against his moral character. His death,
however, was most remarkable: he had removed with his family to a country
residence, some three miles from the city, in the summer of 1809. A few
days afterwards he exposed himself to malaria, by walking without a hat,
through the fields, under a burning September sun. He was struck with a
complication of ills—fever, congestion of the brain, and great cerebral
distress. The malignancy of his case soon foretold to his physician, Dr.
Hosack, the uncertainty of his recovery. Being at that time a student of
medicine, I was requested to watch him; on the second day of his sickness,
his fever raging higher, he betrayed a disturbed intellect. On the night
of the third day raving mania set in. Incoherently he called his family
around him, and addressed his sons as to their peculiar avocations for
life, giving advice to one ever to be temperate in all things, and to
another urging the importance of knowledge. After midnight he became much
worse, and was ungovernable. With herculean strength he now raised himself
from his pillow; with eyes of meteoric fierceness, he grasped his bed
covering, and in a most vehement but rapid articulation, exclaimed to his
sons, "Boys! study Bolingbroke for style, and Locke for sentiment." He
spoke no more. In a moment life had departed. His funeral was a solemn
mourning of his political friends.

Paine has been referred too. I have often seen him at the different places
of his residence in this city, now in Partition-street, now in
Broome-street, &c. His localities were not always the most agreeable. In
Partition-street, near the market, a portion of his tenement was occupied
for the display of wild beasts. Paine generally sat, taking an airing, at
the lower front windows, the gazed-at of all passers by. Jarvis, the
painter, was often his visitor, and was fortunate enough to secure that
inimitable plaster cast of his head and features, which at his request, I
deposited with the New-York Historical Society. While at that work, Jarvis
exclaimed, "I shall secure him to a nicety, if I am so fortunate as to get
plaster enough for his carbuncled nose." Jarvis thought this bust of Paine
his most successful undertaking as a sculptor.

I shall trespass some moments by giving a few reminiscences concerning
booksellers and publishers. There are many of this professional order,
whose character and influence might justly demand a detailed account.
Spence himself would find among them anecdotes worthy consideration in the
world of letters. I must, however, write within circumscribed limits. The
first in my immediate recollection is Everet Duyckinck. He was a
middle-aged man, when I, a boy, was occasionally at his store, an ample
and old-fashioned building, at the corner of Pearl-street and Old Slip. He
was grave in his demeanor, and somewhat taciturn; of great simplicity in
dress; accommodating and courteous. He must have been rich in literary
recollections. He for a long while occupied his excellent stand for
business, and was quite extensively engaged as a publisher and seller. He
was a sort of Mr. Newbury, so precious to juvenile memories in the olden
times. He largely dealt with that order of books, for elementary
instruction, which were popular abroad, just about the close of our
revolutionary war and at the adoption of our Constitution—Old Dyche, and
his pupil Dilworth, and Perry, and Sheridan. As education and literature
advanced, he brought forward, by reprints, Johnson and Chesterfield, and
Vicissimus Knox, and a host of others. His store was the nucleus of the
Connecticut teachers and intellectual products, and Barlow and Webster,
and Morse and Riggs, found in him a patron of their works in poetry and
their school books. Bunyan, Young, Watts, Doddridge and Baxter, must have
been issued by his enterprise in innumerable thousands throughout the old
thirteen States; and the _English Primer_, now improved into the _American
Primer_, with its captivating emendations, as

  The royal oak, it was the tree
  That saved his Royal Majesty;

changed to the more simple couplet—

  Oak’s not as good
  As hickory wood;

and the lines—

  Whales in the sea
  God’s voice obey;

now modified without loss of its poetic fire—

  By Washington,
  Great deeds were done—

led captivity captive, and had an unlimited circulation, for the better
diffusion of knowledge and patriotism throughout the land. As our city
grew apace, and both instructors and their functions enlarged, he engaged
in the Latin classics. Having a little Latin about me, it became my duty
to set up at the printing office of Lewis Nicholls, Duyckinck’s reprint of
_De Bello Gallico_. The edition was edited by a Mr. Rudd. He was the first
editor I ever saw; I looked on him with school-boy admiration when I took
him the proofs. What alterations or improvements he made in the text of
Oudendorp, I never ascertained. This, however, must have been among the
beginnings of that American practice, still prevailing among us, of having
in reprints of even the most important works from abroad, for better
circulation, the name of some one as editor, inserted on the title-page.
Mr. Duyckinck was gifted with great business talents, and estimated as a
man of punctuality and of rigid integrity in fiscal matters. He was the
first who had the entire Bible, in duodecimo, preserved—set up in
forms—the better to supply, at all times, his patrons. This was before
stereotype plates were adopted. He gave to the Harpers the first job of
printing they executed—whether Tom Thumb or Wesley’s Primitive Physic, I
do not know. The acorn has become the pride of the forest—the Cliff-street
tree, whose roots and branches now ramify all the land. Duyckinck
faithfully carried out the proverbs of Franklin, and the sayings of Noah
Webster’s _Prompter_. He was by birth and action a genuine Knickerbocker.

There was, about forty years ago, an individual somewhat remarkable in
several respects, whose bookstore was in Maiden Lane—William Barlas. He
was by birth a Scotchman, and was brought up to the ministry; but from
causes which I never learned, he relinquished that vocation in his native
land, and assumed that of a bookseller in this city. He was reputed to be
a ripe scholar. He dealt almost exclusively in the classics, and for
numerous years imported the editions—_in usum Delphini_, for the students
in our schools and colleges. Hardly a graduate among us, of the olden
time, can have forgotten him—Irving, Verplanck, John Anthon, and Paulding,
can doubtless tell much of him. When, on a large scale, was commenced in
Philadelphia, reprints of the Latin and Greek writers, poor Mr. Barlas’s
functions were nearly annihilated. I mention him here from his relation to
the advancement of learning in my juvenile days. His opinion on the
various editions was deemed conclusive; and he controlled the judgment as
well as the pocket of the purchaser. He was long in epistolary
correspondence with "the friend of Cowper," as some call him—old John
Newton of London; and I have often wondered that no enterprise has yet
brought forward, in a new edition of the writings of Newton, their
correspondence. It is not for me to dwell on the contrast, so striking,
between the present period and that to which I have just adverted, when
even professors of Colleges were controlled in their opinions of books by
the dicta of a bookseller. Such was the fact some forty or fifty years
ago. What would be the reply of our Professor Anthon, of Columbia College,
to a bookseller who assumed such authority? of him whose love and devotion
to the philosophy of the classics has led him already in so many works to
spread before the cogitative scholars, of both worlds, the deepest
researches of antiquarian disquisition and philological lore, evincing
that America is not tardy in a just appreciation of the excellencies of
those treasures which enriched a Bentley, a Horseley, a Porson, and a
Parr.

Those of our literary connoisseurs who cast a retrospective glance over
days long past, may awaken into memory that delicately constructed and
pensive-looking man, of Pearl-street, recognized by the name of Charles
Smith. I believe he was a New-Yorker. Pulmonary suffering was his physical
infirmity—his relief, tobacco, the fumes of which aver surrounded him like
a halo. He abounded in the gloom and glory of the American Revolution, and
published, with portraits, numerous diagrams of the campaigns of the war
in the _Military Repository_, a work of great fidelity, in which it is
thought he was aided by Baron Steuben and General Gates. As a
bibliopolist, little need be said of him. But the curious in knowledge
will not overlook him as the first who popularly made known to the English
reader the names of Kotzebue and Schiller. Several of the novels and plays
of these German authors were done into English by him; and, with William
Dunlap, both as a translator and as a theatrical manager, _The Stranger_
and other plays were presented to the cultivators of the drama in New-York
long before their appearance in London, or the publication of Thompson’s
_German Theatre_. It is a circumstance worthy of notice, that the Rev. Mr.
Will, then of this city, added to the stock of our literary treasures, by
other translations into the English, such as the _Constant Lovers, &c._,
of Kotzebue, before, I believe, any recognized English version appeared
abroad. But I must leave this subject for the fuller investigation of the
learned Dr. Schmidt professor of German, in Columbia College.

David Longworth’s name is a good deal blended with the progress of
American literature during years gone by. He was by birth a New Jerseyman;
and the publication of his _City Directory_, for some thirty or more
years, gave him sufficient notoriety; while his Shaksperean Gallery
introduced him to many of the cultivators of the fine arts, at a period,
when Trumbull and Jarvis were our prominent painters. Longworth had been
brought up as a printer, at a daily press, but he seems early to have got
a taste for copper-plate engraving, accurate printing, and elegant
binding. With determined energy he issued an edition of Telemachus, which,
for beauty of typography and paper, was looked upon, by the lovers of
choice books, as a rich specimen of our art. His _Belles-Lettres
Repository_ no less evinced his taste in the _elegantiæ literarum_. He
was, nevertheless, a man of many strange notions. It is well known that
about the commencement of the eighteenth century, in our English books,
printed in the mother country, the substantive words were almost always
begun with a capital; the like practice obtained in many newspapers; but
Longworth, not content with the partial change which time had brought
about, of sinking these prominent and advantageous upper case type, waged
a war of extermination against almost every capital in the case, and this
curious deformity is found in many of his publications, as _british
america_, and _london docks_. Even in poetry, of the first word, he
tolerated only small letters at the beginning of the lines. His practice,
however, found no imitators, though ’tis said that it first began in
Paris. His bookstore, at a central situation by the Park, with works of
taste classically displayed, afforded an admirable lounge for the
litterateurs of that day. Here, when Hodgkinson, and Hallam, and Cooper,
and Cooke were at the zenith of their histrionic career in the Park
Theatre, adjacent, might be seen a group of poets and prose writers, who,
in their generation, added to the original off-spring of the American
press—Brockden Brown, Dunlap, Verplanck, Paulding Fessenden, Richard
Alsop, Peter Irving, and the now universally famed Washington Irving.

I must note a circumstance of some import on the state of letters among us
about those times. Longworth had secured from abroad a copy of the first
edition, in quarto, of Scott’s _Lay of the Last Minstrel_, and determined
to reprint it; yet, not satisfied with his own judgment, he convened a
meeting of his literary friends to settle the matter. The committee, after
solemn deliberation, suggested his venturing to reproduce only the
introductions to the cantos, as an experiment, in order to ascertain the
public taste. Would I speak in terms too strong if I affirmed that since
that committee sat, millions of copies of the numerous volumes of Sir
Walter Scott have been bought by the reading world in America. My circle
of literary acquaintance was a good deal enlarged by the coteries I now
and then found at Longworth’s, as he was not backward in seizing
opportunities of issuing new works, when from their nature they might
excite the appetite of the curious. No publication of his so effectually
secured this end, as the _Salmagundi_, in 1807, sent forth in bi-weekly
numbers by young Irving and his friend Paulding. When we are apprised that
some few of our middle-aged citizens, who sustained the stroke of that
literary scimetar so long ago, still survive among us, I think we may
argue from strong data for the salubrity of our climate. At Longworth’s, I
first saw the youngest dramatic genius of the time, Howard Payne, then
about fourteen years old, and who, a short while after, appeared as young
Norval on the boards of the theatre. He was editor of the _Thespian
Mirror_.

Originally of Ireland, Hugh Gaine, upon his emigration to this country
during our colonial dependence, set up in this city in 1753 his Royal
Gazette, the _New-York Mercury_. His fame as well as his patriotism is
embalmed in the irony of Freneau. It is only as a bookseller that I knew
him, in Hanover Square. He was then at a very advanced age. His savings
rendered him in due time independent in pecuniary matters. We may safely
infer that he was not surpassed in industry, and that he was ever awake to
the main chance, when we are assured that at the commencement of his
journal, he collected his own news, set up his types, worked off his
papers, folded his sheets, and personally distributed them to his
subscribers. Franklin had done pretty nearly the same things before.
Gaine, who in his after-life was an object of a good deal of curiosity to
the citizens of the republic, enjoyed the consideration due to an honest
man, and many kindly feelings.

Many as were his merits, and great as was his enterprise, Isaac Collins
was most widely known, the latter part of his long career, by his editions
of the works on grammar, and other school books, by the prolific Lindley
Murray. As in the case of Franklin, his earliest effort of magnitude was
the printing Sewell’s _History of the Quakers_. The neatness and accuracy
of his printing were familiarly remarked among readers; and these
excellencies he displayed in his quarto Bible, the first of that form
which was printed in this country in 1790. Collins was a native of
Delaware. He projected a weekly paper, the _New Jersey Gazette_, which he
published at Burlington during the Revolution, and, some time after, upon
strenuous Whig principles. He had authority, like Franklin, for the
emission of paper money for the State Government. He removed to this city
in 1796, and a few years after this time I knew him. As his career was,
many portions of it, like Franklin’s, I had the greater admiration of him.
He died in 1817. That he enjoyed the acquaintance of Franklin, of
Rittenhouse and Rush, of Livingston of New Jersey, and others of the
truest patriots in the great struggles of the country, may be inferred
from his profession, his public station, his integrity, and his general
character. In the society of Friends he was prominent, and, like Thomas
Eddy and Robert Bowne, he was occupied with hospitals, and ever zealous in
good works. He did vast service to the city as a printer, and as such he
is here introduced.

The oldest inhabitants of our city may well recollect the bookstore of the
Swords, Thomas and James. Some sixty years ago they began operations in
Pearl-street. They commenced when New-York was little more than a village
in population, and when literary projects were almost unknown. They
deserve ample notice as most efficient pioneers, in their day, as printers
and booksellers, and through a long career they held a high rank; they
were assiduous and economical almost to a fault: their integrity was never
doubted; their word was as good as their bond. They printed good works in
more acceptations of the phrase than one. They did a great service to our
scientific enterprise, in issuing the _Medical Repository_, the earliest
journal of that kind, in the country. A literary periodical, of many years
duration, was also printed by them, called the _New-York Magazine_. It was
remarkable for the contributions of a society, self-named the Drone.
Brockden Brown, William Dunlap, Anthony Bleucker, Josiah Ogden Hoffman,
and James Kent (afterwards the great Chancellor), were among the writers.
William Johnson, the well-known Reporter, who died recently, was the last
survivor of this club. Their store for a number of years was a rendezvous
for professional men of different callings—divines, physicians, lawyers,
with a sprinkling of the professed authors of those times, as Clifton,
Low, Davis, &c. Its theological feature was its strongest; and the
interest of episcopacy were here descanted on with the unction of
godliness, by such men as Seabury of Connecticut, and Moore of New-York,
with good old Dr. Bowden, and Dr. Hawks, my friends Drs. Berrian and
McVicker of Columbia College, and the energetic Bishop Hobart, the busiest
and most stirring man I ever knew. The Messrs. Swords were largely
occupied in printing works on divinity, and were confessed the printers of
sound orthodoxy long before "the novelties which disturb our peace" had
invoked polemical controversy.

I should do injustice to my feelings were I in this rapid sketch to
overlook the late James Eastburn, the founder of the first reading-room on
a becoming scale, in this country, and the publisher of the American
edition of the Edinburgh and London Quarterly Reviews. He was a gentleman
deserving of much estimation, of bland manners, and enthusiastic in his
calling. He was curious in antiquarian literature and a great importer of
the older authors. Many are the libraries enriched by his perseverance.
Consumption wasted his generous frame, and he died at a comparatively
early age, to the deep regret of the scholar and the philanthropist.

I should like, before I close this portion of these reminiscences, to
awaken recollections of one or two other estimable individuals with whom I
was long acquainted—George F. Hopkins and Jonathan Seymour. Hopkins merits
a biography; he justly boasted that his edition of Robertson’s Charles V.
was the most accurately printed work of the time. He was fastidious almost
to a fault in typographical neatness. He printed only works of positive
merit. His enterprise led him, now fifty years ago, to urge the craft to
render themselves independent of imported types, by establishing
type-foundries in the country. There were few indeed among us who knew
practically much about the founts of Caslon, the Coryphæus of
letter-founders. The Scotch hard-faced letter was then extensively in use.
Hopkins induced the immigration to this country of the famous Binney and
Ronaldson, whose great skill in the art was soon recognized, and from that
era up to the present day competent judges affirm that our Bruce, White,
Conner, and others, have accomplished all that is requisite in the
type-founding business. Of Jonathan Seymour, it is enough to say, that at
one period of his life he was more largely engaged than any of his rivals
in printing from manuscripts—so well known and appreciated was his
devotion to his calling, and the accuracy of its results. In his death,
the art lost one who had given it elevation, and society a man possessed
of the qualities of industry, temperance, honesty, and Christian
philanthropy in the fullest measure.

Within a few days has departed from among us, at the age of eighty years,
a supporter of the press who long contributed to the diffusion of
wholesome knowledge. I allude to Thomas Kirk. I shall terminate these
notices by a striking occurrence, which involved him in great loss. He had
determined, about the year 1801, to give the Christian community an octavo
edition, in large type, of the _Book of Common Prayer_, the first of that
size from an American press. To secure the utmost accuracy, he engaged,
for a pecuniary consideration, the Rev. John Ireland, of Brooklyn, to
revise the proofs. When the sheets were worked off, it was ascertained
that the copy was an exact reprint, save in one particular. The critical
acumen of Ireland had discovered, in the Apostles’ Creed, a "tautological
error," in the words, "from thence he shall come." The word "from" was
superfluous, ungrammatical, and inelegant, according to Ireland, and,
accordingly, it was not in Kirk’s edition. Upon the sale of a few copies
the omission was remarked; the fact became known to the bishop of the
church; the book was pronounced defective, and the ecclesiastical
authorities prohibited its circulation. The whole edition fell a dead
weight upon the hands of the well-meaning publisher. I had this anecdote
from Mr. Kirk himself, years ago, and he repeated it to me not long prior
to his death, in last November.

This allusion to Kirk brings to my mind the notorious John Williams,
better known as Anthony Pasquin, under which name he was doomed to
everlasting infamy by Gifford, in his satire of the _Baviad and Mæviad_,
in judgments afterwards confirmed in a celebrated trial for libel in which
the famous Erskine delivered one of his best forensic speeches. Williams
was the associate in London of a small but ambitious set of mutual
admirers in literature, of whom Mr. Merry and his future wife were the
"Della Crusca" and "Rosa Matilda," and all three of these worthies came to
New-York about the year 1798. I have an impression that Kirk came at the
same time. The character of Williams was infamous, and a large share of
his infamy consisted in his ministering to, if not creating, the passion
for personal scandal, and setting the example of black-mail collections,
in newspapers. In the report of the great case of Williams vs. Faulder, it
is said of his paper, called _The World_, that "In this were given the
earliest specimens of those unqualified and audacious attacks on all
private character which the town first smiled at for their quaintness,
then tolerated for their absurdity—and will have to lament to the last
hour of British liberty." After he came to this country he associated
himself with the enemies of Hamilton, and published a satire called _The
Hamiltoniad_, edited a magazine entitled _The Columbian_, and was a
pioneer in that species of journalism which still subsists here upon the
most scandalous invasions of private life and reputation. He was doubly
detestable, in that he was the corruptor and worst specimen of the
editorial calling in Europe and in America. I remember frequently seeing
Williams, in the latter part of his life, in his shabby pepper-and-salt
dress, in the obscure parts of the city. I believe he died during the
first prevalence of the cholera in Brooklyn. Fancy may depict his
expression as illustrating Otway’s lines, "as if all hell were in his
eyes, and he in hell." It must not be supposed that I in any degree
associate the fame of the worthy Kirk with that of this literary vagabond.

To a suggestion that I might refer to the late William Cobbett, as
associated with the periodical press of this country, I may say that I see
in it no impropriety. Unquestionably a minute record would include his
_Porcupine Gazette_ and his _Weekly Register_; the one an offspring of his
juvenile life, the other of his ripened years. I had some personal
acquaintance with him at the time of his last residence in New-York.
Hazlitt has, in his attractive manner, described him to the life. He was
deemed the best talker of his day, and his forcible pen has given us
indubitable proofs of his powers in literary composition. It was not
unusual with him to make a visit to the printing office at an early
morning hour, take his seat at the desk, and after some half dozen lines
were written, to throw off MSS. with a rapidity that engaged eleven
compositors at once in setting up. Thus a whole sheet of the _Register_
might be completed ere he desisted from his undertaking. I think that in
quickness he surpassed even the lamented William Leggett, of the _Evening
Post_. The circumstance is certainly interesting in a psychological point
of view; and yet may not be deemed more curious than the fact that
Priestley made his reply to Lind, quite a voluminous pamphlet, in
twenty-four hours, or that Hodgkinson, the actor, was able to peruse
crosswise, the entire five columns of a newspaper, and within two hours
recite it thus by memory. I visited Cobbett, when his residence was within
a couple of miles of this city, in company with a few professional
gentlemen. It was in October, and a delightful day. He heard our approach,
and came to the door without our knocking. "Walk in, gentlemen—am I to
consider this as a visit to me?—walk in and be seated on these benches,
for I have no chairs—you may be fatigued—will you have a bowl of milk? I
live upon milk and Indian corn—I never drink spirit or wine, and yet I am
a tolerable example of English health." And, indeed, he was a most ample
specimen of the genuine John Bull. His nearly oval face, and florid
countenance, with strong gray piercing eyes and head thickly covered with
white hair, closely trimmed; his huge frame, of some two hundred and
seventy pounds weight, corresponding abdominal development, and
well-proportioned limbs, all demonstrated, with anatomical accuracy, the
truth of his observation. His superior intellect seemed roused in all its
functions. The United States, England, the reform measures, the union of
church and state, and its absurdity, were only a few of the subjects of
his caustic remark. "I have just performed a duty, gentlemen, which has
been too long delayed; you have neglected the remains of Thomas Paine; I
have done myself the honor to disinter his bones; I have removed them from
New Rochelle; I have dug them up; they are now on their way to England;
when I return, I shall cause them to speak the Common Sense of the great
man; I shall gather together the people of Liverpool and Manchester in one
assembly with those of London, and those bones will effect the reformation
of England in Church and State." After some two or three hours we took our
leave, with unlimited admiration of his brave utterance and his colloquial
talents.

With such a hastily written and imperfect sketch of the newspaper
periodical press, of printers, editors, booksellers, and authors, I must
close this portion of my present reminiscences. I have depended on a
memory somewhat tenacious as my authority, in most instances, having no
leisure at command for reference. A volume might be written of pertinent
details. Nevertheless, enough has been said to illustrate, in part, the
advancement of one species of knowledge in this metropolis. Did we
institute a comparative view of the past and present condition of the
press, we might be better enabled to announce the existing condition of
our city as a Literary Emporium, That it is in accordance with the spirit
of the age, seems demonstrable. Abroad, in England, in 1701, when the
stamp duty was levied upon every number of a periodical paper consisting
of a sheet, the whole quantity of printed paper was estimated at twenty
thousand reams annually. Nearly at this period (1704), when the Boston
_News Letter_ made its appearance in the American colonies, some two or
three hundred copies weekly may have been its circulation. What is the
quantity of paper demanded by the present British periodical press, I am
unable to state. In this month of January, 1852, it is calculated that
there are about three thousand different newspapers and other periodicals
printed in this country, the entire issues of which approach the yearly
aggregate of four hundred and twenty-three millions of numbers.

When Franklin was a printer it was a hard task to work off over a thousand
sheets on both sides in a day, by the hand press. Since his time we have
had the Clymer, the Napier, the Ramage, the Adams, and now Hoe’s Lightning
press. By this last-named achievement in the arts, so honorable to a son
of New-York, and so stupendous in its results to the world at large,
twenty thousand papers may be printed in one hour.

If we advert to the instructive fact, of the enormous circulation of many
of the journals of New-York, as the _Herald_, the _Sun_, the _Tribune_,
the _Times_, the _Express_, the _Mirror_, and others issued daily; if we
calculate the copies of the _Observer_, the _Home Journal_, the _Christian
Advocate_, and others of the weekly press; the circulation of the monthly
and other periodicals; if we look at the Methodist Book Concern, the Tract
Society, the American Bible Society, the publications of the Appletons, of
Putnam, and of the enterprising booksellers of this city generally, what
bounds can we set to the offspring of the typographic art? The _Herald_
and the _Tribune_ in their distinct circulation, consume an aggregate of
fifty thousand reams per year. The Harpers, who have thrown John
Baskerville, and other eminent typographers of Europe in the shade by the
magnitude of their operations, use one hundred reams of paper daily, at
six dollars per ream, and make about ten volumes a minute or six thousand
a day. On a former occasion I stated to you the agency which Franklin had
in bringing forward stereotype plates, as projected by Dr. Colden, in this
city, in 1779, and the fact that the art was communicated to Didot in
Paris, by Franklin himself. I well remember the anxious John Watts, when
he showed me his first undertaking in this branch of labor in New-York,
just forty years ago. It was a copy of the Larger Catechism, the one I now
hold in my hand. Notwithstanding the doubts of many, he felt confident of
its ultimate success, yet suffered by hope deferred. What is now the state
of the business in the matter of stereotyping? The Harpers alone—a single
firm—have within their vaults plates for more than two thousand volumes.

Need I dwell on the improved appliances in the great art, which enrich the
present day, or on the influences now at work on the intellectual man?
Justly has it been stated, that the press of a single office in this city
issues more matter than the industry of the world, with all its scribes
and illuminators, in an entire year, previous the time of Faust. Let us,
then, reverence the press, as our Franklin did. Let us cherish its
freedom, as the triumph of our fathers, if we love the name of patriot.
Let us teach our children to acknowledge it the palladium of our altars
and our firesides. Let us recognize it as the Great Instructor, knocking
at every door, and rendering every hovel, as well as every palace, a
school-house.

Nor is it solely on the score of quantity, that we are to contemplate the
measures now in force for the disciplining of intellect, and the rearing
the moral edifice of the nation. I have already remarked on the superior
ability of the press of our days in comparison with that of the period
through which some of us have lived. The same energy which has swelled its
dimensions, has increased the excellence of its material. Libraries so
abound, knowledge is so diffused, that individuals qualified by scholastic
powers, can be called in requisition for the duties of every department a
successful journal demands. There is moreover a happier recognition of
intellectual merit; reward is higher and more certain; and there exists
throughout the community a noble estimation of productive intellect.
Instead of a scattered recruit here and there in the ranks of literature,
we have armies at command, of well-disciplined men; and the belief is not
altogether idle that, in due season, of these armies there will be
legions. Lovesick tales and Della Cruscan poetry, have yielded to stately
essays on the business of life, in philosophy and in criticism, while the
native muse has often stronger claims to our homage than the verses Dr.
Johnson has embalmed, and that have made the fame of ancient bards. We no
longer gaze at the author as a drone in the hive of industry.

Our youth are taught that a true man may be found among the luxurious and
refined as well in the humble avocations of life. Ambitious of a national
literature, we honor those who have laid its foundations, in the persons
of an Irving, a Prescott, and a Bancroft, a Longfellow, and a Hawthorne.
We gratefully remember our historical obligations to Sparks. We feel the
dignity of the scholar when we summon to our aid the classical Everett.
Mourning with no feigned sorrow the demise of that true son of our soil,
the lamented Cooper, we rejoice that a Bryant and a Halleck, a Verplanck
and a Paulding, are still left with us. Warm in our feelings, and made
happier by the relations of intercourse, we extend the cordial hand to
Tuckerman, our classical essayist and poet; to Willis, for his felicitous
comments on passing events; to Griswold, for his admirable works in
criticism and biography; to Dr. Mayo, for his _Kaloolah_; to Stoddard, for
his exquisite poems; to the generous Bethune, the orator and bard; to
Morris, for his _Melodies_; to Kimball, for his _St. Leger Papers_; to
Clark, for his _Knickerbocker_; to Melville, for _Typee_; to Ik. Marvell,
for his _Reveries_; to Ripley, for his fine reviews; to Bigelow, for his
book on _Jamaica_; to Bayard Taylor, for his _Views A-Foot_; to Greeley,
for his _Crystal Palace_ labors; and to Duyckinck, the son of our old
friend, the bookseller, for his _Literary World_. In the name of the
Republic, we give our heartiest thanks to our intimate friend, the learned
Dr. Cogswell, as we look at the spacious walls of the Astor Library.

The very great length to which I have unconsciously extended these
reminiscences, forbids me from dwelling, as my heart and your wishes
dictate, upon the most glorious name in American Printing, the immortal
Franklin’s. His character and deeds, however, are familiar to you all; and
the language of eulogy is needless in regard to one whose fame increases
with time, and whose transcendent merits, the constant development of that
element he brought under human dominion render daily more evident and
memorable. It is related, gentlemen, that when the statues of the Roman
Emperors were carried in a triumphal procession, one was omitted, and the
name of that one was shouted with more zeal than all the others inspired.
So I know it to be with us to-night. The memory of Franklin is too ripe in
our hearts to require words; it is a spell that sheds eternal glory on the
typographical art; it is the best encouragement of youthful energy; it is
revealed in every telegraphic despatch; it hallows the name of our country
to the civilized world.





NOCTES AMICÆ.


Of tipsy drollery, a correspondent of the _Evening Post_ (Mr. Bryant
himself, we have no doubt), writes: "It is esteemed a mark of a vulgar
mind, to divert one’s self at the expense of a drunken man; yet we allow
ourselves to be amused with representations of drunkenness on the stage
and in comic narratives. Nobody is ashamed to laugh at Cassio in the play
of Othello, when he has put an enemy into his mouth to steal away his
brains. The personation which the elder Wallack used to give us some years
ago, of Dick Dashall, very drunk, but very gentlemanly, was one of the
most irresistibly comic things ever known. I have a mind to give you a
translation of a German ballad on a tipsy man, which has been set to
music, and is often sung in Germany; it is rather droll in the original,
and perhaps it has not lost all of its humor in being _overset_, as they
call it, into English. Here it is:"

                         OUT OF THE TAVERN, ETC.

  Out of the tavern I’ve just stepped to-night
  Street! you are caught in a very bad plight.
  Right hand and left hand are both out of place;
  Street, you are drunk, ’tis a very clear case.

  Moon, ’tis a very queer figure you cut;
  One eye is staring while t’other is shut.
  Tipsy, I see; and you’re greatly to blame;
  Old as you are ’tis a terrible shame.

  Then the street lamps, what a scandalous sight!
  None of them soberly standing upright.
  Rocking and staggering; why, on my word,
  Each of the lamps is drunk as a lord.

  All is confusion; now isn’t it odd?
  I am the only thing sober abroad.
  Sure it were rash with this crew to remain,
  Better go into the tavern again.

This is parodied or stolen by the clever author of the _Bon Gaultier
Ballads_, in one of his best pieces.





The famous Quaker _Anthony Benezet_, was accustomed to feed the rats in
the area before his house in Philadelphia. An old friend who found him so
engaged, expressed some surprise that he so kindly treated such pernicious
vermin, saying, "They should rather be killed and out of the way." "Nay,"
said good Anthony, "I will not treat them so; thou wouldst make them
thieves by maltreating and starving them, but I make them honest by
feeding them, for being so fed, they never prey upon any goods of mine."
This singular fact is very characteristic. When feeding rats, the
benevolent philosopher used to stand in the area, and they would gather
round his feet like chickens. One of the family once hung a collar about
one of them, which was seen for years after, feeding in the group.





DES CARTES fought at the siege of Rochelle, and after a variety of
adventures, established himself in Holland, where he composed most of his
works. These abound in singular theories and curious speculations, and
their spirit of independence aroused the same spirit wherever they were
read. Scholars and theologians vied with each other in battling the new
opinions. The followers of Aristotle and the followers of Locke arrayed
themselves against him. His novelties even drew the attention of women
from their fashions. "The ladies of quality here, of late," says a writer
from Paris, in 1642, "addict themselves to the study of philosophy, as the
men; the ladies esteeming their education defective, if they cannot
confute Aristotle and his disciples. The pen has almost supplanted the
exercise of the needle; and ladies’ closets, formerly the shops of female
baubles, toys, and vanities, are now turned to libraries and sanctuaries
of learned works. There is a new star risen in the French horizon, whose
influence excites the nobler females to this pursuit of human science. It
is the renowned Monsieur Des Cartes, whose lustre far outshines the aged
winking tapers of Peripatetic Philosophy, and has eclipsed the stagyrite,
with all the ancient lights of Greece and Rome. ’Tis this matchless soul
has drawn so many of the fairer sex to the schools. And they are more
proud of the title—Cartesian—and of the capacity to defend his principles,
than of their noble birth and blood."





We find in _The Courts of Europe at the Close of the last Century_, by
Henry Swinburne, the following illustration of American manners:

"An English officer, Colonel A in a stage to New-York, and was extremely
annoyed by a free and enlightened citizen’s perpetually spitting across
him, out of the window. He bore it patiently for some time, till at last
he ventured to remonstrate, when the other said, ’Why, colonel, I estimate
you’re a-poking fun at me—that I do. Now, I’m not a-going to chaw my own
bilge-water, not for no man. Besides, you need not look so thundering
ugly. Why, I’ve _practised_ all my life, and could squirt through the eye
of a needle without touching the steel, let alone such a great saliva-box
as that there window.’ Colonel A at last his anger got up, and he spat
bang in his companion’s face, exclaiming, ’I beg you a thousand pardons,
squire, but I’ve not practised as much as you have. No doubt, by the time
we reach New-York, I shall be as great a dabster as you are.’ The other
rubbed his eye, and remained _bouche close_."

In support of the hydropathic practice, and in illustration of the effect
of cold, we cite an anecdote MIGNET tells of the celebrated French
physician Broussais:


    "Seized with a violent fever at Nimèguen, Broussais was attended
    by two of his friends, who each prescribed opposite remedies.
    Embarrassed by such contradictory opinions, he resolved to follow
    neither. Believing himself to be seriously in danger, he jumped
    out of bed in the midst of this raging fever, and almost naked sat
    down to his escrutoire to arrange his papers. It was in the month
    of January; the streets were covered with snow. While thus
    settling his affairs the fever abated, a sensation of freshness
    and comfort diffused itself throughout his frame. Amazed at this
    result, Broussais, like a bold theorist as he was, converted his
    casual forgetfulness into an experience. He boldly _threw open the
    window_, and for some time inspired the cold winter air that blew
    in upon him. Finding himself greatly benefited, he concluded that
    cool drink would be as refreshing to his stomach as cold air had
    been to his body. He deluged his stomach with cold lemonade, and
    in less than forty-eight hours he was well again!"





The following amusing anecdote is told in a work recently published in
London of Tom Cooke, the actor and musician:


    "At a trial in the Court of King’s Bench, June, 1833, betwixt
    certain publishing tweedledums and tweedledees, as to the alleged
    piracy of an arrangement of the ’Old English Gentleman,’—an old
    English air, by the bye—Cooke was subpœnaed as a witness. On his
    cross-examination by Sir James Scarlet, afterwards Lord Abinger,
    for the opposite side, that learned counsel rather flippantly
    questioned him thus: ’Now, sir, you say that the two melodies are
    the same, but different; now what do you mean by that, sir?’ To
    this Tom promptly answered, ’I said that the notes in the two
    copies were alike, but with a different accent, the one being in
    common time, the other in sixth-eight time; and, consequently, the
    position of the accented notes was different.’ Sir James—’What is
    musical accent?’ Cooke—’My terms are a guinea a lesson, sir.’ (A
    loud laugh.) Sir James (rather ruffled)—’Never mind your terms
    here. I ask you what is musical accent. Can you see it?’
    Cooke—’No.’ Sir James—’Can you feel it?’ Cooke—’A musician can.’
    (Great laughter.) Sir James (very angry)—’Now, pray sir, don’t
    beat about the bush, but explain to his lordship and the jury, who
    are supposed to know nothing about music, the meaning of what you
    call accent.’ Cooke—’Accent in music, is a certain stress laid
    upon a particular note, in the same manner as you would lay a
    stress upon any given word for the purpose of being better
    understood. Thus, if I were to say, ’You are an _ass_—it rests on
    ass; but if I were to say, ’_You_ are an ass—it rests on you, Sir
    James.’ Reiterated shouts of laughter by the whole court, in which
    the bench itself joined, followed this repartee. Silence having
    been at length obtained, the Judge, with much seeming gravity,
    accosted the chop-fallen counsel thus: Lord Denman—’Are you
    satisfied, Sir James?’ Sir James (deep red as he naturally was, to
    use poor Jack Reeve’s own words, had become scarlet in more than
    name), in a great huff, said, ’The witness may go down!’"





A Portuguese paper gives some statistics which could only be obtained
under the spy and secret police system. There are said to be in Portugal
872,634 married couples, of which the present condition is very nearly as
follows:—"Women who have left their husbands for their lovers, 1,262.
Husbands who have left their wives for other women, 2,361. Couples who
have agreed to live separately, 33,120. Couples who live in open warfare,
under the same roof, 13,263. Couples who cordially hate each other, but
dissemble their aversion under the appearance of love, 162,320. Couples
who live in a state of tranquil indifference, 510,132. Couples who are
thought by their acquaintances to be happy, but are not themselves
convinced of their own felicity, 1,102. Couples that are happy as compared
with those that are confessedly unhappy, 131. Couples indisputably happy
in each other, 0. Total, 872,634."





The first duel in New England, was fought with sword and dagger, between
two servants. Neither of them was killed, but both were wounded. For this
disgraceful offence, they were formally tried before the whole company
(the first settlers), and sentenced to have their "heads and feet tied
together, and so to be twenty-four hours, without meat or drink." Their
bravery all exploded in a little while, and they plead piteously to be
released, which was finally done by the Governor on their promising better
behavior. "Such was the origin," says Dr. Morse, "and such, I may almost
venture to say, was the termination of the odious practice of duelling in
New England, for there have been very few fought there since."





We are told by Ariosto of a warrior who was so happily gifted that when
his arms, his legs, or even his head, happened to be chopped off in
battle, he could jump down from his horse and replace the dissevered
member. Many modern humbugs are of this description; they are real polipi;
chop them into a thousand pieces, and each piece will start up as brisk
and as lively as ever. Metaphysical humbugs are the most difficult kind to
deal with. Contending with them is like wrestling with spectres; there is
not substance enough to catch hold of.





Lately, at a sitting of the Norwegian legislature at Christiana, a
petition was presented from the world-known fiddler, Ole Bull, in which he
solicited the creation of a national theatre in that town, to receive a
subvention from the government, and to which a dramatic school was to be
attached. The Assembly voted that the petition should be taken into
consideration, and appointed a committee to draw up a report on it. M.
Bull has already founded, at his own cost, a theatre in his native town,
Bergen. M. Bull visits this country now in search only of pleasure.





AUTHORS AND BOOKS


GUTZKOW’S _Ritter vom Geiste_ (Knights of the Spirit) is at last finished,
the ninth volume having made its appearance. It has faults of detail, and
there are deficiencies in spots, but as a whole it is praised as eminently
successful, and truly a new work. The idea in some respects recalls the
Wilhelm Meister of Goethe, and the Nathan the Wise of Lessing, but the
execution has more force and a larger and more imperious movement than
either. The Knights of the Spirit are a body of men who are combined in an
order to which they give that name, and this book is their history and
that of the order. At the same time there is nothing mystical,
supernatural, or merely fantastic about it, though its spirit is
humanitary and even socialistic. The scene is in modern times, but though
the names of the heroes are German, and the circumstances in which they
are placed German, the author has succeeded in producing a truly
cosmopolitan romance. The nine volumes are sold in Germany for about $8
00.





HENRY TAYLOR, the author of Philip Van Artevelde, is the subject of an
article in the _Grenzboten_. The writer takes him, as the acknowledged
first living dramatic poet of England, to be the best illustration of the
nature and characteristics of the English drama. This drama is said to be
more remarkable for sharply-outlined and detailed characters, than for the
invention of exciting and consistent action. The characters in all their
peculiarities are first created, and situations are made and arranged for
them afterward. The evil of this is, that the whole thus becomes
fragmentary, and the particulars outweigh and obscure the general spirit
and intention of the piece. Even Shakspeare, with his gigantic genius, was
not free from this defect. His Merry Wives of Windsor, for instance, is
rich in comic situations and figures, but they are arbitrarily put
together, and every scene has the character of an episode; the action does
not go forward in a true and consistent course. Now-a-days the evil is
worse, because it is the fashion to substitute reflection for natural
feeling. Taylor is like those portrait painters who paint the features so
carefully as to destroy the general character of the face. His men and
women are not alive and genuine. Still their language is grave and noble,
their thoughts comprehensive, often striking, and their emotions, though
artificial, are elaborated with great insight and knowledge of the world.
Compared with the wretched creations of the French romanticists, they are
worthy of all praise. The critic then proceeds to analyze Isaac Comnenus,
Philip Van Atevelde, and Fair Edwin, setting forth with great fairness the
excellencies and faults of each.





A new contribution to an obscure but most interesting part of European
history is _Deutschland in der Revolutions periode von_ 1522-26, (Germany,
in the Revolutionary Period from 1522 to 26,) by JOSEPH EDMUND JÖRG. The
author has had access to a great mass of original and hitherto unused
materials, especially diplomatic correspondence and other documents in the
Bavarian archives. His view of the subject is very different from that
taken by ZIMMERMANN, in his _Peasants’ War_, or by any other writer. He
mocks at the idea that this revolution grew out of the evils and
oppressions suffered by the people, and finds its most powerful impulse in
the passion for innovation that sprung up along with the revival of
classical studies in the middle ages.





The antique fashion of presenting poetic works to the public, is revived
in Germany with great success. Professor GRIEPENKERL of Brunswick, whose
tragedy of Robespierre made a great sensation a year or more since, is now
reading his new play of the Girondists to large audiences in the principal
cities. He has already been heard at Brunswick, Leipzig, Dresden, and
Bremen, and proposes to visit other places on the same errand. The play,
which is a tragedy of course, is much admired, though it is not thought to
be adapted to the stage. The Girondists were not men of action, but
orators and thinkers. The final scene in the play is the famous banquet
before they were taken to execution. Charlotte Corday is among the
characters; the women are said not to be drawn as truly and powerfully as
the men.





CARLYLE’S Life of Stirling is criticised in the _Grenzboten_, which calls
Carlyle the strangest of all philosophers. This book is said, however, to
be, on the whole, clearer and more intelligible than most of his former
productions. Still, like most works of the new romantic school in England,
of which Carlyle is the chief, it aims rather to give expression to the
ideas and abilities of the author, than to do justice to its subject. But
it is in Warren’s _Lily and the Bee_, that the school appears in full
bloom. This is said to consist mostly of exclamation points, and is
written in a sort of lapidary style, that deals in riddles, pathos without
object, sentimentality with irony, world-pain, and allusions to all the
kingdoms of heaven and earth, without any explanation as to what relation
these allusions bear to each other, and with a Titanic pessimism as its
predominating tone, which first rouses itself up to take all by storm, and
finishes by being soothed into happy intoxication by the odors of a lily.
This is better treatment than _The Lily and the Bee_ gets at home.





In the second volume of _Shakspeare as Protestant, Politician,
Psychologist and Poet_, by DR. ED. VEHSE—spoken of as being "even more
uninteresting than the first," we find the two following extraordinary
ideas. Firstly, that Shakspeare followed a theory of physical
_temperaments_ in his characters—that Hamlet was a representative of the
melancholy or nervous, Othello of the choleric, Romeo of the sanguine, and
Falstaff of the phlegmatic. Secondly, that in Falstaff, Shakspeare
parodied—himself! Or to give his own words, "We may suppose that
Shakspeare’s physical constitution inclined to corpulence, and inspired in
him the disposition to the life of a _bon vivant_. His intimacy with the
Earl of Southampton may have favored this disposition, since they led for
a long time a dissipated tavern-life, and were rivals in love matters!"
The work is principally made up of extracts from Shakspeare’s plays, to
every which extract we find appended "How admirable,"—"Excellent," and
similar aids to those who are not familiar with the English bard.





We commend to the attention of philologists Das _Gothische Runenalphabet_,
(or The Gothic Runic Alphabet,) recently published by HERTZ of Berlin.
"Before Wulfila, the Goths had an alphabet of twenty-five letters, formed
according to the same principles, and bearing nearly the same names as the
_Runes_ of the Anglo-Saxons and Northmen, and probably arranged in the
same order of succession. _Wulfila_ adopted the Grecian alphabet, which
through his modification was received by the Goths to the old twenty-five
letters." This is the theory propounded in the work, which is not wanting,
as we learn, in instructive information. In connection with this we may
notice a book which has been deemed worthy of a modern English
republication in elegant style, the often referred to _Scriptural Poems_
of CÆDMON, in Anglo-Saxon, an edition of which, by R. W. BOUTERWEK, with
an Anglo-Saxon Glossary, has recently been published by Bædeher of
Elberfeldt.





The _Preussische Zeitung_ states that M. HANKE, a learned Bohemian, is
publishing, in Prague, a _fac-simile_ of the Gospels on which the Kings of
France have always been sworn at their coronation at Rheims. The
manuscript volume is in the Slavonian language, and has been preserved at
Rheims ever since the twelfth century, but it has only been lately
discovered in what language it was written.





The eleventh volume of the _Monumenta Germaniæ Historica_ inde ab anno
Christi 500 usque ad annum 1500 auspiciis societ, aperiendis fontibus
serum German medii ævi edid, G. H. PERTZ, has just made its appearance.
This work is regarded as a stupendous effort of erudition and historical
acumen, even in Germany.

DR. HAGBERG, a professor at the University of Upsal, has just published at
Stockholm a version of the complete works of Shakspeare, the first ever
made in the Swedish language. It is in twelve thick octavo volumes. The
Shaksperian Society of London having received a presentation copy of this
translation, has returned a vote of thanks to Dr. Hagberg, accompanied by
forty volumes of the Society’s publications, all relating to the great
dramatist and the state of dramatic art in his time.





DUNLOP’S _History of Fiction_ has been translated into German by Professor
Liebrecht of Liege, and enlarged so as to be much more complete than the
original. The version bears the title of _Geschichte der Prosadichtung
oder, Geschichte der Romane, Novellen und Mährchen_ (History of Prose
Poetry, or History of Romances, Novels and Traditional Tales). It gives a
complete account of the most prominent fictions from the Greek romances
down to the present day, and is quite as valuable for those who like to
take their novels condensed, as for those who make a historical study of
literature.





HOLTEI, the German poet, has published a four-volume novel, called _Die
Vagabunden_ (The Vagabonds). It is a curious and successful book. It
treats of the various classes that get their living by amusing others, not
merely of theatrical and musical artists, but of circus-riders,
ventriloquists, jugglers, rope-dancers, puppet-showmen, &c. Indeed, actors
and musicians are only introduced casually, while the lower classes, if we
may so call them, of wandering artists, make up the book; and they make it
up not in the form of caricatures or exaggerations, but as genuine living
characters, with the faults and virtues that really belong to men of their
respective professions The story is a good one, and is varied with all
sorts of strange adventures.





In poetry we observe the attractive title of _The Æolian Harp of the
World’s Poetry_, a collection of poems of all countries and ages,
"dedicated to German ladies and maidens," by FERD. SCHMIDT. Also by the
same collector, a Household Treasury of the most beautiful Ballads,
Romances, and Poetic Legends of all Times and Nations; by BRUNO LINDNER,
_Four Tales_, and from the Countess AGNES SCHWERIN, a new edition of _What
I heard from the bird_. Were we confident that the Countess were
intimately familiar with English poetry, we should feel half inclined to
accuse her of having taken this title from

  "High diddle ding, I heard a bird sing."

G. PUSLITZ has "thrown forth," as Bacchus threw the wreath of Ariadne, a
"garland of Stories," entitled _What the Forest Tells_. Whether, like the
wreath alluded to, it will reach the stars, we must leave our readers or
his to decide.





In Science, we observe the publication of a piece of eccentric nonsense
such as emanates at the present day only from a weak brother in Germany,
or occasionally from a would-be _original_ in New England. The work to
which we refer is the _Natur und Geist_ (or _Nature and Spirit_) of DR.
JOHANN RIOHERS. In the second volume he attempts to utterly overwhelm,
confound, and destroy Newton’s Theory of Attraction, by such an argument
as the following. "Let any man jump from a height, in descending he feels
no _attraction_ to the Earth. How hasty and absurd therefore is it to
attribute the movement in question to such an attraction."





A new collection of German Domestic Legends (_Haus Mährchen_) has been
published at Leipzig, by J.W. WOLF, a distinguished German philologist.
His Legends closely resemble those collected by Grimm, and, like them, are
curious and instructive. He obtained them, one from a Gipsey, others from
peasants in the mountain districts, and others from some companies of
Hessian soldiers. He remarks that many such ancient legends are yet
floating about among the German people, and that they ought to be
collected before they are lost.





ZEND AVESTA, or On the things of Heaven and the World beyond the Grave, is
the title of a new book in three volumes just published at Leipzig, in
German, of course, by GUSTAV THEODOR FECHNOR. The author attempts to prove
the possibility, if not the certainty, of a future life of the individual
after death. His demonstrations are drawn from the analogies of the
natural world. He exhibits a wide acquaintance with nature and with
literature, but is not thought to have made any positive additions to
psychological science.





Those who are conversant with the curiosities of the Middle Ages, and have
read the entertaining history of "_Ye Nigromancer Virgilius_," in which
the Mantuan bard lives no longer in the magic of song, but that of literal
sorcery, will peruse with pleasure the _Virgil’s Fortleben im
Mittelalter_, or The Life of Virgil continued in the Middle Ages, by G.
RAPPERT. Of all the wild romantic legends which the romantic time brought
forth, none surpass in singularity and interest this singular narration.





TEMPERANCE TALES are produced in Germany as well as elsewhere. JEREMIAS
GOTTHELF is the best author who there cultivates this style of
composition. His _Dürsli, the Brandy drinker_, has just passed through a
fourth edition, and _How five Maidens miserably perished in Brandy_, to a
second. Gotthelf has the talent of combining great dramatic interest and
artistic freshness of narration, with a moral purpose. Hence the
popularity of these little books.





NIEHL’S _Bûrgerliche Gesellschaft_ (Civil Society) is greatly praised by
critics, as the most valuable work lately published in Germany, or indeed
in Europe, upon the State of Society and the causes operating to change
it. Especially good are its pictures of the different classes in Germany,
such as the nobility, the peasantry, the industrious middle class, and the
proletaries. These pictures are said to have the minuteness and fidelity
of daguerreotypes. The chapter on the "proletaries of intellectual labor,"
gives any thing but a flattering account of the literary classes on the
continent. Those classes are held up as in a great measure perverted,
empty, and dangerous. Niehl divides Society in Germany into four great
classes, namely: the peasantry, the aristocracy, the _bourgeoisie_ or
middle class, and the proletariat, or mere laborers for wages. The last he
regards as the decaying and corrupting class, a sort of scum in hot
effervesence. This is, however, one of the classes that produce social
movement; the other is the middle class; the conservative or stationary
classes are the peasantry and aristocracy. The learned professions he
reckons among the middle class. He makes no distinction between the
proletaries who live by the soil, and those who live by working in
connection with manufactures and mechanical trades.





Another contribution to Goethean literature is the Correspondence between
the great Poet and his intimate friend Knebel, which has just appeared in
Germany in two volumes. The letters extend from 1774 to 1832, and contain
the free expression of Goethe’s opinions on a great variety of important
subjects, as well as many interesting particulars in his personal history,
hitherto unknown.





MR. WETZSTEIN, Prussian Consul at Damascus, has returned to Europe,
bringing a valuable collection of Arabic, Turkish and Persian manuscripts,
which he expects to sell to the Royal Library at Berlin. Of especial value
is a history of Persia during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, which
casts light on several portions of Persian history that have hitherto been
obscure.





LONGFELLOW’S _Evangeline_ has been translated into German and published at
Hamburg. The name of the translator is not given. The critics find that
the poem has a very marked resemblance to Goethe’s Herman and Dorothea.





DR. MAYO’S _Berber_ has been translated into the German by Mr. L. Dubois,
and published at Leipzig.





A new and splendid edition of the _Pilgrim’s Progress_ has been published
at Leipzig, in German. It is curious to see the good old book discussed by
the critics as if it were a new production.





German Historical Literature has lately been enriched by numerous valuable
works. Among these we notice WENCK’S _Fränkische Reich_ (Frankish Empire),
which treats that subject, from A.D. 843 to 861, with instructive
thoroughness and philosophical insight; two essays by FICKER, the one on
Reinhald von Dassel, the Chancellor of Ferdinand I., and the other on the
attempt of Henry VI. to render the German empire hereditary; ARNTHEN’S
_History of Carinthia_; RINK’S _Tirol_; PALAZKY’S _History of Bohemia_;
MINUTOLI’S _History of the Elector Frederic I._; RIEDEL’S _Ten years of
the History of the Ancestors of the Royal House of Prussia_; the _History
of Schleswig Holstein_, by GEORGE WAITZ; RUCKERT’S _Annals of German
History_; G. PHILIP’S _Outlines of the History of the German Empire and
German Law_; GENGLER’S _History of German Law_; the _Coins of the German
Emperors and Kings in the Middle Ages_, a large work by CAPPE; the _Celts
and Ancient Helvetians_, by J. B. BROZI; and the _Campaigns of the
Bavarians_ from 1643 to 1645, by J. HELLMANN; MAYR’S _Mann von Rinn_ (Man
of Rinn) deserves special mention. The man of Rinn is Joseph Speckbacher,
the hero of the war of 1809 in the Tyrol. His deeds, and those of his
countrymen, are here narrated in a style as attractive as the facts are
authentic.





In all the States of the German Confederation there are 2,651 booksellers,
400 of whom deal only in their own publications, 2,200 sell books, but do
not publish, and 451 keep general assortments of books, and publish also.
At Berlin there are 129 booksellers, at Leipzic, 145, at Vienna, 52, at
Stuttgard, 50, and at Frankfort, 36. A hundred years ago there were only
31 at Leipzic and 6 at Berlin, and at two fairs held at Leipzic in 1750,
only 350 German booksellers’ establishments were represented. No one is
allowed in Germany to become a bookseller without a license from the
government, and in Prussia the applicant has to pass a special
examination.





Those desirous of acquiring languages by wholesale, may try a recent work
by Captain J. NEPOMUK SZÖLLÖZY, with which the scholar can learn,
according to the Ollendorffian system, French, German, English, Italian,
Russian, Spanish, Hungarian, Wallachian and Turkish. Phrases and
vocabularies of all the languages are appended.





A second edition of ADOLF STAHR’S _Preussische Revolution_, has appeared
in Germany, revised by the author and dedicated to Macaulay. No recent
book in Germany has been more successful than this.





MAX SCHLESINGER’S _Wanderings through London_ are announced at Berlin; the
first volume is already published. One of the chapters treats of
"Linkoln’s-In-Fields."





We learn from the last number of the _Journal Asiatique_, that M. WÖPCKE,
a mathematician who devotes himself to Arabic studies, has discovered in
some Arabic manuscripts two works purporting to be by Euclid, which have
not been preserved in the Greek original, nor are any where referred to as
his by ancient mathematical writers. One is a treatise on the lever, and
the other on the division of planimetric figures. The authenticity of the
two is thought to be perfectly established by collateral evidence.





The Hungarian author. Baron Eötvös, has just published a work called
_Ueber den Einfluss der Neuen Ideen auf den Staat_ (On the influence of
new ideas upon the State). He argues that the students of social and
political science should confine themselves strictly to the method
received in the natural sciences, and employed there with such success;
first establish what are the genuine experimental phenomena, and then by
induction settle the law which produces and governs them.





We expect a treat from MORITZ WAGNER’S _Reise nach Persien und dem Lande
der Kurden_ (Journey to Persia and Kurdistan) the first volume of which is
advertised in our last files of German papers. Wagner is one of the best
of travellers, and we shall look for the book itself with some impatience.
The second volume is announced as to appear in three weeks after the
first.





The second part of the third volume of HUMBOLDT’S _Kosmos_, has just
appeared at Stuttgart. It treats of the heavenly nebulae, suns, planets,
comets, aurora borealis, zodiacal light, meteors, and meteoric stones.
This completes the uranological part of the description of the physical
universe. Humboldt has already begun his fourth volume, and expects to
finish it before June next.





KOSSUTH is speculated on by a German bookseller, who advertises a work
giving a complete account of his sayings and doings since the capitulation
at Vilagos, including his flight to Turkey and his residence there, the
negotiations for his release, his journey from Kutahia to England, and his
tarry there up to sailing for America, with a portrait.





THE REV. HENRY T. CHEEVER’S _Life in the Sandwich Islands_ (noticed by us
lately in the _International_), is reprinted in London, by Bentley, and
translated in German for a publisher at Berlin.





SILVIO PELLICO, so famous for his works, his imprisonments and sufferings,
is passing the winter in Paris.





The complete works of CLEMENS BRENTANO, have been brought out at
Frankfort, in seven volumes.





Two books of travels in Scandinavia have just appeared in Germany. One is
the _Bilder aus dem Norden_ (Pictures of the North), by Professor OSCAR
SCHMIDT of Jena; and the other _Hägringar_, or a Journey through Sweden,
Lapland, Norway, and Denmark, in 1850, by a young author. Professor
Schmidt amply repays the reader, which is more than can always be said of
the author of _Hägringar_. Both works are, however, especially worthy the
attention of those who wish to study the natural history and ethnography
of the countries in question.





MADAME VON WEBER, widow of the composer, who has for some years resided at
Vienna, has applied to the Emperor of Austria for permission to dispose of
the three original MSS. scores of her husband’s operas, _Der Freischütz,
Eutryanthe_, and _Oberon_. These were in the Royal Library at Vienna; and
she purposes offering them to the three sovereigns of Saxony, Prussia, and
England,—in which respective countries they were originally produced. The
Emperor has caused the MSS. to be delivered to her.





PROFESSOR NUYTZ, whose work on canon law was recently condemned by the
Holy See, has resumed his lectures at Turin. The lecture-room was crowded,
and the learned professor was received with loud applause. He adverted to
the hostility of the clergy, and to the Papal censures of his work, which
censures he declared to be in direct opposition to the rights of the civil
power. He expressed his thanks to the ministry for having refused to
deprive him of his chair.





A valuable contribution to Italian history is _Die Carafa von Maddaloni,
Neapel unter Spanische Herrschaft_ (Naples under Spanish Domination), just
published in Germany, by ALFRED VON REUMONT, a member of the Prussian
Legation at Florence, who, more than almost any other man, has made a
study of the history of that part of Italy, and who in this work has had
access to a great mass of new documents. He writes as a monarchist, but
his facts may be relied on. The work is in two volumes.





Every body remembers the noise made in New-York some fifteen years since
by the revelations of MARIA MONK. We notice a translation of her famous
disclosures advertised, with all sorts of trumpet blowing, in our German
papers.





An edition of the complete works of KEPLER is preparing in Germany, under
the supervision of Prof. FRISCH, of Stuttgart. The manuscripts of the
great astronomer, preserved at St. Petersburg, have been examined for the
purpose, with rich results. It is also proposed to erect a monument to
Kepler at Stuttgart.





Sixteen German books were prohibited in Russia in August last; among them
were FONTAINE’S _Poems_, GÖRRE’S _Christian Mysticism_, KUTZ’S _Manual of
Sacred History_, SCHMIDT’S _Death of Lord Byron_, KINKEL’S _Truth without
Poetry_, and STRAUSS’S _Life Questions_. Of eleven other works, a few
pages from each were prohibited; among these was the German version of
Lieutenant LYNCH’S _United States Expedition to the Jordan and the Dead
Sea_. These works are allowed to enter Russia after having the
objectionable pages cut out.





The science of landscape gardening is enriched by a new work of value just
published at Leipzig, by RUDOLPH LIEBECK, the director of the public
garden in that city. It is called _Die bildenden Garten Kunst in seinen
Modernen Formen_ (The Modern Constructive Art of Gardening). It has twenty
colored plates.





COTTA, of Stuttgart, is preparing to publish a splendid illustrated
edition of Goethe’s _Faust_. The designs are to be by an artist well known
in Germany, Engelbert Seibertz. The work is to be published in numbers.





The historical remains and letters of George Spalatin have been published
at Weimar. They are a valuable addition to the history of the Reformation.





It is remarkable that the only oriental nation whose literature has much
resemblance to ours, and has a direct practical value for us, is the
Chinese. For instance, the works of this people upon agriculture abound in
practical information, which may be made immediately useful in Europe and
America. We noticed, some time since, the treatise on the raising and care
of silk worms, translated and published at Paris, by M. STANISLAS JULIEN,
which was so warmly welcomed in France as a timely addition to what was
there known upon the subject. It seems that this work was but a small
portion of an extensive Cyclopedia of Agriculture in use in China, where
the science of tilling the soil has in many respects been developed to an
astonishing degree of perfection. This cyclopedia, M. Hervey, a French
scholar, whose knowledge of the Eastern languages is accompanied by an
equally profound love of farming, has undertaken to translate entire. This
is a difficult and tedious enterprise, especially on account of the mass
of botanical and technical expressions which occur in the work, and of
which the dictionaries furnish no explanation. Meanwhile M. Hervey has
published some of the results of his studies in a work called
_Investigations on Agriculture and Gardening among the Chinese_. He
mentions several varieties of fruits, vegetables, and trees, which might
advantageously be introduced into France and Algiers; he also analyzes the
Cyclopedia, and shows what are the difficulties in translating it.





A remarkable contribution to our knowledge of China, is M. BIOT’s recent
translation of the book called _Tscheu-li_. It seems that in the twelfth
century before Christ, the second dynasty that had ruled the country, that
of _Thang_, fell by its own vices, and the empire passed into the hands of
Wu-wang, the head of the princely family of _Tscheu-li_. Wu-wang was a
great soldier and statesman; he confided to his brother Tscheu-Kong, a man
evidently of extraordinary political genius, the moral and administrative
reformation of the empire. He first laid the foundation of a reform in
moral ideas by an addition to the Y-King or sacred book, which the Chinese
revere and incessantly study, but which still remains an unintelligible
mystery for Europeans. Of his administrative reforms a complete record is
preserved in the _Tscheu-li_, and nothing could be easier to understand.

When the Tscheus thus came into power, they found in existence a powerful
feudal aristocracy, from which they themselves proceeded, and which they
must tolerate. Accordingly, they recognized within the imperial dominions
sixty-three federal jurisdictions, which were hereditary, but whose rulers
were obliged to administer according to the laws and methods of the
empire. Having made this concession, they abolished all other hereditary
offices, and established instead, a vast system of centralization, such as
the world has never seen equalled elsewhere. The administration, according
to the _Tscheu-li_, is divided among six ministries, which were also
divided into sections, and the executive functions descend regularly and
systematically to the lowest official, and include the entire movement of
society. The emperor and the feudal princes are restrained by formalities
and usage, as well as by the expression of disapprobation; and the
officials of every grade by their hierarchical dependency, and by a system
of incessant oversight; and finally, the people by proscription, and the
education, industrial, as well as mental and moral, which the State
dispenses to them. The sole idea in which this astonishing system rests,
is that of the State, whose office is to care for all that can contribute
to the public good, and which regulates the action of every individual
with a view to this end. In his organization, Tscheu-Kong excelled every
thing that the most centralized governments of Europe have devised.

The Tscheu family remained in power for five centuries, and was finally
broken down by the feudal element they had preserved. But so deep was the
impress of Tscheu-Kong upon the nation, that after centuries of
revolutions and civil war, it returned to his institutions and principles,
and it is by them and in a great degree in their exact forms, that China
is now governed.

In form the _Tscheu-li_ is like an imperial almanac of our own times. It
is, however, much more complete, because Tscheu-Kong gives in it a mass of
detailed instructions, in order to make the officials aware of their
duties and the precise limits of their authority. Thus the work affords a
quite exact picture of the social condition of China at that time. There
is no other monument of antiquity with which it can be compared, except
the _Manus_, the Indian book of law. The difference is, that in China the
intellectual activity was altogether political, and the public
organization altogether imperial and political; while in India the mental
activity was metaphysical, and the public organization altogether
municipal.

The translation of the _Tscheu_ was not published till after M. Biot’s
decease; it was brought out by his father, with the assistance of M.
Stanislas Julien.





The library of the famous Cardinal Mezzofanti is about to be sold, and the
catalogue is already printed—in Italian, of course. It is one of the most
extensive and valuable collection of works in various languages ever made,
and it is to be hoped that it may not be disposed of at the sale, but pass
all together into some public library—that of some university would be
most appropriate. To indicate the contents of the catalogue, we give the
titles of the different parts: Books in Albanian or Epirotic, Arabic,
Armenian, American (Indian dialects of Brazil, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru,
United States), Bohemian, Chaldaic, Chinese (Cochin-Chinese, Trin-Chinese,
Japanese), Danish (Swedish, Norwegian, Icelandic, Laplandic), Hebrew
(Antique, Rabbinic, Samaritan), Egyptian, or Coptic-Egyptian and Coptic,
Arabic, Etrusean, Phœnician, Flemish, French (Breton-French,
Lorraine-French, Provençal), Gothic and Visi-Gothic, and Greek and
Greek-Latin, Modern Greek, Georgian or Iberian, Cretian or Rhetian,
Illyrian, Indo-oriental (Angolese, Burmese or Avian, Hindostanee, Malabar,
Malayan, Sanscrit), English (Arctic, Breton or Celtic, Scotch-Celtic,
Scotch, Irish, Welch), Italian (Fineban dialect, Maltese, Milanese,
Sardinian, Sicilian), Kurdistanee or Kurdic, Latin, Maronite and Syriac
Maronite, Oceanic (Australian), Dutch, Persian, Polish, Portuguese
(various dialects), Slavonian (Carniolan, Serbian, Ruthenian,
Slavo-Wallachian), Syriac, Spanish (Catalan, Biscayan), Russian, Turkish,
Hungarian, Gipsey.





The French historian MICHELET, deprived of his professorship in the
College of France, is devoting himself more than ever to literature. His
last work, of which an authorized translation has just appeared in London,
is _The Martyrs of Russia_.





MICHEL NICOLAS, one of the ablest among the French theologico-ethical
writers, has published a translation of the _Considerations on the Nature
and Historical Developments of Christian Philosophy_, by Dr. RITTER, of
the University of Gottingen.





M. SCHONENBERGER, a music-publisher at Paris, has purchased from the heirs
of Paganini the copyright of his works, and is now publishing them, under
the editorial supervision of M. ACHILLE PAGANINI, the son of the great
violinist. The edition will comprise every thing that he left behind in
writing. Hector Berlioz speaks with enthusiasm in the _Journal des Debats_
of the two grand concertos which have just appeared, one of them
containing the marvellous rondo of the _campanella_. Berlioz speaks in
high praise of Paganini’s genius as a composer. A volume would be
required, he says, to indicate the new effects, the ingenious methods, the
grand and noble forms which he discovered, and even the orchestral
combinations, which before him were not suspected. In spite of the rapid
progress which, thanks to Paganini, the violin is making at the present
day in respect of mechanical execution, his compositions are yet beyond
the skill of most violinists, and in reading them it is hardly possible to
conceive how their author was able to execute them. Unfortunately he was
not able to transmit to his successors the vital spark which animated and
rendered _human_ those astonishing prodigies of mechanism.





M. PHILARETE CHASLES, one of the literary critics of the _Journal des
Debats_, has published, at Paris, a book called _Etudes sur la Litterateur
et les Mæurs des Anglo-Americanis_, which abounds in those curious
blunders that some French authors seem to be destined to when they write
upon topics connected with foreign countries. For instance, he makes the
pilgrims of Plymouth to have been the founders of Philadelphia, New-York,
and Boston. Buffalo he sets down opposite to Montreal, speaks of the
puritans of Pennsylvania as near neighbors of Nova Scotia, and extends
Arkansas to the Rocky Mountains. At New-York his regret is that a railroad
has destroyed the beauty of Hoboken, and at New Orleans he laments that
marriages between whites and Creoles are interdicted. Of Cooper, Irving,
Bryant, Audubon, and Longfellow, he speaks in terms of just praise, but
Willis is not mentioned. Bancroft and Hildreth are mentioned as
historians, Prescott is spoken of briefly in connection with his Ferdinand
and Isabella, while his other works are not alluded to. To Herman
Melville, M. Chasles devotes fifty pages, while Mr. Ticknor has not even
the honor of a mention. The author of this work is very far from doing
justice either to American literature or to himself.





Five of the nine intended volumes of LAFUENTE’S _General History of Spain_
from the remotest times to the present day, have appeared in Paris.





In Paris a new edition is announced of the best French versions of
FENIMORE COOPER’S works—six or eight illustrated volumes.





M. GUIZOT is about to publish a new volume at Paris, with the title of
_Shakspeare et son Temps_ (Shakspeare and his Times). It is to be composed
of his Life of Shakspeare, and the articles that he has written at various
times upon different plays. The only novelty in it is a notice on Hamlet
which was prepared expressly for this publication. He regards both Macbeth
and Othello as better dramas than Hamlet, but thinks the last contains
more brilliant examples of Shakspeare’s sublimest beauties and grossest
faults. "Nowhere," says Guizot, "has he unveiled with more originality,
depth and dramatic effect, the inmost state of a great soul: but nowhere
has he more abandoned himself to the caprices, terrible or burlesque, of
his imagination, and to that abundant intemperance of a mind pressed to
get out its ideas without choosing among them, and bent on rendering them
striking by a strong, ingenious, and unexpected mode of expression,
without any regard to their truth and natural form." The French critic
also thinks that on the stage the effect of Hamlet is irresistible.





A Capital work on Paris has just been published at Berlin, from the pen of
FRIEDRICH SZARVADY, a Hungarian, who has resided for several years in
Paris. The titles of the chapters are:—Paris in Paris; Strangers in Paris;
Parisian Women; Street Eloquence; the Temple of Jerusalem (the Bourse);
Salons and Conversation; Dancing, Song, and Flowers; the Ball at the Grand
Opera; Artist Life; the Press; the Feuilleton; History on a Public Square;
Lamartine, Cavaignac, Thiers; Louis Bonaparte. Szarvady observes sharply,
and writes with as much grace and _esprit_ as a Frenchman. Nothing can be
more taking than his pages. They deserve a translation from the German
into English.





VILLERGAS, the Spanish historian, who in one of his recent works drew a
parallel between Espartero and Narvaez which excited great attention at
Madrid and in other parts of Spain, has just been condemned by the court
which has charge of the offences of the press, to a fine of twenty
thousand reals, or twenty-five hundred dollars, for the sin against public
order and private character contained in that parallel.





An interesting and valuable series of articles reviewing historically the
systems of land tenure which have prevailed in different countries, is
appearing in the _Journal des Débats_ from the pen of M. HENRY TRIANON.
The systems of India and China have already been examined.





The termagant wife of Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton has just published _The
School for Husbands_, a novel founded on the life and times of Moliere.
Probably her own husband is shot at in all the chapters.





The books on modern French history would already fill an Alexandrian
library, and every month produces new ones. M. LEONARD GALLOIS, a
well-known historical writer, announces a _History of the Revolution of
February, 1848_, in _five_ large octavos, with forty-one portraits. M.
BARANTE’s _History of the Convention_ will consist of six octavos, of
which three are published, and the last is accompanied by it biographical
sketch of each of the seven hundred and fifty members. The period embraced
in this work is from 1792 to 1795, inclusive. There is a new _History of
the City of Lyons_, in three octavos, by the city librarian.





The _Letters and unpublished Essays of Count_ JOSEPH DE MAISTRE have been
brought out at Paris, in two volumes octavo. The letters show the
celebrated author in a new and pleasing light; a tone of genial unreserve
prevails in many of them, which those who have become familiar with his
brilliant, dogmatic, and paradoxical intellect, in his more elaborate
writings, would hardly suppose him capable of. No writer, of this century
at least, has more powerfully set forth the doctrines of the Roman
Catholic Church than he.





The _Political Situation of Cuba_, a volume published in Paris, by Don
ANTONIO SACO, is commended in the _Revue des Deux Mondes_. Don Antonio was
one of the most distinguished intelligences and liberals of the precious
island: he argues against independence, or annexation to the American
Union: he suggests various arrangements by which Spain could safely
establish political freedom in Cuba, and he thinks administrative and
judicial reforms to counteract the worst ills of her present situation,
might be accomplished.





A New edition of SHARON TURNER’s _History of the Anglo-Saxons_ has just
appeared in London, with important additions and revision. The first
edition of Turner’s History was published in London more than fifty years
ago. At the time when the first volume appeared, the subject of
Anglo-Saxon antiquities had been nearly forgotten by the British public,
although the most venerated laws, customs, and institutions of the nation
originated before the Norman conquest. The Anglo-Saxon manuscripts lay
unexamined in archives, and the important information they contained had
never been made a part of general history. Mr. Turner undertook a careful
and patient investigation of all the documents belonging to the period
preserved in the kingdom, and the result of his labors was the work in
question, which at once gave rise to an almost universal passion for the
records and remains of the Anglo-Saxon people, and called forth general
applause from the best minds of England. A good edition of his History was
published several years ago by Carey and Hart of Philadelphia, but it is
now, we believe, out of print.





The Rev. JOHN HOWARD HINTON, author of a well-known History of the United
States, has published, in London, a volume under the title of _The Test of
Experience_, in which he has presented a masterly argument for the
voluntary principle in matters of religion. The "test of experience" is in
this, as in all other things, the best of tests, and the religious
institutions of the United States can well bear its application. One of
the most noticeable results of the non-interference of the State is
pointed out in the following passage:


    "To travellers in the United States, no fact has been more
    immediately or more powerfully striking than the total absence of
    religious rivalry. Amidst such a multitude of sects, an inhabitant
    of the old world naturally, and almost instinctively looks for one
    that sets up exclusive pretensions and possesses an actual
    predominance. But he finds nothing of the kind. Neither
    presbyterianism, or prelacy, nor any other form of
    ecclesiasticism, makes the slightest effort to lift its head above
    its fellow. And with the resignation of exclusive pretensions, the
    entire ecclesiastical strife has ceased, and the din of angry war
    has been hushed; and here, at length, the voluntary principle is
    able to exhibit itself in its true colors, as a lover of peace and
    the author of concord. It is busied no longer with the arguing of
    disputed claims, but throws its whole energy into free and
    combined operations for the extension of Christianity. The general
    religious energy embodies itself in a thousand forms; but while
    there is before the church a vast field to which the activities of
    all are scarcely equal, there is, also, ’a fair field and no
    favor,’—a field in which all have the same advantages, and in
    which each is sure to find rewards proportionate to its wisdom and
    its zeal. This inestimable benefit of religious peace is clearly
    due to the voluntary principle."





JUNIUS, since the publication of his Letters, never figured more
conspicuously than during the last month. The _Paris Revue des Deux
Mondes_ has a very long article on the great secret by M. Charles Remusat,
a member of the Institute, well known in historical criticism. He arrays
skilfully the facts and reasonings which British inquirers have adduced in
favor of Sir Philip Francis, and the other most probable author, Lord
George Sackville. He seems to incline to the latter, but does not decide.
He pronounces that, on the whole, Junius was not "a great publicist." His
powers and influence are investigated and explained by M. de Remusat with
acuteness and comprehensive survey. Lord Mahon, in his new volumes, says,
"From the proofs adduced by others, and on a clear conviction of my own, I
affirm that the author of Junius was no other than Sir Philip Francis." We
think not. The London _Athenæum_, last year, we thought, settled this
point. It is understood that the editor of the _Grenville Papers_, now on
the eve of publication, in London, is in favor of Lord Temple as a
claimant for the authorship of Junius. The January number of the
_Quarterly Review_ contains an article on the subject.





The _Natural History of the Human Species_, by Lieutenant-Colonel CHARLES
HAMILTON SMITH, is the title of a duodecimo volume from the press of Gould
& Lincoln of Boston. An American editor (Dr. Kneeland) has added an
introductory survey of recent literature on the subject. The whole
performance is feeble. The author and his editor endeavor to make out
something like the infidel theory of Professor AGASSIZ, which, a year or
two ago, attracted sufficient attention to induce an investigation and an
intelligent judgment, in several quarters, as to the real claims of that
person to the distinctions in science which his advertising managers claim
for him. We have not space now for any critical investigation of the work,
and therefore merely warn that portion of our readers who feel any
interest in ethnological studies, of its utter worthlessness.





An Englishman, Mr. FRANCIS BONYNGE, recently from the East Indies, has
come to this country at the instance of our minister in London, for the
purpose of bringing before us the subject of introducing some twenty of
the most valuable agricultural staples of the East, among which are the
tea, coffee, and indigo plants, into the United States. He gives his
reasons for believing that tea and indigo would become articles of export
from this country to an amount greater than the whole of our present
exports. He says that tea, for which we now pay from sixty-five to one
hundred cents per lb. may be produced for from two to five cents, free
from the noxious adulterations of the tea we import. He has published a
small volume under the title of _The Future Wealth of America_, in which
his opinions are fully explained and illustrated.





The first volume of a work on _Christian Iconography_, by M. DIDRON, of
Paris, opens to the curious reader a new source of intellectual enjoyment,
both in the department of ancient religious art, and in the archæology of
the early paintings of the Catholic Church. The rich, profuse, and quaint
plates of the original work are used in a translation ably made by E.J.
Millington, published in London by Bohn, and in New-York by Bangs.





SIR FRANCIS BOND HEAD, so well known in this country as one of the former
governors of Canada, and as an author of remarkable versatility and
cleverness, has published an agreeable but superficial book on Paris—the
Paris of January, 1852—under the quaint title of _A Bundle of French
Sticks_; and Mr. Putnam has reprinted it in his new library.





A remarkable book published in Louisville, Kentucky, in 1847, by J. D.
NOURSE, under the title of _Remarks on the Past, and its Legacies to
American Society_, has just been reprinted in London, with an introduction
by D. T. COULTON.





The following works, all of which have promising titles, will soon be
published by J. S. REDFIELD: _Men of the Times in 1852_, comprising
biographical sketches of all the celebrated men of the present day;
_Characters in the Gospels_, by Rev. E. H. Chapin; _Tales and Traditions
of Hungary_, by Theresa Pulzky; _The Comedy of Love_, and the _History of
the Eighteenth Century_, by Arsene Houssaye; Aytoun’s _Lays of the
Scottish Cavaliers_; _The Cavaliers of England_, and _The Knights of the
Olden Time, or the Chivalry of England, France and Spain_, by Henry W.
Herbert; _Lectures and Miscellanies_, by Henry James; and _Isa: a
Pilgrimage_, by Caroline Chesebro.





_The Westminster Review_ says of ALICE CAREY, whose _Clovernook_ we
noticed favorably in the last _International_, that "no American woman can
be compared to her for genius;" the Paris _Débats_ refers to her as a poet
of the rank of Mrs. ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING in England; the literary
critic of _The Tribune_ (the learned and accomplished RIPLEY whose
judgment in such a matter is beyond appeal) prefers her _Clovernook_ to
Miss MITFORD’S _Our Village_, or Professor WILSON’S _Lights and Shadows of
Scottish Life_.





MR. DANIEL S. CURTISS has availed himself well of large opportunities for
personal observation, in his volume just published under the title of
_Western Portraiture, and Emigrant’s Guide_, a description of Wisconsin,
Illinois, and Iowa, with remarks on Minnesota and other territories. It is
the most judicious and valuable book of the kind we have seen.





HERR FREUND, the Philologist, is in London, engaged in constructing a
German-English and English-German dictionary upon his new system; and
Professor SMITH, the learned editor of the Dictionary of Greek and Roman
Antiquities, announces a dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography, the
articles to be written by the principal contributors to his previous
works.





THE CHRISTMAS BOOKS of the present season in England have not been very
remarkable. Mr. DICKENS, in an extra number of his Household Words,
printed _What Christmas is to Everybody_; and we have from WILKIE COLLINS,
_A New Christmas Story_; by the author of "The Ogilvies," _Alice Learmont,
a Fairy Tale of Love_; by the author of "The Maiden Aunt," a pleasant
little book entitled _The Use of Sunshine_.





Under the title of _Excerpta de P. Ovidii Nastonis_, Blanchard & Lea of
Philadelphia have published a series of selections from a poet whose
works, for obvious reasons, are not read entire in the schools. The
extracts present some of the most beautiful parts of this graceful and
versatile poet.





THE FINE ARTS


The American Art Unions have not been successful in the last year, unless
an exception may be made in regard to that of New England, at Boston. The
American, at New-York, deferred indefinitely its annual distribution of
pictures, on account of the small number of its subscriptions; and the
Pennsylvanian, at Philadelphia, by a recent fire in that city has lost its
admirably-engraved plates of Huntington’s pictures from the _Pilgrim’s
Progress_, the last of which was just completed and placed in the hands of
the printer. It will make no distribution.





A Sicilian artist, residing at Naples, has amused himself, and probably
pleased his sovereign, by composing a life-sized group, representing
Religion supporting King Ferdinand, and guarded by an angel, who places
his foot on an evil spirit. On the other side of this group is a child
bearing the scales of justice. "How much," writes a correspondent of the
_Athenæum_, "the artist is to get for this plaster blasphemy, I know not;
but a more impudent caricature (at the present moment) it would be
difficult to imagine." Another artist has, however, beaten the Sicilian
sculptor quite out. A small bronze group represents Religion triumphing
over Impiety and Anarchy. Impiety is represented by a female figure, under
whose arm are two books inscribed Voltaire and Luther! Anarchy has taken
off her mask, and let fall two scrolls, on which are written _Communismo_
and _Constituto_.





PROFESSOR ZAHN, who has been engaged during a period of more than twenty
years in examining the ruins of Pompeii and Herculaneum, has exhibited at
Berlin a collection of casts unique in their kind. These are 8,000 in
number; and comprise all the remarkable sculptures of the above places,
besides those found at Stabiæ, and those of the vast collection of the
Museo Borbonico and other museums of the Two Sicilies. The casts from the
Museo Borbonico are the first ever made,—the King of Naples having
accorded the privilege of taking these copies to M. Zahn alone, in royal
recompense for the Professor’s great work on Pompeii and Herculaneum.





A book which all students of art should possess, is DR. KUGLER’S
_Geschichte der Kunst_ (History of Art), with the Illustrations
(_Bilderatlos_) which accompany it, and which are now being published at
Stuttgart. The ancient and modern schools of Art—Painting, Sculpture, and
Architecture—are here represented in outlines of their most celebrated and
characteristic works. Eleven numbers of these Illustrations have appeared,
and the whole work will be completed in the course of the coming year.





In our musical world there have been several noticable facts in the last
month. The opera company, perhaps from the utter incapacity of its
director, has been divided, and the best portion of it has been singing at
Niblo’s Theatre. Jenny Lind’s farewell series of concerts was prevented by
intelligence of the death of the great singer’s mother, in Sweden.
Catherine Hayes has been successful in several concerts at Tripler Hall,
and Mrs. Bostwick, whom the best critics of the city regard as superior to
any singer who has appeared among us, except Jenny Lind, has given a
second series of her subscription concerts, which were extremely well
attended.





A correspondent of the _Athenæum_, writing from Egypt, urges that a few
young artists should be sent out with orders to copy all the hieroglyphics
on the most important temples, as well as the numerous tablets and
fragments which are daily brought to light. "A work pursued with such
materials—all theories and arbitrary classification being excluded—would
ever remain as a lasting monument, and would reflect great credit on the
Government which should order its execution." Less than one-half of the
money required for the removal of the Obelisk would amply cover all
expenses.





A correspondent of _Kuhne’s Europa_ writes from Dresden that a number of
humorous drawings, sketched by the pencil of Schiller, and accompanied by
descriptions in his own hand, have been found in the possession of a
Swabian family, with whom the great poet became acquainted during his
residence at Loschwitz.





In Berlin, M. von Prinz, a pupil of Kiss, the sculptor, is erecting a
group which he calls _The Lion-killer_ in imitation of the _Amazon_. Kiss
himself is engaged on a set of groups from a fox-hunt, Rauch has almost
completed a bust of Humboldt, and statues of General Gneisenau and of
_Hope_.





A colossal statue of the Emperor Napoleon, thirty feet high, is to be
placed on the top of the Triumphal Arch, at the end of the Champs Elysées,
in Paris.





KAULBACH has undertaken to draw a set of sketches for an illustrated
edition of Shakspeare, which will shortly be published by Nicolai, At
Berlin.





MR. GREENOUGH, is now in New-York, awaiting the arrival of his splendid
group for the Capitol, from Italy. He will soon be engaged on his statue
of his friend the late Mr. Cooper, to be erected in this city.





HISTORICAL REVIEW OF THE MONTH


The extraordinary abilities of Kossuth as orator, hid attractive personal
qualities, and grandeur of his propositions, continue to occupy the
generous regard of the people of the United States, but the impression
which obtained at one time that the national government would in any
manner or degree enter into his plans for confining a future contest for
the liberty of Hungary exclusively to the two parties most immediately
interested, appears to have been very generally given up. This country
will continue to encourage and aid oppressed peoples by showing how wisely
and efficiently its servants can attend to her own affairs. At the same
time it is not to be doubted that citizens in their private capacity may
and will do much for the illustrious exile who pleads among us for the
means of opposing the oppressors of his nation. Kossuth has been
entertained at public banquets since he left New-York by the authorities
of Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, Annapolis, and Harrisburg; he has
been received by the President of the United States, the two houses of
Congress, and the legislatures of Maryland and Pennsylvania; and on the
7th of January he dined with the representatives, senators, and other
persons connected with the government, at Washington, and Daniel Webster,
Lewis Cass, William H. Seward, and Stephen A. Douglass, made speeches on
the occasion expressive of their personal respect and sympathy, and their
anxiety as individuals to see Hungary independent. Mr. Cass indeed went so
far as entirely to endorse the doctrine of Kossuth respecting intervention
to insure non-intervention. Kossuth is now in the state of Ohio, and he
probably will remain in this country long enough—since the French
revolution has at least deferred any great and united movement of the
European democracy—to visit all the principal cities of the valley of the
Mississippi.

But little important business has yet been accomplished in Congress,
though numerous bills have been introduced, as is usual in the early weeks
of the session. On the morning of the 24th of December, a portion of the
capitol, occupied by the national library, was destroyed by fire, with
nearly sixty thousand printed volumes, and many MSS., maps, medals,
portraits, sculptures, and other works of art.

The legislature of several of the states are now in session. Those of
Ohio, Michigan, Mississippi, Wisconsin and California, met on the 5th of
January; those of New-York, Pennsylvania and Delaware, on the 7th; those
of Maryland and Massachusetts, on the 7th; that of Indiana, on the 8th;
those of Virginia and Illinois, on the 12th; that of New Jersey, on the
13th; that of Maine, on the 14th, and that of Louisiana, on the 19th. No
great national questions have been prominently before the state
legislatures, except that of our foreign relations, with special reference
to Hungary, upon which the assemblies in the several states appear to be
less conservative than Congress. The most important subject of local
administration, is that of the suppression of the sales of intoxicating
liquors. The law of Maine, enacted last year, will probably be sustained
in that state; in Massachusetts a petition with more than one hundred
thousand signatures, has been offered in the legislature for such a law,
and similar efforts are being made in New-York and other States.

In Mexico there is a continuance of the imbecility of the government and
the agitations of factions. Rumors, constantly varying, in regard to the
conduct and prospects of Caravajal, leave us in doubt whether any thing of
real importance will grow out of his attempts at revolution in the
northern provinces. The administration appears to have acted with
decision, but probably with impotence so far as the final result is
concerned, in regard to the Tehuantepee railroad contract.

South America presents the usual series of disturbances, with some facts
which indicate a prospect of repose; but all such prospects in the Spanish
states of this continent are apt to be deceptive. The birthday of Bolivar
was celebrated at Caracas on the 28th of October with great public
festivities. Treaties between Brazil and Uruguay were formed for alliance,
military aid, commerce and navigation, and the mutual surrender of
criminals, on the 12th of October. We learn from Buenos Ayres that,
through November, Rosas was making great preparations to meet Urquiza. He
had established a corps of observation in the direction of Entre Rios to
look out for an invasion. A considerable emigration was taking place from
Buenos Ayres to Montevideo, mostly of previous residents of the latter
city.

In Great Britain the most important recent event is the retirement of Lord
Palmerston from the cabinet, in which he held the place of Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs. This occurred on the 22d of December. The
causes of Lord Palmerston’s retirement are a subject of much
unsatisfactory speculation, and the fact is generally regretted by the
friends of political liberty in Europe. His successor is Lord Granville, a
nobleman of manly and liberal character, heretofore connected with the
government. It is apprehended that the popular feeling may induce the
recall of Lord Palmerston to be the head of a new Ministry. Great Britain
has now no envoy resident in the United States, but it is not improbable
that Sir Henry Bulwer will return to this country for the final settlement
of affairs connected with Central America. It is understood officially
that the attack of a British man-of-war on the United States steamer
Prometheus, at Greytown, was entirely unauthorized.

The Admiralty have determined not to send another expedition in search of
Sir John Franklin, by way of Behring’s Straits. The Plover is to be
communicated with each year by a man-of-war—the Amphitrite is the next.
The proposed overland expedition of Lieut. Pym has been abandoned.

The English war at the Cape of Good Hope continues with little change,
though a few important successes by the English are reported. The war
appears to be condemned by a large and respectable portion of the journals
and the people at home. In its character and details it continues to
resemble our own contest with the Indians in Florida.

The month of December, 1851, witnessed, in FRANCE, the successful
accomplishment of a _coup d’état_ not less daring than any that marked the
earlier annals of that country. It is asserted that the personal security
of the President was menaced with imminent danger, when, on the evening of
the 1st of December, he came to the resolution to strike the first blow.
The measures he immediately took were, to issue an appeal to the people
denouncing the conduct of the Assembly, and declaring it dissolved; a
proclamation to the army, telling them that "to-day, at this solemn
moment, I wish the voice of the army to be heard;" and a decree "in the
name of the French people," of which the articles were—"1. The National
Assembly is dissolved; 2. Universal Suffrage is re-established—the law of
the 31st May is abrogated; 3. The French people is convoked in its
elective colleges from the 14th of December to the 21st of December
following; 4. The state of siege is decreed through the first military
division; 5. The Council of State is dissolved; 6. The Minister of the
Interior is charged with the execution of the present decree." The appeal
to the people contained these further propositions; "Persuaded that the
instability of power, that the preponderance of a single Assembly, are the
permanent causes of trouble and discord. I submit to your suffrages the
fundamental basis of a constitution which the Assemblies will develop
hereafter—1. A responsible chief named for ten years; 2. The Ministers
dependent on the executive alone; 3. A Council of State formed of the most
distinguished men, preparing the law, and maintaining the discussion
before the legislative corps; 4. A legislative corps, discussing and
voting the laws, named by universal suffrage, without the _scrutin de
liste_ which falsifies the election; 6. A second Assembly formed of all
the illustrious persons of the nation—a preponderating power, guardian of
the fundamental pact and of public liberty." At an early hour, on the 2d,
these manifestoes were found covering the walls of Paris, and at the same
time the principal thoroughfares were filled with troops of the line.

The President had taken precautions that the National Guard should not be
called out. The Generals Changarnier, Cavaignac, Bedeau, Lamoricière,
Leflo, Colonel Charras, MM. Bazé, Thiers. Brun, the Commissary of Police
of the Assembly, and others of the leading heads of parties, were arrested
before they had risen for the day. Many members of the Assembly gathered
at the house of M. Daru, one of their Vice-Presidents and, having him at
their head, proceeded to their ordinary place of meeting, but found access
effectually barred by the Chasseurs de Vincennes, a corpse recently
returned from Algeria. These men forcibly withstood the entrance of the
members, some of whom were slightly wounded. Returning with M. Daru, they
were invited by General Lauriston to the Marie of the 10th arrondissement,
where they formed a sitting, presided over by two of their
Vice-Presidents, M. Vitel and M. Benuist d’Azy (M. Daru having meanwhile
been arrested), and proceeded to frame a decree to the following effect:
"Louis Napoleon Bonaparte is deprived of his functions as President of the
Republic, and the citizens are commanded to refuse him obedience; the
executive power passes in full right to the National Assembly; the judges
of the High Court of Justice are required to meet immediately, on pain of
dismissal, to proceed to judgment against the President and his
accomplices. It is enjoined on all functionaries and depositaries of
authority that they obey the requisition made in the name of the Assembly,
under penalty of forfeiture and the punishment prescribed for high
treason." While this decree was being signed, another was unanimously
passed, naming General Oudinot commander of the forces, and M. Tamisier
chief of the staff. These decrees had scarcely been signed by all present,
when a company of soldiers entered, and required them to disperse. The
Assembly refused to do so, when, after some parley, two commissaries de
police were brought, the presidents were arrested, and the whole body of
members present, 230 in number, were marched across the city to the
barracks of the Quai d’Orsay. The next day they were distributed to the
prisons of Mount Valerien, Mazas, and Vincennes; and the generals
Cavaignac, Lamoricière, Bedeau, and Changarnier, were sent to Ham. During
the day the population viewed the soldiers in the streets merely as a
spectacle, and no violent excitement occurred. At ten o’clock on Wednesday
morning some members of the Mountain appeared in the Rue d’Antoine, and
raised the cry _Aux armes!_ The party they collected immediately began to
erect a barricade at the corner of the Rue St. Marguerite. Troops were
quickly at the spot, when the barricade was carried, and the
representative Baudin was killed. Some other barricades were raised in the
afternoon, but as quickly destroyed. General Magnan, the
Commander-in-chief of the army of Paris, seeing the day was passed in
insignificant skirmishes, now determined to withdraw his small posts, to
allow the discontented to gather to a head. On the morning of the 4th it
was reported that the insurrection had its focus in the Quartiers St.
Antoine, St. Denis, and St. Martin, and that several barricades were in
progress. The General deferred his attack until two o’clock, when the
various brigades of troops acted in concert. The barricades were attacked
in the first instance by artillery, and then carried at the point of the
bayonet. There were none which offered very serious resistance, and the
whole contest was over about five o’clock. In the evening, however, fresh
barricades were raised in the Rues Montmartre and Montorgueil, and others
in the Rues Pagevin and des Fosses Montmartre, which were successfully
attacked in the night by the officers in command of those quarters. On the
5th the last remains of street-fighting were effectually quelled. The loss
to the military in these operations was twenty-five men killed, of whom
one was Lieut-Col. Loubeau, of the line, and 184 wounded, of whom
seventeen were officers. The number of insurgents killed is unknown, but
they are estimated it from two to three thousand, including,
unfortunately, many indifferent persons, who were accidentally passing
along the boulevards when the soldiery suddenly opened their sweeping
fire. The insurgents taken with arms in their hands were carried to the
Champ de Mars, and there shot by judgment of court martial. Most of the
political prisoners arrested were discharged after a few days, some of the
more formidable only being longer detained.

By a decree of the President dated the 2d December, the French people were
convoked in their respective districts for the 14th of the month to accept
or reject the following _plébiscite_: "The French people wills the
maintenance of the authority of Louis Napoleon Bonaparte, and delegates to
him the powers necessary to frame a Constitution on the bases proposed in
his proclamation of the 2d December." On that day the voting consequently
commenced by universal suffrage; and the President has been re-elected for
ten years by a majority greatly exceeding that of his contest with
Cavaignac. In Paris, of 394,049 registered voters 197,091 have voted in
the affirmative; 95,511, in the negative; and 96,819 abstained from
voting. The majority for Louis Napoleon being 191,500. In the provinces he
has had a majority of eight to one. The inauguration of the usurper took
place in the church of Notre Dame on the 3d of January, and the new order
of things has been recognized by all the courts of Europe.

On the 25th of November a French squadron appeared before Salee, to claim
satisfaction for an act of piracy committed by the inhabitants of that
town. The Caid asked for six days to take the orders of the Emperor of
Morocco; and the Caid of Rabat sent a similar evasive reply. The next day
the French bombarded the place for seven hours, the fire being returned by
both forts of Rabat and Salee. The Admiral, however, confined his
chastisement to the latter, which he thoroughly performed, and fired the
town in several places. The French fleet arrived at Tangier on the morning
of the 29th, when the Consul-General for Morocco and several officers of
the squadron landed, and had an interview with the Bashaw of the province,
which ended in a satisfactory arrangement, to the great relief of the
people of Tangier, who were in consternation at the prospect of sharing
the fate of their neighbors.

From Austria we learn the partial amelioration in private business of the
financial difficulties. The Emperor published, on the 1st of January,
decrees, that whereas the provisions of the constitution were cancelled by
the imperial edict of August 20, 1851, the last principles of political
right conceded by the constitution are now disavowed. There now exists no
political right in the empire. The Austrian government continues to watch
with the keenest anxiety the proceedings of the exiled Italians and
Hungarians, and by very stringent arrangements in regard to the press, and
the interdiction of most foreign journals, keeps the "dangerous classes"
in ignorance of the sympathy with which they are regarded from abroad.

The Queen of Spain, by a spontaneous act of her royal clemency, granted a
pardon to all such prisoners, made in the last expedition against the Isle
of Cuba, as are citizens of the United States, whether they be already in
Spain, undergoing the punishments they have incurred, or whether they be
still in Cuba. The queen on the 20th of December gave birth to a princess,
who is heir to the throne.

From China there are reports that the Emperor has been compelled to resign
in favor of the revolutionary general, whose triumphant march through many
revolted provinces has, from time to time, been noticed in the last half
year. The statement, however, does not appear to be credited by some of
the best informed London journals.

The Queen of Madagascar is bent on exterminating Christianity in her
dominions, and has long mercilessly persecuted those who prefer the "new
religion." In the last outburst of this protracted persecution, four
persons were burnt alive; fourteen precipitated from a high rock and
crushed to death; a hundred and seventeen persons condemned to work in
chains as long as they live; twenty persons cruelly flogged with rods,
besides 1,748 other persons mulcted in heavy penalties, reduced into
slavery, and compelled to buy themselves back, or deprived of their wives
and families. Persons of rank have been degraded, and sent as forced
laborers to carry stone for twelve months together to build houses; and,
in an endless variety of other ways have the maddened passions of one
wicked woman been permitted now for years past to plunge a great country
in ruin.

There has been a serious Mussulman riot at Bombay, occasioned by the
Parsee editor of an illustrated newspaper, in each number of which is
given a life and portrait of some remarkable historical character, having
published—in the series (next to one of Benjamin Franklin)—a life and
portrait of Mahomet. Both are said to have been unexceptionable according
to European ideas, but the whole Mussulman population (145,000 in number)
considered their faith insulted and outraged by the publication, holding
it sacrilege and idolatry to imagine and print any likeness whatever of so
sacred a personage.

The Wahabees, who inhabit the interior and highland portion of Arabia,
have pillaged the holy cities of Mecca and Medina, destroying the mosques,
sacking the cities, and carrying off numbers of women and children into
the desert. It is supposed to be in revenge for the punishment inflicted
on them thirty years ago, when they had conquered the same cities.

The Turkish government has introduced the culture of cotton in the
vicinity of Damascus, with seed procured from the United States. It is
successful.





SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERIES AND PROCEEDINGS OF LEARNED SOCIETIES.


In London, among the scientific questions of a practical kind much
discussed, is that of a patent process for contracting the fibres of
calico, and of obtaining on calico thus prepared colors of much
brilliancy. It is regarded by chemists as likely to lead to valuable
results. In the British Association, it was described as the discovery
that a solution of cold but caustic soda acts peculiarly on cotton fibre,
immediately causing it to contract; and although the soda can be readily
washed out, yet the fibre has undergone a change. Thus, taking a coarse
cotton fabric, and acting upon it by the proper solution of caustic soda,
this could be made much finer in appearance; and if the finest calico made
in England—known as one hundred and eighty picks to the web—be thus acted
on, it immediately appears as fine as two hundred and sixty picks.
Stockings of open weaving assume a much finer texture by the condensation
process; but the effect of the alteration is most strikingly shown by
colors: the tint of pink cotton velvet becomes deepened to an intense
degree; and printed calicoes, especially with colors hitherto applied with
little satisfaction—such as lilac—come out with strength and brilliancy,
besides producing fabrics finer than could be possibly woven by hand. The
strength, too, is increased by this process; for a string of calico which
breaks with a weight of thirteen ounces when not soaked, will bear twenty
ounces when half condensed by the caustic soda.





At a recent meeting of the Paris _Academy of Sciences_, M. YVART read an
important practical Memoir on the production of Wool, in the Merino race.
He teaches that the only means of obtaining fine wool—taking into account
the weight of the sheep’s body,—is the employment of races of small size.
When the skin is very delicate, it secretes less of wool than when it is
otherwise;—the fineness of the wool is proportioned to that of the skin.
Those countries in which the winter is long or cold, or where the sheep
remains in the fold the greater part of the year, and does not lie on
ploughed lands, are especially suited to the production of the finest and
most elastic wools, those chiefly sought after for manufacture of cloth.





Experiments on the application of electro-magnetism as a motive power,
have been made with some striking results in Paris, as well as in this
country. M. Dumont, in a paper on the subject submitted to the _Female
Academy_, states, "that if in the production of great power the
electro-magnetic force is inferior to that of steam, it becomes equal to
it, and perhaps superior in the production of small power, which may be
subdivided, varied, and introduced into employments or trades requiring
but little capital, and where the absolute value of the mechanical power
is less essential than the facility of producing instantaneously and at
pleasure the power itself. In this point of view electro-magnetic power
comes to complete, not to supersede, that of steam."





In the papers of the celebrated Lalande, recently presented to the Paris
_Academy of Sciences_, by M. Arago, there is a note to the effect that so
far back as the 25th of October, 1800, he and Burckhardt were of opinion,
from calculations, that there must be a planet beyond Uranus, and they
occupied themselves for some time in trying to discover its precise
position. This is a very curious fact for astronomers.





RECENT DEATHS.


JOEL R. POINSETT, LL.D., long distinguished in society and in affairs,
died at his residence in Statesburg, South Carolina, on the 12th of
December. The first American ancestor of Mr. Poinsett came to this country
from Soubisi, near Rochelle, in France, soon after the revocation of the
edict of Nantz. His father was a physician, and served in the Revolution
under Count Pulaski. He himself was born at Charleston on the second of
March, 1779, and, after having passed some time at the school of the Rev.
Timothy Dwight (afterward President of Yale College), at Greenfield,
Connecticut, he was sent, at the close of the Revolution, to England, to
complete his studies, and for the advantages of foreign travel. Returning
in 1800, when he was twenty-one years of age, he commenced the study of
law in the office of Mr. Desaussure, afterwards Chancellor of South
Carolina, Before his admission to the bar, he again embarked for Europe,
extending his travels to Switzerland, Bavaria, Austria, and the northern
countries of the continent. At St. Petersburg he became acquainted with
the Emperor Alexander, soon after his accession, and was received by him
with marked partiality, and often questioned respecting the peculiar
institutions of this country. On one occasion, after he had been
expatiating at large on the advantages of America, the Czar exclaimed,
"Were I not an emperor, I would be a republican." Declining the offer of a
place in the service of the Emperor, he commenced a tour into the East,
travelling through Persia and Armenia, and, returning to Europe, resided
for some time in its principal capitals. On the breaking out of
difficulties between the United States and Great Britain, in 1808, he
returned to his own country, and applied to Mr. Madison for a commission
in the army. Owing to some objections by the Secretary of War, he did not
obtain the commission, but was sent by the President to South America, to
ascertain the result of the revolutions which had recently occurred in
that quarter. While in Chili, he heard of the declaration of war between
England and America. Embarking in the frigate Essex, to return to this
country, with a view to enter the army, he was made a prisoner on the
surrender of that vessel to the British by Commodore Porter. The British
Commander refused to allow his return home with the rest of the prisoners,
regarding him as a dangerous enemy of England, and he therefore determined
to cross the continent to the Atlantic. He passed the Andes in the month
of April, when they were covered with snow, and, after great difficulties,
reached Buenos Ayres. He succeeded, in a Portuguese vessel, in reaching
Madeira, where, on his arrival, he learned that a treaty of peace had been
concluded. Soon after he reached South Carolina, he was elected to the
Legislature of that State, in which he devoted himself chiefly to the
establishment of a system of internal improvements. In 1821 he was elected
to Congress, from the Charleston District, and was twice re-elected to
that body. In 1822, he was sent to Mexico, by President Monroe, to obtain
information with regard to the government under Iturbide. He performed
this mission with signal success. Foreseeing the speedy downfall of the
imperial administration, he gave his advice against all connection with
it, on the part of this country. He had scarcely returned home, when
Iturbide abdicated the throne. Soon after the election of Mr. Adams, which
he had strongly opposed, Mr. Poinsett was again appointed Minister to
Mexico, whore he remained until the summer of 1829. His important services
in this period are amply detailed in a memoir of his political life, in
the first volume of the _Democratic Review_, and were warmly approved in
the first annual message of President Jackson. On returning to the United
States, he devoted himself to the pursuits of private life, in South
Carolina. When the States Rights controversy broke out, he again engaged
in political affairs, and became a prominent advocate of the principles of
the Union party, as opposed to Nullification. In 1836, he was nominated by
his friends as a candidate for the State Senate, and was elected with but
little opposition. On the formation of Mr. Van Buren’s cabinet, Mr.
Poinsett accepted the office of Secretary of War. On the election of Gen.
Harrison he retired to his home in South Carolina, where he devoted
himself to those literary pursuits which formed the pleasure of his life;
and thence he issued, only two years ago, those stirring appeals against
secession, which were among the most powerful influences for the
preservation of the endangered peace of the Union at that period. Mr.
Poinsett received the degree of Doctor of Laws from Columbia College in
this city, and he was a member of many learned societies in this country,
and in Europe. Besides his _Notes on Mexico_, written soon after his last
return from that country, he published several addresses, was a large
contributor to the _Southern Quarterly Review_ and other periodicals, and
furnished some important papers to the Paris Geographical Society, and
other learned associations abroad and at home.





MOSES STUART, D.D., of the Theological Seminary at Andover, died at his
residence in that town on the 4th of January, in the seventy-second year
of his age. He was born in Wilton, Conn., March 16, 1780; was graduated at
Yale College in 1799; and was a tutor in that institution from 1802 to
1804. After having studied the profession of the law, he turned his
attention to theology, and in 1806 was ordained pastor of the Central
Congregational church in New Haven. He was called to the Professorship of
Sacred Literature in Andover Theological Seminary in 1810, and continued
for nearly forty years to discharge its important duties. Professor Stuart
was a man of great natural abilities, honorable principles, and a strong
will; for a long period he occupied the first place among cultivators of
sacred learning in this country; and though younger men, with larger
opportunities, have recently attained to greater eminence, no one in the
same field has ever exercised a more important and advantageous influence.
His first considerable work was a _Hebrew Grammar_, published in 1823. It
scarcely deserves comparison with the more celebrated performance of
Gesenius, of which Professor Stuart himself gave to the public a
translation, more than twenty years after the publication of his own work;
but for some time after its original appearance it was the best Hebrew
Grammar in the English language. In 1825 he was associated with Professor
Robinson in the production of a _Greek Grammar of the New Testament_; in
1827 he published his _Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews_; in 1829
his _Hebrew Chrestomathy_, and in 1830 his _Course of Hebrew Study_. His
Commentary on the Hebrews, was received as an accession to the body of
permanent theological literature. It was spoken of in England as "the most
valuable philological aid" that had been published "for the critical study
of that important, and in many respects difficult book;" and the late Dr.
Pye Smith, one of the first biblical, theological, and classical scholars
in Great Britain, stated, that he felt it to be his duty to describe it as
"the most important present to the cause of sound biblical interpretation
that had ever been made in the English language." In Germany also it
secured for Professor Stuart the highest consideration; and it continues
in all countries to be regarded as one of the noblest examples of
philological theology and exegetical criticism. In 1832 Professor Stuart
published another great work of a similar character: his _Commentary on
the Epistle to the Romans_. It was distinguished for a profoundness of
research, for an intensity and minuteness of philological labor, and a
singleness of purpose to arrive at the meaning of the apostle, without
regard to any preconceived or partisan opinions, which obtained for it a
regard as an authority equal to that awarded to its predecessor. In 1845
he published a _Commentary on the Apocalypse_; a profoundly learned and
critical work, in which the interpretation of this difficult book varies
much from that which has been most generally received. In the same year he
also gave to the church a _Critical History and Defence of the Old
Testament Canon_. His devotion to biblical criticism continued to the
close of his life, and we believe, his last use of the pen was in the
correction of the concluding sheets of a volume of Commentaries.

In his later years Professor Stuart entered into political controversies,
and was particularly distinguished for his defence of the policy of Mr.
Webster, in a pamphlet entitled _Conscience and the Constitution_. He also
ventured very injudiciously into the field of classical criticism, in an
edition of _Cicero_, which was sharply reviewed by Professor Kingsley of
Yale College; and he lost reputation in his more legitimate sphere by a
controversy with Professor Conant, of Madison University, growing out of
his translation of the _Hebrew Grammar of Gesenius_. It is not to be
denied that in measuring his strength against that of these accomplished
scholars, he was signally unfortunate.

In his personal character he was simple, sincere, enthusiastic, brave, and
religious. He was well entitled to the great respect in which he was held
by the church. He had been ordained for high services, and he had
accomplished them. Every duty of which he was capable was finished, and he
could have added nothing to his good reputation if his years had been
prolonged.





WILLIAM GRIMSHAW, born in Ireland in 1781, but nearly all his life a
resident of this country, where he was for many years well known as a
writer, died near Philadelphia on the 8th of January. Besides editing and
rewriting a considerable portion of Baine’s _History of the Wars growing
out of the French Revolution_, he was the author of Histories of Great
Britain, France, and several other countries, which for a long time were
very generally used as text-books in schools, and he also wrote _The
American Chesterfield_, _The Ladies’ Lexicon_, and numerous smaller
volumes, which were creditable to his abilities. His reading was
extensive, and his knowledge of events during his lifetime, particularly
in British affairs, was minute and accurate. His mind lost none of its
vigor with the approach of age, and in his fine countenance, and imposing
figure, there were no appearances of decay. His love of reading continued
to the last, and within a year he frequently employed his pen on such
subjects as he took an especial interest in.





NICHOLAS GRAN DE DIEU SOULT, Marshal General of France, Duke of Dalmatia,
&c., died on the 26th of December, at his chateau of Soult Berg, near the
place where he was born. We have given in another part of this magazine an
estimate of his character. The Paris _Pays_ furnishes us a brief abstract
of his history. He was born at St. Amand (Tarn), March 29, 1769. His
father, who was a notary, seeing that he had no taste for his own
profession, allowed him to enter the army. The future Marshal of France
entered the Royal Regiment of Infantry in 1785, where he was soon remarked
by his aptitude for the functions of instructor. He was made
non-commissioned officer in 1790, and then passed rapidly through the
intermediate grades, until he reached that of Adjutant-General of the
Staff, when General Lefebvre attached him to his own service with the
grade of Chief of Brigade. In that quality he went through the campaigns
of 1794 and 1795 with the army of the Moselle, and owed to his talents, as
well as to his republican principles, a rapid promotion. Successively
raised to the rank of General of Brigade, and then to that of General of
Division, he took part in all the campaigns of Germany until 1799, when he
followed Massena into Switzerland, and thence to Genoa, where he was
wounded and taken prisoner. Set at liberty after the battle of Marengo,
and raised to the command of Piedmont, he returned to France at the peace
of Amiens, and was named one of the four Colonels of the Guard of the
Consuls. When the Empire was proclaimed, in 1804, he was nominated Marshal
of France, and during the campaign which terminated in Austerlitz, held
the command of the fourth corps of the grand army. After the conquest of
Prussia and the battle of Eylau, Marshal Soult solicited and obtained the
command of the second corps of the army of Spain, with which he overran
Galicia and the Austrians, and passed into Portugal, where he fought the
memorable battle of Oporto. Forced to abandon that city, when delivered up
by treason to the English, he effected into Galicia a bold and perilous
retreat, which did the greatest honor to his energy and presence of mind.
Being named Commander-in-Chief of the army of Spain, he marched to the
succor of Madrid, menaced by the Anglo-Spanish army, and his movement was
crowned with full success. He continued in this command until March, 1813,
when he was appointed in Saxony to the command-in-chief of the Imperial
Guard. The disasters of Vittoria decided Napoleon to again confer on
Marshal Soult the command of the French troops in Spain. The point then
was to defend the menaced frontier of France. Forced to fall back on
Toulouse, he there terminated by a brilliant engagement, due to most able
strategic arrangements, the fatal campaign of 1814. On the announcement of
the event at Paris he signed a suspension of arms, and adhered to the
reëstablishment of Louis XVIII., who presented him with the Cross of St.
Louis, and called him to the command of the 13th military division, and
then to the Ministry of War (Dec. 3, 1814). On March 8th, learning the
landing from Elba, he published the order of the day which is so well
known, and in which Napoleon is treated more than severely. On March 11th
he resigned his portfolio as Minister of War, and declared for the
Emperor, who, passing over the famous proclamation, raised him to the
dignity of Peer of France and Major General of the Army. After Waterloo,
where he fought most energetically, the Marshal took refuge at Malzieu
(Lozere) with General Brun de Villeret, his former aid-de-camp. Being set
down on the list of the proscribed, he withdrew to Dusseldorf on the banks
of the Rhine, until 1819, when a Royal ordinance allowed him to return to
France. He then went to live with his family at St. Amand, his native
place, and on his reiterated representations his marshal’s baton, which
had been withdrawn from him, was restored. Charles X. treated Marshal
Soult with favor, creating him knight of his orders, and afterward making
him Peer of France. After the revolution of July, 1830, the declaration of
the Chamber of Deputies of August 9th excluded him from that rank, but he
was restored to it four days later by a special nomination of Louis
Philippe, who soon after appointed him Minister of War. We shall not
follow Marshal Soult through the acts of his administrative career. He
always showed himself devoted to the constitutive principles of the
Government of July. He was twice named President of the Council of King
Louis Philippe, who elevated him to the dignity of Marshal General, of
which Turenne had been the last possessor. Since the revolution of
February, Marshal Soult has lived on his estate, in the midst of his
family, and almost forgotten in our present political agitations.





KARL FRIEDERICH RUNGENHAGEN, late Royal Director of Music at Berlin, was
born in that city on September 27, 1778. His father was a merchant. In
1801 he became member of the Singing Academy, and studied under Zetter. In
1814 he wrote the songs for a melo-drama, which was not successful. In
1815 he became director of the Singing Academy, with Zetter; most of his
religious music was composed after this time. In 1825 he was appointed to
the post of Royal Music Director, and in 1833, after Zetter’s death, he
became sole conductor of the Singing Academy. His influence has been
considerable upon the culture of music in Germany. Carl Maria Von Weber
was his friend, and Lortzing was one of his pupils. He died at Berlin on
the 22d of last December.





The journals of Moscow announce the death of the Armenian Archbishop,
MICHAEL SALLANTIAN, the most distinguished writer of Armenia at the
present day. He was born at Constantinople in 1782, and educated at the
Armenian monastery at Venice. He died at the age of sixty-nine at Moscow,
where he had been professor of theology and literature for sixteen years
before his elevation to the Archbishopric.





DR. GRAEFE, one of the most eminent veterans of European philology, died
suddenly at St Petersburg on November 30th. He was born at Chemnitz, in
Saxony, in July, 1780, but went to Russia in 1810, to assume the
professorship of Greek at the Academy of St. Petersburg.





The Russian General, Kiel, has died in Paris. He was employed by the
Emperor Nicholas in directing works of art in the Russian empire.





HERR MEINHOLD, author of the _Amber Witch_, died in Germany in December.





J. W. M. TURNER, the greatest of English artists, and the hero of Mr.
Ruskin’s brilliant book entitled _The Modern Painters_, died in London on
the 20th of December, at the age of 77. He had always a reluctance to have
his portrait taken, but the engraving accompanying this article—from a
sketch made without his knowledge—is said, by the _Illustrated London
News_ to be remarkably like him. It is understood that by his will he has
left a million dollars (£200,000) for the purpose of founding an
institution for the relief of of decayed artists, and has given it also
the chief part of his pictures, to adorn the building which is to be
occupied by it. The _Times_ says, "although it would be out of place to
revive the discussions occasioned by the peculiarities of Mr. Turner’s
style in his later years, he has left behind him sufficient proofs of the
variety and fertility of his genius to establish an undoubted claim to a
prominent rank among the painters of England. His life had been extended
to the verge of human existence; for although he was fond of throwing a
mystery over his precise age, we believe that he was born in Maiden-lane,
Covent-garden, in the year 1775, and was, consequently, in his 76th or
77th year. Of humble origin (he was the son of a barber), he enjoyed the
advantages of an accurate rather than a liberal education. His first
studies, some of which are still in existence, were in architectural
design; and few of those who have been astonished or enchanted by the
profusion and caprice of form and color in his mature pictures, would have
guessed the minute and scientific precision with which he had cultivated
the arts of linear drawing and perspective. His early manhood was spent
partly on the coast, where he imbibed his inexhaustible attachment for
marine scenery and his acquaintance with the wild and varied aspect of the
ocean. Somewhat later he repaired to Oxford, where he contributed for
several years the drawing to the _University Almanac_. But his genius was
rapidly breaking through all obstacles, and even the repugnance of public
opinion; for before he had completed his 30th year he was on the high road
to fame. As early as 1790 he exhibited his first work, a water-colored
drawing of the entrance to Lambeth, at the exhibition of the Academy, and
in 1793 his first oil painting. In November, 1799, he was elected an
associate, and in February, 1802, he attained the rank of a Royal
Academician. We shall not here attempt to trace the vast series of his
paintings from his earlier productions, such as the "Wreck," in Lord
Yarborough’s collection, the "Italian Landscape," in the same gallery, the
_pendant_ to Lord Ellesmere’s "Vanderwelde," or Mr. Munro’s "Venus and
Adonis," in the Titianesque manner, to the more obscure, original, and, as
some think, unapproachable productions of his later years, such as the
"Rome," the "Venice," the "Golden Bough," the "Téméraire," and the
"Tusculum." But while these great works proceeded rapidly from his
palette, his powers of design were no less actively engaged in the
exquisite water-colored drawings that have formed the basis of the modern
school of "illustration." The "Liber studiorum" had been commenced in
1807, in imitation of Claude’s "Liber veritatis," and was etched, if we
are not mistaken, by Turner’s own hand. The title-page was engraved and
altered half-a-dozen times, from his singular and even nervous attention
to the most trifling details. But this volume was only the precursor of an
immense series of drawings and sketches, embracing the topography of this
country in the "River Scenery" and the "Southern Coast"—the scenery of the
Alps, of Italy, and great part of Europe—and the ideal creations of our
greatest poets, from Milton to Scott and Rogers, all imbued with the
brilliancy of a genius which seemed to address itself more peculiarly to
the world at large when it adopted the popular form of engraving. These
drawings are now widely diffused in England, and form the basis of several
important collections, such as those of Petworth, of Mr. Windus, Mr.
Fawkes, and Mr. Munro. So great is the value of them that 120 guineas have
not unfrequently been paid for a small sketch in water-colors; and a
sketch-book, containing chalk-drawings of one of Turner’s river tours on
the continent, has lately fetched the enormous sum of 600 guineas. The
prices of his more finished oil paintings have ranged in the last few
years from 700 to 1,200 or 1,400 guineas. All his works may now be said to
have acquired triple or quadruple the value originally paid for them. Mr.
Turner undoubtedly realized a very large fortune, and great curiosity will
be felt to ascertain the posthumous use he has made of it. His personal
habits were peculiar, and even penurious, but in all that related to his
art he was generous to munificence; and we are not without hope that his
last intentions were for the benefit of the nation, and the preservation
of his own fame. He was never married, he was not known to have any
relations, and his wants were limited to the strictest simplicity. The
only ornaments of his house in Queen Anne-street were the pictures by his
own hand, which he had constantly refused to part with at any price, among
which the "Rise and Fall of Carthage" and the "Crossing the Brook," rank
among the choicest specimens of his finest manner.

"Mr. Turner seldom took much part in society, and only displayed in the
closest intimacy the shrewdness of his observation and the playfulness of
his wit. Every where he kept back much of what was in him, and while the
keenest intelligence, mingled with a strong tinge of satire, animated his
brisk countenance, it seemed to amuse him to be but half understood. His
nearest social ties were those formed in the Royal Academy, of which he
was by far the oldest member, and to whose interests he was most warmly
attached. He filled at one time the chair of Professor of Perspective, but
without conspicuous success, and that science has since been taught in the
Academy by means better suited to promote it than a course of lectures. In
the composition and execution of his works, Mr. Turner was jealously
sensitive of all interference or supervision. He loved to deal in the
secrets and mysteries of his art, and many of his peculiar effects are
produced by means which it would not be easy to discover or to imitate.

"We hope that the Society of Arts or the British Gallery will take an
early opportunity of commemorating the genius of this great artist, and of
reminding the public of the prodigious range of his pencil, by forming a
general exhibition of his principal works, if, indeed, they are not
permanently gathered in a nobler repository. Such an exhibition will serve
far better than any observations of ours to demonstrate that it is not by
those deviations from established rules which arrest the most superficial
criticism that Mr. Turner’s fame or merit are to be estimated. For nearly
sixty years Mr. Turner contributed largely to the arts of this country. He
lived long enough to see his greatest productions rise to uncontested
supremacy, however imperfectly they were understood when they first
appeared in the earlier years of this century; and, though in his later
works and in advanced age, force and precision of execution have not
accompanied his vivacity of conception, public opinion has gradually and
steadily advanced to a more just appreciation of his power. He is the
Shelley of English painting—the poet and the painter both alike veiling
their own creations in the dazzling splendor of the imagery with which
they are surrounded, mastering every mode of expression, combining
scientific labor with an air of negligent profusion, and producing in the
end works in which color and language are but the vestments of poetry. Of
such minds it may be said in the words of Alastor:

    "Nature’s most secret steps
  He, like her shadow, has pursued, where’er
  The red volcano overcanopies
  Its fields of snow and pinnacles of ice
  With burning smoke; or where the starry domes
  Of diamond and of gold expand above
  Numberless and immeasurable halls,
  Frequent with crystal column and clear shrines
  Of pearl, and thrones radiant with chrysolite.
  Nor had that scene of ampler majesty
  Than gems or gold—the varying roof of heaven
  And the green earth—lost in his heart its claims
  To love and wonder...."

                 [Illustration: THE LATE J. W. M. TURNER]

                         THE LATE J. W. M. TURNER


BASIL MONTAGU, an eminent philosophical and legal writer, was the
illegitimate son of the well-known statesman, John fourth Earl of
Sandwich, many years First Lord of the Admiralty, by the unfortunate Miss
Margaret Reay, who was assassinated, in 1779, by her affianced lover, the
Rev. Mr. Hackman. The tragic affair, which excited immense interest at the
time, and which gave rise to various romantic stories, is to be found in
most series of judicial investigations, and especially in a collection of
celebrated trials recently published. It appears that Margaret Reay was
the daughter of a stay-maker in Covent-garden, and served her
apprenticeship to a mantuamaker. Having attracted the attention of Lord
Sandwich, he treated her from that period until her assassination, with
the greatest tenderness and affection. He introduced to her a young ensign
of the 68th Regiment, then in command of a recruiting party at Huntingdon,
in the neighborhood of the mansion of the Montagues. Mr. Hackman from the
first moment was desperately in love with her, and his passion increased
with the daily opportunities afforded by invitations he received to Lord
Sandwich’s table. With the object of continuing his attentions, and the
hope of ultimately engaging her affections, he quitted the army, and,
taking orders, obtained the living of Wiverton, in Norfolk. That Miss Reay
had given him some encouragement, is proved by the tenor of their
correspondence; but prudential motives induced her afterwards to refuse
the offer of his hand, and to intimate a necessity for discontinuing his
visits. Stung by this unexpected termination of his long-cherished
expectations, Hackman’s mind became unsettled; on the 7th of April, 1779,
he was occupied all the morning in reading Blair’s _Sermons_; but in the
evening, as he was walking towards the Admiralty, he saw Miss Reay pass in
her coach, accompanied by Signora Galli. He followed, and discovered that
she alighted at Covent-garden Theatre, where she went to witness _Love in
a Village_. He returned to his lodgings, armed himself with a brace of
pistols, went back to the theatre, and when the performance was over, as
Miss Reay was stepping into her coach, he took a pistol in each hand, one
of which he discharged at her, and killed her on the spot, and the other
at himself, but it did not take effect. He then beat his head with the
butt of the pistol, to destroy himself, but was, after a struggle, secured
and carried before Sir John Fielding, who committed him to Bridewell, and
he was shortly after tried at the Old Bailey, before the celebrated
Justice Blackstone, found guilty, and hanged at Tyburn on the 19th of the
month.

Basil Montagu was born in 1770, and received his education at the Charter
House. He was called to the English bar by the Society of Gray’s Inn, the
19th of May, 1798, and soon obtained considerable practice as a
conveyancer. It was, however, by his legal authorship and reporting that
he became particularly distinguished in the profession. His various works
and reports on the subject, principally of the Law of Bankruptcy, were of
high estimation and lasting utility. In 1801, he produced his _Summary of
the Law of Set Off_, with an Appendix of Cases, argued and determined in
the Courts of Law and Equity, in one volume, octavo; in 1804-5, in four
volumes, _A Digest of the Bankrupt Laws_, with a Collection of the
Statutes and of the Cases, which reached three editions, and brought him
into immediate notice and considerable practice; and, some time afterward,
he printed a pamphlet on Bankrupts’ Certificates. His fame in this branch
of forensic learning procured him the appointment of a Commissioner of
Bankruptcy. Mr. Montagu wrote also on philosophical subjects. Among his
productions of this tendency were _Thoughts of Divines and Philosophers;
Selections from Taylor, Hooker, Bishop Hall, and Bacon_. He edited an
edition of Lord Bacon’s works, in seventeen volumes. Another bent which
his mind took, placed him by the side of Romilly and Mackintosh in the
cause of Humanity. He had in his nature an abhorrence of depriving any
living thing of life, and with regard to his own diet he totally abstained
from animal food. This led him to bestow his active attention towards
putting a stop to capital punishment. In 1809 he published _Opinions of
Different Authors on the Punishment of Death_. The work was so well
received, that he added a a second and third volume to it. In 1811, when
the important question occupied Parliament, he edited _The Debates on a
Bill for Abolishing the Punishment of Death for Stealing in a Dwelling
House_. In 1815 he reprinted a tract originally published in 1801, called
_Hanging not Punishment enough for Murderers_. Mr. Basil Montagu, who had
some years ago been made a Queen’s counsel, died at Boulogne on the 27th
of November, in the eighty-second year of his age.





REAR-ADMIRAL HENRY GAGE MORRIS, entered the navy at the early age of
twelve, and served as midshipman throughout the French and American wars.
He was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, April 2, 1793. He was engaged
at the capture of the French frigate _Sybille_, in 1783, and at the attack
on Martinique, in 1793. He was promoted to post rank August 12, 1812, and
was made rear-admiral in 1847. He died at Beverley, 24th ult. aged
eighty-two. Admiral Morris was younger brother of the late Captain Amherst
Morris, being second son of Colonel Roger Morris, a member of the
Governor’s Council at New-York, by Mary, daughter of Frederick Phillipse,
of this city. This family of Morris is one of great antiquity, deriving
its descent from Elystan Glodrydd, a famed chieftain of Wales in the
eleventh century.





MR. SAPIO the once celebrated tenor singer, was born in London, in 1792.
In his early life he was page to Queen Caroline, consort of George IV. He
made his first appearance on the metropolitan stage at Drury Lane, the 1st
December, 1824, as the _Seraskier_, in the "Siege of Belgrade," and he
soon attained and long preserved a high vocal reputation. He died in
obscurity, in London, about the end of November.





One of the most distinguished chiefs of the war of Greek independence,
General JATRAKO, is just dead at Athens. He was one of the primates of
Marna; his family, as his name indicates, have for many generations back
been famous for their hereditary medical talents, and the tradition exists
among them that a branch of their family formerly passed from Sparta to
Italy, translated their name into Medici, and gave rise to the celebrated
family of that name.





PRIESSNITZ, the celebrated founder of hydropathy, died at Graefenberg on
the 26th of November, at the age of fifty-two. In the morning of that day
Priessnitz was up and stirring at an early hour, but complained of the
cold, and had wood brought in to make a large fire. His friends had for
some time believed him to be suffering from dropsy of the chest, and at
their earnest entreaty he consented to take a little medicine, exclaiming
all the while, "It’s of no use!" He would see no physician, but remained
to the last true to his profession. About four o’clock in the afternoon of
the 26th he asked to be carried to bed, and upon being laid down he
expired! In early life he received serious injury in the chest from an
accident, and he used to say himself that his constitution was bad; that
nothing but his own mode of life and his own "cure" would have sustained
him. It is not known what attempts will be made to carry on the
establishment at Graefenberg, which was in full activity at the moment of
his death. The most probable conjecture is, that his eldest daughter and
her husband (a Hungarian of property) will carry it on, with the aid of
some physician who has studied Priessnitz’s method. This may succeed to a
certain extent, for the place and neighborhood are admirably adapted for
taking the water-cure, and the _prestige_ of Priessnitz’s name, as well as
the tradition of his practice, will long survive him: but the attraction
which brought patients, not only from the neighboring cities, but from the
remotest parts of the world, is gone. It is not exactly known what amount
of property Priessnitz left, but it is supposed to be nearly £100,000.
When it is considered how small, compared to that given to other
physicians, was the remuneration he received from his patients, and that
thirty years ago, Priessnitz was a poor peasant, this fortune gives some
measure of his immense success.





GEORGE DUNBAR, the distinguished Professor of Greek Literature in the
University of Edinburgh, died on the 6th of December, at his residence in
that city. The natural decay attending even an otherwise green old age has
been for some years aggravated by a virulent internal malady, which at the
commencement of the present season compelled him to relinquish his
academic duties. He was born at the village of Caldingham, in
Berwickshire, in 1774. In early life he labored as a gardener, but an
accidental lameness, which lasted throughout his subsequent life,
incapacitated him from active bodily employment. His attention was then
devoted to literature. He soon became a scholar, and in truth a ripe and
good one. Going to Edinburgh, he readily obtained, on proof of his
acquirements, a tutorship in the family of Lord Provost Fettes. Having
been shortly after selected as assistant to Professor Dalziel, he was
appointed, on that professor’s death, to the Greek chair in the Edinburgh
University, in 1805. The duties of this responsible position he discharged
most zealously and ably. The published works of Professor Dunbar are well
known. The _Collectanea Minora_, the _Collectanea Majora_, and the _Greek
Grammar_, have all had great reputation. His chief production—massive in
every sense—the main object of his life of learned toil, was his Greek
Lexicon, which was given to the world with his name in 1840.





MR. HENRY LUTTRELL, one of the ornaments of a society of what may be
termed conversational wits, died on the 19th of December, at the advanced
age of eighty-six. He was the friend and companion, _hand impari passu_,
of Jeckyll, Mackintosh, Jeffrey, Alvanley, Sydney Smith, and others of
that brilliant school, and of which the Misses Berry, Rogers, Moore, and
but a few others, are still left. A correspondent of the _Times_ says: "He
charmed especially by the playfulness and elegance of his wit, the
appropriateness and felicity of illustration, the shrewdness of his
remarks, and the epigrammatic point of his conversation. Liveliness of
fancy was tempered in him with good breeding and great kindness of
disposition; and one of the wittiest men of his day, he could amuse and
delight by the keenness of playful yet pungent sallies, without wounding
the feelings of any one by the indulgence of bitterness and ill-nature."





English journals notice with expressions of regret the death in
Philadelphia of R. C. TAYLOR, on the 26th of October, aged sixty-two. Mr.
Taylor emigrated in the year 1830, being previously well known as a Fellow
both of the Antiquarian and of the Geological Societies. He had published
a work of great care and research while resident in his native county,
Norfolk, _Index Monasticus for East Anglia_; and had made some useful
explorations into the fossil remains on the coast of Norfolk. In America
he wrote for various philosophical societies, and published, in 1848, his
work on the Statistics of Coal, by which alone he was much known to the
public of this country.





The Royal University of Berlin has lost by death since Christmas, MM.
Lachmann, Stuhr, Jacobi, Erman, and Dr. CHARLES THEODORE FRANZ, who died
at Breslaw early in January, at the untimely age of forty-five. For eleven
years Dr. Franz occupied the chair of Classical Philology in the
University of Berlin. He is the author of a variety of works: in the first
rank of which stand his Criticisms on the Greek Tragic Poets, and his
several collections of Greek and Latin inscriptions before unpublished.
The London Morning Chronicle remarks that the continent never before lost
so many great scholars in one year as in 1851.





WILLIAM JACOB, F.R.S., a profound writer on science and agriculture, was
born in 1762. His work, _An Inquiry into the Precious Metals_, has been
held in high estimation. His other principal productions were
_Considerations on the Price of Corn_; _Tracts on Corn-Laws_; and a _View
of Agriculture in Germany_. Mr. Jacob, who was formerly Comptroller of
Corn Returns in the Board of Trade, died on the 17th of December, at his
residence in London, aged eighty-eight.





MR. PAUL BARRAS, died in Paris from wounds received in the contests
between the people and the military, on the second day of the usurpation
of Louis Napoleon. M. Barras resided in New-York about twenty years, and
was engaged here as a teacher of his native language, and as a
correspondent of one of the Parisian journals. He was an amiable man, of
considerable talents, and enthusiastic in his attachment to Republicanism.
He wrote several articles on American subjects in the _Revue de Paris_.





LADIES’ FASHIONS FOR FEBRUARY.


                              [Illustration]

In matters of fashion there have been very few changes since our last
publication. We are in the midst of the gay season, but its modes, until
disturbed by the approach of spring, were fixed before the holidays, and
for the most part have already been reported. The Paris journals, we may
remark, however, dwell much on the unusual ascendency of black, in furs,
velvets, cloths, and other heavy stuffs, for walking and carriage dresses,
and on the greater demand than in recent winters for every species of
embroidery.

In the first of the above figures, representing a promenade costume, we
have a high dress of rich silk; the skirt has plaided tucks woven in the
material; it is long, and very full. Manteau of velvet, very richly
embroidered; a broad black lace is set on round the shoulders in the style
of a cape, and the cloak is embroidered above it. Capote of white silk, of
a very elegant form, with deep bavolet or curtain; a droop of small
feathers on the left side.

The second figure, or visiting costume, of heavy silk, with four flounces,
and corresponding waistcoat. The waistcoat now takes the first place in a
lady’s toilette, and may be considered a triumph of luxury and elegance,
reviving every description of embroidery, and forcing the jewellers to be
constantly bringing out some novelty in buttons, &c. It is made very
simple or very richly ornamented: for instance, those of the most simple
description are made either of black velvet, embroidered with braid, and
fastened with black jet buttons, or of cachemire; and a pretty style, of
straw color, embroidered in the same colored silk, and closed with fancy
silk bell buttons, whilst a few may be seen in white, quilted and
embroidered with oak leaves and rose-buds. The rich style of waistcoat
being covered with embroideries, and being closed up the front with
buttons of brilliants. As a general rule, the waistcoat is made high up
the throat, round which is a fall of lace, or opens _en cœur_, having a
_fichu à plastron_ of embroidery, worn under. The waistcoat has also two
pockets.






FOOTNOTES


    1 The large outer porch of Cowley’s house had chambers above it and
      beneath the window in front a tablet was affixed, upon which was
      inscribed the epitaph "upon the living author" which Cowley had
      written for himself, whilst living in retirement here, commencing

        "Hic, O Viator, sub lare parvulo,
        Couleius hic est conditus hic jacet."

      It is represented in its original condition in the two views we have
      engraved.

    2 Some additional rooms have been added to the house by the same
      occupant, who has, however, religiously preserved all the old rooms,
      which still exhibit the "fittings" that existed in Cowley’s time.
      The bed-chambers are wainscotted with oaken panels. The staircase is
      a very solid structure, with ornamental balusters, leading toward
      the small study in which the poet wrote,—a little back room, about
      five feet wide, looking upon the garden. It may be distinguished in
      our back view of the house, by a figure placed at the window. Cowley
      ended his life in this house at the early age of forty-nine.

    3 Brayley, in his History of Surrey, states that Cowley accompanied by
      his friend Dean Spratt, having been to see a "friend," did not set
      out for his walk home until it was too late, and had drunk so deep,
      that they both lay out in the fields all night; this gave Cowley the
      fever that carried him off. Brayley’s authority for this slander
      (which is not borne out by the poet’s previous course of life), is
      "Spence’s Anecdotes."

    4 Life and Letters of Joseph Story, Associate Justice of the Supreme
      Court of the United States, and Dane professor of law at Harvard
      University. Edited by his son, William W. Story. Two vols. Boston:
      Little & Brown, 1851.

    5 As an example of the gravity and formality with which proceedings in
      matters of this nature were conducted, even as late as the end of
      the sixteenth century, take the subjoined palinode or recantation of
      a Flemish ecclesiastic, who had been guilty of the offence of
      doubting the evection, or bodily transport through the air, of
      witches and wizards. The original may be found in Delrio, at the end
      of the Appendix, in his 5th book:—

      "I Cornelius Loseus Gallidius, born in the town of Gouda, in
      Holland, now, by the command of the renowned and illustrious Lord
      Nuncio Apostolic, the Lord Octavius Bishop of Tricaruis, arrested
      and detained in the Imperial Monastery of St. Maximin, near Treves,
      on account of certain tracts ’On True and False Witchcraft,’ rashly
      and presumptuously by me written, published, and sent to be printed
      at Cologne, without the perusal or permission of the superiors of
      this place: whereas I am informed for certain that in the aforesaid
      books, and also in certain of letters on the same subject, sent
      clandestinely to the clergy and senate of Treves, and others, for
      the purpose of impeding the course of justice against witches and
      magicians, there are contained many articles which are not only
      erroneous and scandalous, but also suspected of heresy, and savoring
      of sedition: I therefore hereby revoke, condemn, reject, and
      repudiate, as if they had never been said or asserted by me, the
      said articles, as seditious and temerarious, contrary to the common
      judgment of learned theologians, to the decision and bulls of the
      supreme Pontiffs, and to the practice, and statutes, and laws of the
      magistrates and judges, as well as of this Archdiocese of Treves, as
      of the other provinces and principalities, in the order in which the
      same are hereunto annexed.

      "1. _Imprimis._ I revoke, condemn, reject, and hold as disproved,
      what both in words and writing I have often and to many persons
      pertinaciously asserted; and what I would have had taken as the head
      and chief ornament of my disputations, to wit, that what is written
      touching the corporeal evection or translation from place to place
      of witches and magicians, is to be held as a vain superstition and
      figment, as well because that opinion savors of heretical pravity,
      as because it partakes of sedition, and so also savors of the crimes
      of _lese majesté_. 2. In the second place, I revoke what I have
      pertinaciously, but without solid reasons, alleged against the
      magistracy, in letters secretly sent to several, that is to say,
      that the course of procedure against witches is erroneous and
      fantastical: asserting, moreover, that those witches were compelled
      by the severity of torture to confess acts that they had never done;
      that innocent blood was shed by a cruel judicature; and that by a
      new alchemy gold and silver were extracted from human blood. 3.
      Thereby, and by the like assertions, partly diffused by private oral
      communications among the vulgar, partly by various letters addressed
      to both branches of the magistracy, imputing to superiors and judges
      the exercise of tyranny towards the subjects. 4 And consequently,
      inasmuch as the most reverend and illustrious Archbishop and Prince
      Elector of Treves not only permits witches and magicians to be
      subjected to deserved punishment in his diocese, but has also
      ordained laws regulating the mode and cost of the procedure against
      witches, thereby with inconsiderate temerity tacitly insinuating the
      charge of tyranny against the said Elector of Treves. 5. _Item._ I
      revoke and condemn these following conclusions, to wit, that there
      are no such beings as sorcerers, who renounce God and worship the
      Devil, who bring on tempests, and do the work of Satan and such
      like, but that all these things are dreams. 6. Moreover that magic
      is not to be called sorcery, nor its practisers to be deemed
      sorcerers, and that that that place of Exod. xxii, (’Ye shall not
      suffer sorcerers to live’) is to be understood of those who slay
      with material poison, naturally administered. 7. That no contract
      exists or can exist between man and the demon. 8. That demons do not
      assume bodies. 9. That the life of Hilary, written by St. Jerome, is
      not authentic. 10. That the demon cannot carnally know mankind. 11.
      That neither demons nor witches can excite tempests, rain, hail,
      &c., and that what is alleged in that behalf is mere dreams. 12.
      That spirits and forms can be seen by mankind separate from matter.
      13. That it is rash to assert that whatever demons can do magicians
      can also by the help of demons. 14. That the assertion that the
      superior demon can expel the inferior is erroneous and derogatory to
      Christ.—Luke xi. 15. That the Popes in the bulls do not allege that
      magicians and sorcerers perpetrate such acts as above mentioned.

      "All these and the like, my assertions, with my many calumnies,
      falsehoods, and sycophancies, petulantly, indecorously, and
      mendaciously expressed against the magistracy, as well secular as
      ecclesiastical, wherewith my writings on witchcraft abound, I hereby
      expressly and deliberately condemn, recant, and reject, earnestly
      beseeching pardon of God and my superiors, and faithfully promising
      that henceforth I will not, either by word of mouth or by writing,
      by myself or others, in any place where I shall happen to be, teach,
      promulgate, or assert the same or any of them. If I shall do to the
      contrary, I subject myself thenceforth and henceforth to the pains
      of the law against relapsed heretics, recusants, seditious
      misdemeanants, and convicts of _lese majesté_, to the pains of
      libellous sycophants publicly convicted, and also to those enacted
      against perjurers. I submit myself also to arbitrary correction at
      the pleasure of the Archbishop of Treves, and of the other
      magistrates under whom I shall happen to live, and who may be
      certified of my relapse or violated undertaking, that they may
      punish me according to my deserts, in name, fame, goods, and body.
      In testimony of all which I have, with my proper hand, subscribed
      this my recantation of the aforesaid articles, in presence of the
      notary and witnesses."

      "(Signed,)   Cornelius Loseus Gallidius."

      "Attestation.—These presents were done in the Imperial Monastery of
      Saint Maximin Without, near Treves, in the abbatial chamber, there
      being then present the Venerable and Excellent Lord Peter Binsfeldt,
      Bishop of Azof, Vicar-General of the Most Reverend Lord Archbishop
      of Treves, our Most Gracious Lord in matters spiritual; Reiner,
      Abbot of the said monastery; Bartholomew Bodegem, Reader of either
      Law in the Ecclesiastical Court of Treves; George Helffenster,
      Doctor of Sacred Theology, Dean of the Collegiate Church of St.
      Simon, in the city of Treves; and John Golmann, Doctor of Laws,
      Canon of the said Church, and Seal-Bearer of the Court of Treves,
      &c.; in the year of our Lord 1592, Treves style, on Monday, the 15th
      day of the month of March, in presence of me, the Notary
      underwritten, and of Nicholas Dolent, and Daniel Major, the
      Amanuensis and Secretary respectively of the Reverend Lord Abbot,
      trustworthy witnesses specially called and required hereto.

      "Subscribed, Adam Tecton, Notary.

      "Compared with the original and found to agree, by me, the
      under-written Secretary of the town of Antwerp.

                                                              S. Kieffel."

    6 Lockhart’s Spanish Ballads.

    7 Continued from page 109.

    8 We are indebted to Dr. Francis for a revised copy, with additions,
      of his very interesting address here printed, which was delivered at
      the Printers’ Banquet in New-York on the 16th of January.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INTERNATIONAL MONTHLY MAGAZINE - VOLUME V - NO II***



CREDITS


December 13, 2006

            Project Gutenberg Edition
            Joshua Hutchinson
            Online Distributed Proofreading Team This file was produced
            from images generously made available by Cornell University
            Digital Collections



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 20102-0.txt or 20102-0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/1/0/20102/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

      You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

      You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

      You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***
