The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Moving Picture Girls in War Plays, by
Laura Lee Hope


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Moving Picture Girls in War Plays
       Or, The Sham Battles at Oak Farm


Author: Laura Lee Hope



Release Date: January 12, 2007  [eBook #20348]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS IN WAR
PLAYS***


E-text prepared by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, J. P. W. Fraser, Emmy, and
the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(https://www.pgdp.net/c/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 20348-h.htm or 20348-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/3/4/20348/20348-h/20348-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/3/4/20348/20348-h.zip)





THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS IN WAR PLAYS

Or

The Sham Battles at Oak Farm

by

LAURA LEE HOPE

Author of "The Moving Picture Girls," "The Moving Picture
Girls at Sea," "The Outdoor Girls Series,"
"The Bobbsey Twins Series," "The Bunny
Brown Series," Etc.

Illustrated







The Saalfield Publishing Co.
Akron, Ohio        New York
Made in U.S.A.

Copyright, 1916, by
Grosset & Dunlap



[Illustration: "HERE THEY COME!" YELLED PAUL, AS THE FIRST OF THE
SOLDIERS CAME INTO VIEW--_Page 78._

_The Moving Picture Girls in War Plays._]




CONTENTS

          CHAPTER                                PAGE

              I THE OLD NEWSPAPER                  1

             II OFF FOR OAK FARM                  11

            III HARD AT WORK                      21

             IV A REHEARSAL                       30

              V A DARING RIDER                    40

             VI A NEEDED LESSON                   48

            VII ESTELLE'S LEAP                    61

           VIII A MASSED ATTACK                   70

             IX MISS DIXON'S LOSS                 79

              X LIEUTENANT VARLEY                 87

             XI WONDERINGS                        97

            XII AN INTERRUPTION                  103

           XIII FORGETFULNESS                    111

            XIV IN THE SMOKE                     120

             XV THE HOSPITAL TENT                130

            XVI A RETAKE                         137

           XVII ESTELLE'S STORY                  143

          XVIII "WHAT CAN WE DO?"                149

            XIX A BIG GUN                        158

             XX A WRONG SHOT                     164

            XXI THE BIG SCENE                    171

           XXII ALICE DOES WELL                  179

          XXIII A BAD FALL                       186

           XXIV A DENIAL OF IDENTITY             192

            XXV REUNION                          199




THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS
IN WAR PLAYS




CHAPTER I

THE OLD NEWSPAPER


"There, I think I have everything in that I'll need at Oak Farm."

"Everything! Good gracious, Ruth, how quickly you pack! Why, I've oceans
and oceans of things yet to go into my trunk! Oh, there are my scout
shoes. I've been looking everywhere for them. I'll need them if I do any
hiking in those war scenes," and Alice DeVere dived under a pile of
clothing, bringing to light a muddy, but comfortable, pair of walking
shoes. "I don't know what I'd do without them," she murmured.

"Alice!" cried Ruth, her sister, and the shocked tone of her voice made
the younger girl look up quickly from the contemplation of the shoes.

"Why, what have I done now?" came in rather injured accents. "I'm sure I
didn't use any slang; and as for not having all my things packed as
quickly as you, why, Ruth, my dear, you must remember that you are an
exception--the one that proves the rule."

"I didn't say you used any slang, Alice dear. Nor did I intimate that
you were behind in your packing. I'll gladly help you. But it---- Those
shoes!" and she pointed a finger dramatically at the "brogans," as Alice
sometimes called them.

"Those shoes? What's the matter with them? They're a perfectly good
pair, as far as I can see; and they're mighty comfortable."

"Oh, Alice--mighty?"

"Well, I can't get over using such words, especially since we heard so
many strong expressions from the sailors when we were in those sea
films. Mine sound weak now. But what's the matter with the shoes, Ruth?"

"They're so muddy, dear. They will soil all your pretty things if you
put them in your trunk in that condition. You don't want that, do you?"

"I should say not--most decidedly! Especially since pretty things with
me last about one day. I don't see how it is you keep yours so nice and
fresh, Ruth."

"It's because I'm careful, dear."

"Careful! Bosh! Care killed a cat, they say. I'm sure I'm careful,
too---- Oh, here's that lace collar I've been looking everywhere for!"

She made a sudden reach for it, there was a ripping, tearing sound, and
Alice was gazing ruefully at a rent in the sleeve of her dress.

"Oh, for the love of trading stamps!" she ejaculated.

"Alice!" gasped Ruth.

"Well, I don't care! I had to say something. Look at that rip! And I
wanted to wear this dress to-day. Oh----"

"That's just it, Alice," interrupted Ruth, in a gentle, chiding voice.
"You are too impulsive. If you had reached for that lace less hurriedly
you wouldn't have torn your dress. And if you took care of your things
and didn't let your laces and ribbons get strewn about so, they would
last longer and look fresher. I don't want to lecture----"

"I know you don't, you old dear!" and Alice leaned over--they were both
sitting on the floor in front of trunks--and made a motion as though to
embrace her sister. But a warning rip caused her to desist, and, looking
over her shoulder, she found her skirt caught on a corner of the trunk.

"There! Did you ever?" she cried. "I can't even give you a
sisterly hug without pulling myself to pieces. I'm all
upset--excited--unstrung--Wellington Bunn doing Hamlet isn't to be
compared to me. I must get straightened out."

"I guess that's it--you're all tangled up in your packing," said Ruth,
with a laugh. "Truly, I don't mean to lecture, Alice, but you must go a
bit slower."

"Not with this packing--I can't, and be ready in time. Why! you are all
prepared to go. I'll just throw the things into my trunk and----"

"Now, don't do that. Don't throw things in. You can put in twice as much
if you lay the things in neatly. I'll help you. But--oh, dear----!"

Ruth made a gesture of despair.

"What's the matter now? What are you registering?" and Alice used the
moving picture term for depicting one of the standard emotions. The
girls were both moving picture actresses.

"I'm trying to register dismay at the muddy state of those scout shoes,
as you call them, Alice. They may be nice and comfortable, as you say,
and really they do look so. And I have no doubt you will find them
useful if we have to do much tramping over the hills of Oak Farm.
But----"

"Oh, we'll have to do plenty of hiking, as Russ Dalwood warned us,"
Alice put in. "You know, there are to be several Civil War plays filmed,
and they didn't have automobiles or motor cycles to get about on in
those days. So we'll have to walk. And it will be over rough ground, so
I thought these shoes would be just the thing."

"They will, Alice. I must get a pair myself, I think. But I was just
wondering how you got them so terribly muddy. How did you?"

"Oh, Paul Ardite and I were in that Central Park scene the other day.
You know, 'A Daughter of the Woods,' and some of the scenes were filmed
in the park. It was muddy, and I didn't get a chance to have the brogans
cleaned, for I had to jump from the park into the ballroom scene of 'His
Own Enemy,' and there was no time. We had to retake in that scene
because one of the extras was wearing white canvas shoes instead of
ballroom slippers, and the director didn't notice it until the film was
run out in the projection room.

"So that accounts for the mud on the shoes, Ruth. But I suppose I can
'phone down to the janitor and have him send them out to the Italian at
the corner. He'll take the mud off."

"No, I don't know that you can do that, Alice. We haven't any too much
time. If I had an old newspaper, I could wrap the shoes up in that for
you, and pack them in the bottom of your trunk. Then the mud wouldn't
soil your clothes."

"An old newspaper? Here's a stack of them. Daddy just brought them from
his room. Guess he's going to throw them away."

Alice reached up to a table and lifted the top paper from a pile near
the edge. She opened it with a flirt of her hand and was about to wrap
the muddy shoes in it when some headlines on one page caught her
attention. She leaned eagerly forward to read them, and spent more than
a minute going over the article beneath.

"Well," remarked Ruth finally, with a smile, "if you're going to do
that, Alice, you'll never get packed. What is it that interests you?"

"This, about a missing girl. Why, look here, Ruth, there's a reward of
ten thousand dollars offered for news of her! Why, I don't remember
seeing this before. Look, it's quite startling. A San Francisco
girl--Mildred Passamore--mysteriously disappears while on a train bound
for Seattle--can't find any trace of her--parents distracted--they've
got detectives on the trail--going to flood the country with photographs
of her--all sorts of things feared--but think of it!--ten thousand
dollars reward!"

"Let me see," and in spite of the necessity for haste in the packing,
Ruth DeVere forgot it for the moment and came to look over her sister's
shoulder to read the account of the missing California girl.

"It is strange," murmured Ruth. "I don't remember about that. I wonder
if she could be around here? The New York police are wonderful in
working on mystery cases."

"But the funny part of it is," said Alice, "that I haven't noticed
anything about it in the New York papers. Have you? This is a San
Francisco paper. Naturally they'd have more about it than would the
journals here. But even the New York papers would have big accounts of
such a case, especially where such a large reward is offered."

"That's so," agreed Ruth. "I wonder why we haven't seen an account of it
in our papers. I read them every day."

"What's that? An account of what? Have the papers been missing
anything?" asked a deep, vibrating voice, and an elderly man came into
the girls' room and regarded them smilingly.

"Oh, hello, Daddy!" cried Alice, blowing him a kiss. "I'm almost ready."

"Hum, yes! You look it!" and he laughed.

"It's this, Daddy," went on Ruth, holding out the paper. "We were going
to wrap Alice's muddy shoes in this sheet, when we happened to notice an
account of the mysterious disappearance of a Mildred Passamore, of San
Francisco, for whom ten thousand dollars reward is offered. There has
been nothing in the New York papers about it."

Mr. DeVere, an old-time actor, and now employed, with his daughters, by
a large motion picture concern, reached forth his hand for the paper.
He gave one look at the article, and then his eyes went up to the
date-line. He laughed.

"No wonder there hasn't been anything in the New York papers of to-day
about this case," he said. "This paper is four years old! But I remember
the Passamore case very well. It created quite a sensation at the time."

"Poor girl! Was she ever found?" asked Ruth.

"Why, yes; I believe she was," said Mr. DeVere, in rather dreamy tones.
He was looking over other articles in the paper.

"Who got the reward?" asked Alice.

"Eh? What's that?" Her father seemed to come back from a mental journey
to the past.

"I say, who got the reward?"

"What reward?"

"Why, Daddy! The one offered for the finding of Miss Passamore. The girl
we just told you about--in the paper--ten thousand dollars. Don't you
remember?"

"Oh, yes. I was thinking of something else I just read here. Oh, the
reward! Well, I suppose the police got it. I don't remember, to tell you
the truth. I know that her disappearance at the time created quite a
sensation."

"And are you sure she was found?"

"Oh, yes, quite sure. Look here!" and with a smile on his face he
leaned forward, one rather fat finger pointing to the article he had
just been reading. "I was wondering how you girls got hold of this old
back-number paper, but I see it's one of several I saved because they
had printed notices of my acting. This is a very good and fair criticism
of my work when I was appearing in Shakespearian drama--a very fair
notice, ahem!" and Mr. DeVere leaned back in his chair, a gratified
smile on his face.

"A fair notice! I should say it was!" laughed Alice. "It does nothing
but praise you, and says the others offered you miserable support."

"Well, it was fair to _me_," said Mr. DeVere. "Yes, I remember that tour
very well. We were in California at the time of this Miss Passamore's
disappearance. Helen Gordon was my leading lady then. Ah, yes, that was
four years ago."

"No wonder there wasn't anything in to-day's New York papers," said
Alice. "Well, let me wrap up my shoes, and I'll try to have this packing
done in time to get out to Oak Farm."

"Yes, I just stopped in to see how you were coming on," put in her
father. "Mr. Pertell wants to get started, and it won't do to disappoint
him. There are to be several thousand men and horses in the production,
and the bill for extras will be heavy."

"I'll hustle along, Daddy!" cried Alice. "Do you want that paper?"

"No, you may take it. I'll just tear out this page with the theatrical
notice of myself."

He handed the remainder of the paper to his daughter, who, with the help
of her sister, wrapped up the muddy shoes.

Then the girls proceeded with the putting in of other articles and
garments that would be needed during their stay at Oak Farm.

"I wonder----" began Alice, when there came a knock on their door, and a
voice demanded:

"I say, girls!--are you there?"

"Yes, Russ. Come on in!" answered Alice.

"Oh, and with the room looking the way it is!" remonstrated Ruth.

"Can't be helped. Russ knows what packing is," Alice declared, as a
tall, good-looking young man entered.

"Come on!" he cried. "No time to lose."

"What's the matter? Is the place on fire?" asked Ruth.

"No. But there's got to be a retake in that last scene of 'Only a
Flivver,' and Mr. Pertell sent me to get you. It won't take long, but
they're in a hurry for it. Come on! Paul is waiting outside in the
machine and I've got the camera. Hustle!"




CHAPTER II

OFF FOR OAK FARM


"What's that, Russ? A retake?" asked Alice.

"Yes, of that auto scene in the park."

"Is that the one I'm in?" Ruth inquired.

"Yes. You're both in it, and so is Paul. It's the scene where Mr. Bunn
is struck by the auto mud-guard--not hurt, you know, and you, Ruth, jump
out to give first aid."

"What's the matter with the scene?" asked Alice. "I certainly struck him
all right with the mud-guard."

"Yes, that part was all right," Russ admitted. Alice had been running
the automobile in the scene.

"And didn't I do my first aid business well?" Ruth demanded.

"Yes," Russ acknowledged. "Your part came out perfect. But just at the
critical moment--you know, where Mr. Bunn was supposed to think he was
dying and wanted to right the wrong he had done in cutting his daughter
off in his will with only a dollar--some boys got in the way of the
camera. They were outsiders, butting in, the way they always do when we
film stuff in the park. It wouldn't have been so bad, only one of the
youngsters began to pull off some funny stuff right in range of Mr.
Bunn's agonized face. I didn't see him at the time, or I'd have stopped
the running of the film. It was only when we got it in the projection
room that we discovered it.

"So Mr. Pertell ordered a retake of that one scene, and it's got to be
done in a hurry. It won't take long. Mr. Bunn will meet us in the park.
Be sure and wear the same things you had on that day. It won't do to
have you get out of the auto in one dress, Ruth, and, a second later,
kneel down beside Mr. Bunn in a gown entirely different."

"All right, Russ, I'll be careful."

"Oh, dear! But my packing!" sighed Alice. "I'll never get it done, and
we must start for Oak Farm----"

"Mr. Pertell will have to make allowances," said Russ, quickly. "Come
on--move the boat! You won't be needed in the real war scenes for a
couple of days, anyhow, though I suppose there'll be rehearsals. But it
can't be helped. This retake is holding up the whole film, and it's to
be released next week."

Delaying only long enough to put on the proper dresses and to tell their
father where they were going, Ruth and Alice DeVere were soon on their
way to Central Park, where the scene was to be filmed, or photographed
over again--a "retake," as it is called, the bane alike of camera men
and directors.

And while the girls--the moving picture girls--are on their way to do
over a bit of work, I shall take the opportunity of telling my new
readers something about Ruth and Alice DeVere.

I have called them just what they are: "The Moving Picture Girls," and
that is the title of the first volume of this series, which depicts them
and their adventures.

Their mother had died some years previously, leaving them to the care of
their father, Hosmer DeVere, at one time a talented actor in the
legitimate drama. But a throat affection forced him to give up his
acting and, at the opening scene in the first volume, we find him and
his daughters in rather straitened circumstances, living in a
second-rate apartment house in New York.

Across the hall dwelt Russ Dalwood, with his mother. Russ was a "camera
man." That is, he took moving pictures in the big studios and out of
doors for the Comet Film Company, of which Mr. Frank Pertell was manager
and director.

It was Russ who suggested to Mr. DeVere a way out of his troubles. He
could not act in the "legitimate," as his voice was gone; but no voice
is needed to appear on the films for the movies, since a mere motion of
the lips suffices, when any speaking is to be done. The "silent drama"
has been the salvation of many an actor who, if he had to declaim his
lines, would be a failure.

At first Mr. DeVere would not hear of acting before the camera, but he
soon came to know that greater actors than he had fallen in line with
the work, especially since the pay was so large, and finally he
consented. An account of his success and of the entrance of his
daughters into the field is given in the initial book.

Ruth, the elder girl, was, like her father, of a romantic turn. Also she
was rather tall and willowy, as Mr. DeVere had been before he had taken
on flesh with the passing of the years; and she was cast for parts that
suited her type. She was deliberate in her actions, and in "registry."

Alice, like her late mother, was warm-hearted and impulsive, plump,
vivacious and full of fun. Both girls were excellent movie actresses. In
the company they had joined was Mr. Wellington Bunn, an old actor, who
hoped, some day, to appear in Hamlet--Hamlet in the legitimate.

Paul Ardite, who played light parts, had become very fond of Alice.
Russ Dalwood had a liking for Ruth, and the four had many pleasant hours
in each other's company.

Pearl Pennington was the leading lady at times, and was rather disposed
to domineer over our girls, as was her chum, Laura Dixon. Mrs. Maguire
was the "mother" of the film company. She portrayed old lady parts, and
her two grandchildren, Tommie and Nellie, the orphans, were cast for
characters suitable to them.

Carl Switzer, a German-American, did comedy parts and was a good fellow,
though occasionally he would unconsciously say some very funny things.
His opposite in character was Pepper Sneed, the grouch of the company.
But Pepper could do valuable work, especially as a villain, and so he
was kept on. As for Pop Snooks, the company could not have got along
without him. It was Pop, the property man of the company, who made many
of the devices used when the company went to "Oak Farm," as told in the
second volume, where scenes for farm dramas were filmed. Pop could use a
drawbridge in one scene, and, in the next, convert it into a perfectly
good cow-barn. Pop was a valuable man.

There were other members of the company, of more or less importance,
whom you will meet as this story progresses.

It was in the third volume of the series, "The Moving Picture Girls
Snowbound," that Ruth and Alice succeeded in getting "the proof on the
film" that saved Mr. DeVere from an unjust charge.

From the cold and frostiness of Deerfield the girls went to Florida,
where "Under the Palms," many stirring acts were filmed. It was here
that Alice and Ruth helped find two girls who were lost in the wilds of
the Everglades.

"The Moving Picture Girls at Rocky Ranch" gave Ruth and Alice a taste of
cowboy life, and though rivals tried to spoil some of the valuable
films, they were not altogether successful, even though a prairie fire
figured in their schemes.

The girls, with their father, had recently returned from a perilous
trip. This is told about in the volume immediately preceding the one you
are reading--"The Moving Picture Girls at Sea." In that Alice and Ruth
proved, not only their versatility as actresses, but also that they
could be brave and resourceful in the face of danger. And they more than
repaid the old sailor, Jack Jepson, who saved their lives, by doing him
a good turn.

"Well, life at Oak Farm will be vastly different from that on the _Mary
Ellen_," remarked Alice, as she looked from the automobile as it swung
along through the New York streets on the way to the park.

"Yes," agreed her sister. "But I like it up there."

"There are going to be some strenuous times," said Paul. "We've got to
do some hustling work."

"All the better," declared Russ. "I like to keep the film running. This
sitting about all day and reeling off only ten feet makes me tired."

"You like action!" laughed Ruth.

"Yes; and plenty of it."

Oak Farm was the property of the Apgars. There was Mr. Belix Apgar, the
father, Nance, his wife, and Sandy, an energetic son. The farm was
located in New Jersey, about forty miles from New York, and it provided
a picturesque background for the scenes evolved by Mr. Pertell and his
company. It was during a scene on the farm, some time before, that a
valuable discovery had been made, which endeared the moving picture
girls and their chums to the Apgars.

"How did Mr. Pertell come to pick out Oak Farm for the war plays?" asked
Ruth, as the automobile bounced along.

"Well, I suggested it to him," answered Russ. "I remembered the
background, and I felt sure we could get all sorts of settings there to
make the proper scenes. There are hills, mountains, valleys, streams,
bridges, waterfalls, cliffs and caves. Everything needed for perfectly
good war dramas."

"How did they come to want that sort of stuff?" asked Paul.

"Oh, war stuff is going big now," Russ answered. "All this talk of
preparedness, you know, the war in Europe, and all that. The public is
fairly 'eating up' war pictures."

"I hope we don't have to fire any guns!" exclaimed Ruth, with a shudder.

"You'll see and hear plenty of 'em fired," Russ told her. "There are to
be some big battle scenes and cavalry charges. But one of you will be
back of the firing line, I believe."

"How is that?" asked Alice.

"Well, one of you girls is to be cast for an army nurse, and the other
will be a spy. The spy has to carry a revolver."

"I'm going to be the spy!" cried Alice, impetuously. "I know how to
shoot a gun."

"I'd rather be the nurse," murmured Ruth, and truly she was better
fitted for that part.

"'A Girl in Blue and A Girl in Gray' is to be the title of the war
play--or at least one of them," went on Russ. "There will be some lively
scenes, and I'll be on the jump most of the time."

"Are you going to film them all?" asked Paul.

"Oh, no. I'm to have several assistants, but I'll be in general charge
of the camera squad. So, girls, look your prettiest."

"They always do that," said Paul.

"Thank you!" came in a feminine duet.

A little later the place where the retake was to be made was reached.
Mr. Bunn was on hand, wearing his air of "Hamletian gloom," as Alice
whispered, and the work of retaking the scenes was soon under way.

This time all went well. Alice drove her "flivver" at Mr. Bunn, who was
properly knocked down and looked after by Ruth. No small boys, with an
exaggerated sense of humor, got in the way, and the girls were shortly
back in their apartment. They had moved to a more pretentious home since
their success in moving pictures, and the Dalwoods had taken an
apartment in the same building.

"And now to get on with my packing!" sighed Alice. "All I am sure of is
that I have my 'brogans' in."

"I'll help you," offered Ruth.

Two days later the Comet Film Company, augmented for the occasion, was
at the depot in Hoboken, ready to take the Lackawanna train out to Oak
Farm, New Jersey, where it nestled in the hills of Sussex County.

"I don't see how they are going to take battle scenes with just this
company," observed Alice, as she surveyed her fellow workers. "And where
are the guns and horses?"

"They'll come up later," Russ informed her. "There are to be two big
companies and a couple of batteries, but they won't be on hand until
they are really needed. It costs too much to keep them when they are not
working."

"Are you all here?" asked Mr. Pertell hurrying along the seats with a
handful of tickets--"counting noses," so to speak.

"All here, I think," answered Russ.

"Where is Carl Switzer?" asked the manager.

"He was here a minute ago," Alice said.

"Well, he isn't here now," remarked Mr. Bunn.

"And almost time for the train to start!" exploded the director. "We
need him in some of the first scenes to-morrow. Get him, somebody!"

"Hey, Mister! Does yer mean dat funny, moon-faced man what talks like a
pretzel?" asked a newsboy in the station.

"Yes, that's Mr. Switzer," was the answer. "Where is he?"

"I jest seen him go out dat way," and the boy pointed toward the doors
leading to the street in front of the ferry. This street led over to the
interned German steamships at the Hoboken piers.




CHAPTER III

HARD AT WORK


"Great Scott!" ejaculated Mr. Pertell. "I might have known that if
Switzer came anywhere near his German friends he'd be off having a
confab with them. Go after him, somebody! It's only five minutes to
train time, and it will take those Germans that long to say how-de-do to
one another, without getting down to business."

"I'll get him," offered Paul, hurrying off toward the swinging doors.

"I'll go wit' youse," said the newsboy. "I likes t' listen t' him talk.
Does he do a Dutch act?"

"Sometimes," laughed Paul.

"Youse is actors, ain't youse?" the boy asked.

"Movies," answered Paul, hurrying along toward the entrance to the
shipyards.

"I wuz in 'em onct," went on the lad. "Dey wuz a scene where us guys wuz
sellin' papes, an' anudder guy comes along, and t'rows a handful of
money in de street--he had so much he didn't know what t' do wit'
it--dat wuz in de picture," he explained. "I wuz in de scene."

"Was it real money?" asked Paul.

"Naw--nottin' but tin," and the tone expressed the disappointment that
had been experienced. "But we each got a quarter out of it fer bein' in
de picture, so we didn't make out so worse. Dere's your friend now," and
the newsboy pointed to the comedian standing at the entrance to one of
the piers, talking to the watchman. Both had raised their voices high,
and were using their hands freely.

"Hey, Mr. Switzer, come along!" cried Paul. "It's time for the train."

"Ach! Der train! I t'ought der vos plenty of time. I vant to see a
friend of mine who is living on vun of dese wessels. Haven't I got der
time?"

"No, not a minute to spare. You can see him when you come back."

"Ach! Maybe I neffer comes back. If I get in der war plays I may be
shotted."

"Oh, come on!" laughed Paul, while the newsboy went into amused
contortions at the exaggerated language and gestures of Mr. Switzer.

"See you later, Hans!" called the comedian to the watchman at the pier.

"Ach, Himmel! Vot I care!" the latter cried. "I don't care even if you
comes back neffer! You can't get on dose ship!" and he waved his hand at
the big vessels, interned to prevent their capture by the British
warships.

"I was having quite an argument with him," said Mr. Switzer, speaking
"United States," as he walked back to the station with Paul.

"Wouldn't he let you go on board?"

"No. Took me for an English spy, I guess. But I know one of der
officers, and I thought I'd have time for a chat with him."

"Mr. Pertell is in a hurry," said the young actor.

"Well, if we miss this train there's another."

"Not until to-morrow, and he wants to start the rehearsals the first
thing in the morning."

"Ach! Den dat's differunt alretty yet again, wasn't it so?" and Mr.
Switzer winked at the admiring newsboy, and tossed him a quarter, with
the advice to get a pretzel and use it for a watch charm. Whereat the
boy went into convulsive laughter again.

"What do you mean, Switzer, by going off just at train time?" demanded
the indignant director and manager.

"Train time is der time to go off--so long as you don't go off der
track!" declared the German. "But I vanted to go on--not go off--I
vanted to go on der ships only dey vouldn't let me. However, better late
than be a miss vot's like a bird in der hand," and with a shrug of his
shoulders and a last wink at the newsboy, Mr. Switzer went out to the
waiting train with the others.

It was a long and rather tedious ride to Oak Farm, which lay some miles
back in the hills from the railroad station, and it was late afternoon
when the company of moving picture actors and actresses arrived, to be
greeted by Sandy Apgar and his father and his mother.

"Well, I _am_ glad to see you all again!" cried Sandy, shaking hands
with Mr. DeVere, the girls and the others. "It seems like old times!"

"We're glad dot you are glad!" declaimed Mr. Switzer. "Haf you any more
barns vot need burning down?"

"Not this time," laughed Sandy. "One barn-burning is enough for me." A
barn, an old one, had been destroyed on the occasion of the previous
visit of the moving picture company--a burning barn being called for in
one of the scenes.

Oak Farm was a big place, and, in anticipation of the war plays to be
enacted there, several buildings had been built to accommodate the extra
actors and actresses, where they could sleep and eat. The DeVere girls
and the other members of the regular company would board at the
farmhouse as they had done before.

Hard work began early the next day. There was much to do in the way of
preliminary preparation, and Pop Snooks, the property man, with a corps
of assistants, was in his element. While Ruth, Alice and the others were
going through a rehearsal of their parts without, of course, the proper
scenic background, the property man was setting up the different "sets"
needed in the various scenes.

While they were working on one piece, Sandy Apgar came along on his way
to look after some of the farming operations.

"Hello!" he cried. "Say! you fellows did that mighty quick."

"Did what?" asked Alice, who stood near, not being engaged for the time
being.

"Why, dug that well. I didn't know you could strike water so soon," and
he pointed to an old-fashioned well with a sweep, which stood not far
from the house. "What'd you use--a post-hole digger?" he asked. "What
sort of water did you strike?"

Before any one could answer him he strode over to the well, and, as he
looked down into it, a puzzled look came over his face.

"Well, I'll be jiggered!" he cried. "'Tain't a well at all! Only an
imitation!"

And that was what it was. Some canvas had been stretched in a circle
about a framework, and painted to represent stones. The well itself
stood on top of the ground, not being dug out at all. It made a
perfectly good water-scene, with a sweep, a chain, a bucket and all.

"I'm supposed to stand there and draw water for the thirsty soldiers,"
explained Ruth, coming up at this point.

"Huh! How are you goin' to git water out of there?" demanded Sandy.
"It's as dry as a bone. Why, I've got a good well over there," and he
pointed to a real one, under an apple tree.

"That's in the shade--couldn't get any pictures there," explained Russ.
"The well has to be out in the open."

"But what about water?" asked Sandy. "Hang me if I ever heard of a well
without water!"

"We'll run a hose up to this one," explained Pop Snooks. "A man will lie
down behind the well-curb, where he won't show in the camera. As fast as
Ruth lowers her bucket into the well the man'll fill the pail with water
for the soldiers to drink. It'll be quicker than a real well, and if we
find we don't like it in one place we can move it to another. This is a
movable well."

"Well, I'll be----" began Sandy, but words failed him. "This is sure a
queer business," he murmured as he strode off.

The hard work of preparation continued. All about the farm queer parts
of buildings were being erected, extra barns, out-houses, bits of fence,
and the like.

In what are called close-up scenes only a small part of an object shows
in the camera, and often when a magnificent entrance to a marble house
is shown, it is only a plaster-of-Paris imitation of a door with a
little frame around it.

What is outside of that would not photograph; so what is the use of
building it? Of course in many scenes real buildings figure, but they
are not built for the purpose.

In one of the war plays a small barn was to be shown, and a soldier was
supposed to jump through the window of this to escape pursuit. As none
of the regular buildings at Oak Farm was in the proper location, Pop
Snooks had been ordered to build a barn.

He did. That is, he built one side of it, propping it up with braces
from behind, where they would not show. The window was there, and some
boards; so that, seen through the camera, it looked like a small part of
a big out-building.

Some hay was piled on the ground to one side, away from the camera, and
it was on this hay that the escaping soldier would land. Then Ruth was
to come to him, and go through some scenes. But these would be interior
views, which would be taken in the improvised studio erected on the farm
for this purpose.

Mr. Switzer was to be the soldier, and would plunge through the barn
window head first. He was called on to rehearse the scenes a few days
after the semblance of a barn had been put in position and the hay laid
out to make his landing safe.

"Are you ready?" asked Mr. Pertell, who was directing the scene. "All
ready, there, Switzer?"

"Sure, as ready as I ever shall be."

"All right, then. Now, you understand, you come running out of those
bushes over there, and when you get out you stop for a minute and
register caution. Look on all sides of you. Then you see the barn and
the open window. Register surprise and hope. You say, 'Ah, I shall be
safe in there!'

"Then you run, look back once or twice to see if you are pursued, and
make a dive, head first, through the open window on to the hay. All
ready now?"

"Sure, I'm ready!"

"How about you, Russ?"

"Let her go."

"All ready, then! Camera!"

Russ began to grind away at the film. Mr. Switzer had taken his place in
the clump of bushes, his ragged Union garments flapping in the wind. He
came out, looked furtively around, and then, giving the proper
"registration," he advanced cautiously toward the barn.

"Go on now--run!" cried Mr. Pertell through his megaphone.

The German actor ran. He made a beautiful leap through the window, and
the next moment there came from him howls of dismay.

"Donner vetter! Ach Himmel! Ach! My face! My hands! Hey, somebody! bring
a pail of water! Quick!"




CHAPTER IV

A REHEARSAL


Mingled in German and English came the shouts of dismay from Herr
Switzer inside the dummy shed, through the window of which he had leaped
on to the hay.

"Oh, what is it?" cried Ruth, clasping her hands and registering
"dismay" unconsciously.

"He must have fallen and hurt himself," ejaculated Alice. "Do, Paul, go
and see what it is."

"Stop the camera!" yelled Mr. Pertell through his megaphone. "Don't
spoil the film, Russ. You got a good scene there. He went through the
window all right, and his yells won't register. Stop the camera!"

"Stopped she is," reported Russ.

Then those of the players who had been looking on and wondering at Mr.
Switzer's cries could hurry to his rescue.

For it is a crime out of the ordinary in the annals of moving pictures
for any one not in the scene to get within range of the camera when an
act is being filmed. It means not only the spoiling of the reel,
perhaps, but a retaking of that particular action. When Russ ceased to
grind at the camera crank, however, it was the same as when the shutter
of an ordinary camera is closed. No more views can be taken. It was safe
for others to cross the field of vision.

"What's the matter?" cried Paul, who, with Ruth and Alice and some of
the others trailing after him, was hurrying toward the false front of
boards that represented a shed.

"Did a cow critter or a sheep step on you?" Russ questioned.

"Ach! My face! My clothes! Ruined!" came in accents of deep disgust from
the actor. "Never again will I leap through a window without knowing
into what I am going to land. Ach!"

"What happened?" asked Paul, trying to keep from laughing, for the
player's voice was so funnily tragic.

"What happened? Come and see!" cried Mr. Switzer. "I have into a
chicken's home invaded myself already!"

"Invaded himself into a chicken's home!" exclaimed Mr. Pertell. "What in
the world does he mean?"

"I guess he means he sat down in a hen's nest!" chuckled Paul, and this
proved to be the case.

Going around to the other side of the erected boards, the players and
others saw a curious sight.

Seated on the hay, his face, his hair, his hands, and his clothing a
mass of the whites and yellows of eggs, was Carl Switzer. He held up his
fingers, dripping with the ingredients of half a dozen omelets.

"The chicken's home was right here, in the hay--where I jumped. I landed
right in among the eggs--head first. Get me some water--quick!" implored
the player.

"Didn't you see the eggs before you jumped among 'em?" asked Mr.
Pertell.

"See them? I should say not! Think you I would have precipitated myself
into their midst had I done so?" indignantly demanded Mr. Switzer,
relapsing into his formally-learned English. "I have no desire to be a
part of a scrambled egg," he went on. "Some water--quick!"

While one of the extra players was bringing the water, Sandy Apgar
strolled past. He was told what had happened.

"Plumped himself down in a hen's nest, did he?" exclaimed the young
proprietor of Oak Farm. "Wa'al, now, if you folks go to upsettin' the
domestic arrangements of my fowls that way I'll have t' be charging you
higher prices," and he laughed good-naturedly.

"Ach! Dat is better," said Mr. Switzer, when he had cleansed himself.
"How came it, do you think, Mr. Apgar, that the hen laid her eggs right
where I was to make my landing when escaping from the Confederates?"

"Huh! More than one hen laid her eggs there, I reckon," the farmer said.
"There must have been half a dozen of 'em who had rooms in that
apartment. You see, it's this way. Hens love to steal away and lay their
eggs in secret places. After you folks built this make-believe shed and
put the hay in, I s'pose some of my hens seen it and thought it would be
a good place. So they made a nest there, and they've been layin' in it
for the last few days."

"More as a week, I should say!" declared Mr. Switzer in his best German
comedian manner. "There were many eggs!"

"Yes, you did bust quite a few!" said Sandy, critically looking at the
disrupted nest. "But it can't be helped."

"Well, the film wasn't spoiled, anyhow," observed Mr. Pertell. To him
that was all that counted. "You got him all right as he went through the
window, didn't you, Russ?"

"Oh, yes. It wasn't until he was inside, down behind the boards and out
of sight, that the eggs happened."

"No more eggs for me!" declared the comedian. "I shall never look a
chicken in the face again."

"Go on with the scene," ordered the director. "You are supposed to steal
out to the barn to give the hidden soldier food," he said to Ruth. "You
come out from the house, and are astonished to see a man's head sticking
out of the shed window. You register surprise, and start to run back to
the house, but the soldier implores you to stay, and you reluctantly
listen to him. Then he begs for food----"

"But don't bring me a hard-boiled egg, whatever you do!" called Mr.
Switzer.

"No funny business now," warned the director, with a laugh. "Go on now,
and we'll see how you do it."

After one or two trials Mr. Pertell announced himself as satisfied and
the filming of that part of the war drama went on.

So many details in regard to the taking of moving pictures have been
given in the previous books of this series that they need not be
repeated here. Suffice it to say that the pictures of the players in
motion are taken on a long celluloid strip of film, just as one picture
is taken on a square of celluloid in a snap-shot camera.

This long reel of film, when developed, is a "negative." From it a
"positive" strip of film is made, and this is the one that is run
through the projection machine throwing the pictures on the white screen
in the darkened theatre. The pictures taken are very small, and are
greatly magnified on the screen.

So much for the mechanical end of the business. It may interest some to
learn that the photo-play, as seen in the theatre, is not taken all at
once, nor in the order in which the scenes are seen as they are reeled
off.

When a play is decided on, the director or one of his helpers goes over
the manuscript and picks out all the scenes that take place in one
location. It may be in a parlor, in a hut, on the side of a mountain, in
a lonely wilderness, on a battlefield, on a bridge--anywhere, in fact.
And several scenes, involving several different persons, may take place
at any one of these places.

It can be understood that it would involve a great deal of work to
follow the logical sequence of the scenes. That is to say, if the first
scene was in an office showing a girl taking dictation from her
employer, and the next showed the same girl and her employer on a
ferryboat, and the third scene went back to the office, where some
papers were being examined, it would mean a loss of time to photograph,
or film, the first office scene, then take every one involved in the
act to the ferryboat, and then back to the office again.

Instead, the two office scenes, and possibly more, are taken at one
time, on the same film, one after the other, without regard to whether
they follow logically or not. Afterward the film is cut apart, and the
scenes fitted in where they belong.

So, too, all the scenes pertaining to a hut in the wilderness, on a
bridge, in the woods, in a parlor--it makes no difference where--are
taken at the same time. In this way much labor and expense are saved.

But it makes a queer sort of story to an uninitiated person looking on;
and sometimes the players themselves do not know what it is all about.

So Mr. Pertell wanted to get all the scenes centering around the shed at
the same time, though they were not in sequence. And Ruth and Mr.
Switzer and the others in the east went through their parts with the
shed as a background.

In one scene Ruth had to discover the hidden soldier. Then she had to
steal out to him with food. Later, at night, she was to help him to
escape. Then, a week later, she was to go out to the same shed and
discover a letter he had hidden in the hay. That ended the scenes at
the shed, and it could be taken away to make room for something else.

"Oh, Ruth, you did that splendidly!" exclaimed Alice, as her sister
finished her work and went up on the shady porch to rest.

"Did you like it? I'm glad."

"Like it? It was great! Where you discovered that letter in the hay,
your face showed such natural surprise."

"I'm glad it didn't register merriment."

"Why?"

"Because, as I picked up the letter, I found a big blot of the yellow
from the hens' eggs on it. I hope it doesn't show in the picture. I had
all I could do to keep from laughing when I thought of Mr. Switzer in
the omelet scene."

"Oh, well, you know they want all white stuff yellow when they make
pictures."

"In the studio, but not outdoors."

This is a fact. As the scenes in the studio are taken in the glare of a
special kind of electric light, all white objects, even the collars and
cuffs of the men, are yellow in tone, though in the picture they show
perfectly white. This is due to the chemical rays of the lights used.
Out of doors, under sunlight, colors are seen in their own hues.

"You did very well in that funny little scene with Paul," said Ruth to
her sister.

"You mean in the swing under the apple tree?"

"Yes."

"I was so afraid he would swing me too high," Alice went on. "He was
cutting up so. I told him to stop, but he wouldn't."

"It was very natural. I think it will show well. Hark! what's that?"
cried Ruth, leaping to her feet.

"Thunder," suggested Alice, as a distant, rumbling noise came to their
ears.

"Sounds more like big guns."

"Oh, that's what it is!" agreed Alice. "They are going to rehearse one
of the battle scenes this afternoon, I heard Mr. Pertell say. The
soldiers must have come, and they're practising over in the glen. Come
on over and watch. We're in on the scenes later, but we can watch now."

"All right," agreed Ruth. "Wait until I get my broad-brimmed hat, the
sun is hot up here."

Presently the two sisters, with Paul Ardite and some other members of
the company, were strolling over the fields toward the scene of the
distant firing. As they came in sight of several hundred men and horses,
they saw the smoke of cannon and heard the shouting of the director and
his assistants who were using big megaphones. It was the rehearsal of
one of the many battle scenes that were to take place about Oak Farm.

"Oh, look at that girl ride!" suddenly exclaimed Alice, pointing to a
young woman who dashed past on a spirited horse. "Isn't she a wonder?"

"She is indeed," agreed Ruth. "I wonder who she is?"

"One of the extras," said Paul. "A number of them have just arrived.
We'll begin active work soon, and film some big scenes with you girls in
them."

Alice gazed across the fields toward the figure of the girl on
horseback. There was something spirited in her riding, and, though she
had never seen her before, Alice felt strangely drawn toward the new
player.




CHAPTER V

A DARING RIDER


"Come on now, Confederates!"

"No, you Union chaps hold back there in ambush. You're not to dash out
until you get the signal. Wait!"

"Keep that horse out of the way. He isn't supposed to dash across,
riderless, until after the first volley."

"Put in a little more action! Fall off as though you were shot, not as
though you were bending over to see if your horse had a stone under his
shoe! Fall off hard!"

"And you fellows that do fall off--lie still after you fall! Don't
twitch as though you wanted to scratch your noses!"

"If some of 'em don't stay quiet after they fall off they'll get stepped
on!"

"All ready now! Come with a rush when the signal's given!"

Mr. Pertell and his men were stationed near a "battery" of camera men,
who were ready to grind away; and the director and his assistants were
calling their instructions through big megaphones. To reach the soldiers
in the more distant parts of the field recourse was had to telephones,
the wires of which were laid along the ground in shallow trenches,
covered with earth so that the trampling of the horses would not sever
them.

"Get that battery farther back among the trees!" cried Mr. Pertell to
one of his helpers. "It's supposed to be a masked one, but it's in plain
sight now. Even the audience would see it, let alone the men it's
supposed to fire on. Get it back!"

"Yes, sir," answered the man, and he telephoned the instructions to the
assistant director in charge of a battery of field guns that had been
thundering away--the sound which had brought Ruth and Alice to the
scene.

"Do we have any part in the battle scenes?" asked Ruth.

"Yes, quite big parts," Paul informed her. "But you don't go on to-day.
This is only a rehearsal."

"But they've been firing real powder," remarked Alice, "and it looks as
though they were going to fire more," and she pointed to where men of
the masked battery were ramming charges down the iron throats of their
guns.

"Yes, they're firing, and charging, and doing all manner of stunts, and
the camera men are grinding away, but they aren't using any film," went
on Paul. "It's just to get every one used to working under the
excitement. They have to fire the guns so the horses will get so they
don't mind them when the real time comes."

Hundreds of extra players had been engaged to come to Oak Farm for these
battle scenes in the drama, "A Girl in Blue and A Girl in Gray," and
some of them were already on hand with their mounts. As has been said,
special accommodations had been erected where they were to stay during
the weeks they would be needed. There were more men than women among the
extra people, though a number of women and girls were needed in the
"town" scenes.

Most of the men were former members of the militia, cowboys and
adventurers, all of whom were used to hard, rough riding. This was
necessary, for when battle scenes are shown there must be some "killed,"
and when a man has a horse shot from under him, or is shot himself,
riding at full speed, even though the cartridges are blank, the action
calls for a heavy fall, sudden and abrupt, to make it look real. And
this is not easy to do, nor is it altogether safe with a mob of riders
thundering along behind one.

Yet the men who take part in these battle scenes do it with scarcely a
thought of danger, though often many of them are hurt, as are the
horses.

In brief the story of the play in which Ruth was to take the part of a
girl in Blue, and Alice of a girl in Gray, was this. They were cousins,
and Ruth was visiting Alice's home in the South when the war broke out.
Alice, of course, sided with her people, and loved the gray uniforms,
while Ruth's sympathies were with the North.

Ruth determined to go back North and become a nurse, while Alice,
longing for more active work, offered her services as a spy to help the
Confederacy. Though on opposite sides, the girls' love for one another
did not wane.

Then came the scenes of the war. Battles were to be shown, and there
were plots and counter-plots, in some of which Ruth and Alice had no
part. Mr. DeVere was cast for a Northern General, and the character
became him well. Later on Alice and Ruth were to meet in a hospital
among the wounded. Alice was supposed to get certain papers of value to
her side from a wounded Union officer. As she was escaping with them
Ruth was to intercept her, and the two were to have a "strong" scene
together.

Alice, ignoring the pleadings of her cousin and about to depart with
the papers, learns that the officer from whom she took them was the same
one that had saved her father's life on the battlefield. She decides to
forego her mission as a spy, even though it may mean the betrayal of her
own cause, when the news comes in of Lee's surrender, and her sacrifice
is not demanded. Then "all live happily for ever after."

That is but a mere outline of the play, which was to be an elaborate
production. And it was the rehearsal for the preliminary battles and
skirmishes that the girls were now witnessing.

"Tell that battery to get ready to fire!" cried Mr. Pertell, and this
word went over the telephone.

"Come on now with that Union charge!" was the next command.

Then hundreds of horses thundered down the slopes of Oak Farm, while the
hidden guns thundered. Down went horses and men while the girls screamed
involuntarily, it all seemed so real.

"It's a good thing we didn't plant no corn in that there field this
season," observed Belix Apgar, Sandy's father, as he saw the charge.

"That's right," agreed his wife. "There wouldn't have been 'nuff left to
make a hominy cake."

"Do it over again!" ordered the manager. "Some of you fellows ride your
horses as if you were going to a croquet game. Get some action into it!"

Once more the battery thundered its harmless shots and the men charged.
This time the scene was satisfactory, and preparations were made to film
it. Again the men thundered down the slope, and when they were almost at
the battery a single rider--a girl--dashed out toward the approaching
Union soldiers.

"Oh, she'll be killed!" cried Ruth. "They'll ride right over her!"

It did seem so, for she was headed straight toward the approaching
horsemen.

"She's all right," said Paul. "She's quite a rider, I believe. Her part,
as a Union sympathizer, is to rush out and warn them of the hidden
battery, but she is delayed by a Southerner until it is too late, and
she takes a desperate chance. There go the guns!"

Horses and riders were lost in a cloud of smoke. This time the film was
being taken. When that charge was over, and men and horses, some
limping, had gone back to their quarters, Mr. Pertell signaled to the
daring woman rider to come to him.

"That was very well done, Miss Brown," he said. "You certainly showed
nerve."

"I am glad you liked it," was the answer in a quiet, well-bred voice.
"Shall you want me again to-day?"

"Not until later, and it will be an interior. Is your horse all right?"

"Oh, yes. I am in love with him!" and she patted the arching neck of the
handsome creature. "He is so speedy."

"He sure is speedy, all right," agreed Paul, and the girl--she was
scarcely more than that--who had been addressed as Miss Brown by the
director smiled at the young actor. Then she let her friendly gaze rest
on Ruth and Alice.

"Isn't she fine!" murmured Alice.

"Like to meet her?" whispered Paul.

"Yes!" exclaimed Alice eagerly, paying no attention to Ruth's plucking
of her sleeve.

"Miss Brown, allow me to present----" and Paul introduced the two DeVere
girls.

"That was a daring ride of yours!" remarked Alice, with enthusiasm.

"Indeed it was," agreed Ruth, more quietly.

"Do you think so? I'm glad you like it. I have been riding ever since I
was a little girl."

"Did you learn in the West?" asked Alice.

"Why, yes--that is I--I really--oh, there goes that wild black horse
again!" and Miss Brown turned to point to an animal ridden by one of
the Confederate soldiers. The horse seemed unmanageable, and dashed
some distance across the field before it was brought under control.

Then the talk turned to moving picture work, though Ruth could not help
wondering, even in the midst of it, why Miss Brown had not been more
certain of where she had learned to ride.

"It isn't something one would forget," mused Ruth.




CHAPTER VI

A NEEDED LESSON


Rehearsals, the filming of scenes, retakes and the studying of their
parts kept busy not only the moving picture girls, but all the members
of Mr. Pertell's company. There was work for all, and from the smallest
girls and boys, including Tommie and Nellie Maguire, to Mr. DeVere
himself, little spare time was to be had.

Ruth and Alice had important parts, and they were given a general
outline of what was expected of them. They would be in many scenes, and
a variety of action would be required. In order that they do themselves
and the film justice, since they were to be "featured," the girls spent
much time studying in their rooms and practising to get the best results
from the various registerings.

"That is going to be a very strong scene for you and Alice," said Mr.
DeVere to Ruth one day. "I refer to that scene where Alice takes the
paper and afterwards discovers the identity of the man to whom she owes
so much--the life of her father. Now let me see how you would play it,
Alice."

Alice did so, and she did well, but her father was not satisfied. The
stage traditions meant much to him, and though he had been forced to
give up many of them when he went into the motion pictures, still he
knew what good dramatic action was, and he knew that it would "get over"
just as certainly in the silent drama as it did in the legitimate. So he
made Alice go over the scene again, and Ruth also, until he was
satisfied.

"Now, when the time comes, you'll know how to do it," he said. "Don't be
satisfied with anything but the best you can do, even if it is only a
moving picture show. I am convinced, more and more, that the silent
drama is going to take a larger place than ever before the public."

It was on one afternoon following a rather hard day's work before the
cameras, that Ruth and Alice, with Miss Pennington and Miss Dixon, sat
on the porch of the farmhouse, waiting for the supper bell. Russ and
Paul were off to one side, talking, and Mr. DeVere and Mr. Bunn were
discussing their early days in the legitimate. Mr. Pertell came up the
walk, a worried look on his face, seeing which Mr. Switzer called out:

"Did a cow step on some of the actors, Herr Director, or did one of our
worthy farmer's rams knock over a camera after it had filmed one of the
battle scenes?"

"Neither one, Mr. Switzer," was the answer. "This is merely a domestic
trouble I have on my mind."

"Domestic!" exclaimed Alice. "You don't mean that some of your pretty
extra girls have eloped with some of your dashing cowboy soldiers, do
you? I wouldn't blame them if they----"

"Alice!" chided her sister.

"Oh, well, you know what I mean!"

"No, it isn't quite that," laughed the director, "though you have very
nearly hit it," and he took a chair near Alice and her sister, and near
where Pearl Pennington and Laura Dixon were rocking and chewing gum.

"Tell us, and perhaps we can help you," Alice suggested.

"Well, maybe you can. It's about Miss Estelle Brown, the young lady who
made that daring ride in front of the masked battery the other day."

"What! Has she left?" asked Ruth. "She was such a wonderful rider!"

"No, she hasn't left, but she threatens to; and I can't let her go, as
she's in some of the films and I'd have to switch the whole plot around
to explain why she didn't come in on the later scenes."

"Why is she going to leave?" Alice queried.

"Because she has been subjected to some annoyance on the part of a young
man who is one of the extras. You know the extras all live down in the
big bungalow I had built for them. I have a man and his wife to look
after them, and I try to make it as nearly like a happy family as I can.
But Miss Brown says she can't stay there any longer. This young man--a
decent enough chap he had seemed to me--is pestering her with his
attentions. He is quite in love with her, it seems."

"Oh, how romantic!" gurgled Miss Dixon.

"Miss Brown doesn't think so," said the manager dryly. "I don't know
what to do about it, for I have no place where I can put her up alone."

"Bring her here!" exclaimed Alice, impulsively.

"Indeed, no!" cried Miss Pennington. "We actresses were told that none
of the extra people would be quartered with us! If that had not been
agreed to I would not have come to this place."

"Nor I!" chimed in Miss Dixon. "We professionals are not to be classed
with these extras--and amateurs at that!"

"I know I did promise you regulars that you would be boarded by
yourselves," said Mr. Pertell, scratching his head in perplexity, "and I
don't blame you for not wanting, as a general run, to mix with the
others. For some of them, while they are decent enough, have a big idea
of their own importance. I wouldn't think of asking you to let one of
the extra men come here, but this young lady----"

"She is perfectly charming!" broke in Alice. "And she certainly can
ride!"

"She did seem very nice," murmured Ruth.

"Pooh! A vulgar cowgirl!" sneered Miss Dixon.

"There is a nice room near mine," went on Alice. "She could have that, I
should think. The Apgars don't use it, and it is certainly annoying to
be pestered by a young man!" and she looked with uptilted nose at Paul,
who said emphatically:

"Well, I like that!"

"If I could bring her here----" began Mr. Pertell.

"By all means!" exclaimed Ruth. "We will try to make her happy and
comfortable--if she is an amateur."

"She has no right to come here!" burst out Miss Dixon.

"No, indeed!" added Miss Pennington. "If she comes, I shall go! I will
not board in the same place with an amateur cowgirl doing an extra turn
in the pictures."

"Nor I!" snapped Miss Dixon.

"All right--all right!" said Mr. Pertell quickly. "I know it's contrary
to my promise, and I won't insist on it. Only it would have made it
easier----"

"Let Miss Brown come," quickly whispered Alice in the director's ear.
"They won't leave. They're too comfortable here, and they get too good
salaries. Let Miss Brown come!"

"Will you stand by me if I do?"

"Yes," said Alice.

"So will I," added Ruth.

Then the supper bell rang and the discussion ended for the time being.
Later Mr. Pertell explained privately to Ruth and her sister that Miss
Brown was a quiet and refined young lady about whom he knew little save
that she had answered his advertisement for an amateur who could ride.
She had made good and he had engaged her for the war scenes.

"But she tells me that among the young men in the same boarding bungalow
is one who seems quite smitten with her. He is impudent and exceedingly
persistent, and she does not desire his attentions. She said she thought
she would have to leave unless she could get a quiet place where he
could not follow. It is all right during the day, as he can not come
near her, but after hours----"

"Do bring her!" urged Alice. "We'll try to make her comfortable. And
don't fear what they will do," and she nodded toward the two other
actresses, who had been in vaudeville before going into motion pictures.

So it was that, later in the evening, Miss Brown brought her trunk to
the Apgar farmhouse and was installed in a room near Alice and Ruth.

"Oh, it is _so_ much nicer here!" sighed Estelle Brown, as she admitted
Ruth and Alice, who knocked on her door. "I could not have stood the
other place much longer. Though every one--except that one man--was very
nice to me."

"Let us be your friends!" urged Alice.

"You are very kind," murmured Estelle, and the more the two girls looked
at her, the prettier they thought her. She had wonderful hair, a
marvelous complexion, and white, even teeth that made her smile a
delight.

"Have you been in this business long?" asked Ruth.

"No, not very--in fact, this is my first big play. I have done little
ones, but I did not get on very well. I love the work, though."

"Were your people in the profession?" asked Alice.

"I don't know--that is, I'm not sure. I believe some of them were,
generations back. Oh, did you hear that?" and she interrupted her reply
with the question.

"That" was the voice of some one in the lower hall inquiring if Miss
Brown was in.

"It's that--that impertinent Maurice Whitlow!" whispered Estelle to Ruth
and Alice. "I thought I could escape him here. Oh, what shall I do?"

"I'll say you are not at home," returned Ruth, in her best "stage
society" manner, and, sweeping down the hall, she met the maid who was
coming up to tell Miss Brown there was a caller for her below.

"Tell him Miss Brown is not at home," said Ruth.

"Very well," and the maid smiled understandingly.

"Ah! not at home? Tell her I shall call again," came in drawling tones
up the stairway, for it was warm, and doors and windows were open.

"Little--snip!" murmured Estelle. "I'm so glad I didn't have to see him.
He's a pest--all the while wanting to take me out and buy ice-cream
sodas. He's just starting in at the movies, and he thinks he's a star
already. Oh! but don't you just love the guns and horses?" she asked
impulsively.

"Well, I can't say that I do," answered Ruth. "I like quieter plays."

"I don't!" cried Alice. "The more excitement the better I like it. I can
do my best then."

"So can I," said Estelle. Then they fell to talking of the work, and of
many other topics.

"Did Estelle Brown strike you as being peculiar?" asked Ruth of her
sister when they were back in their rooms, getting ready for bed.

"Peculiar? What do you mean?"

"I mean she didn't seem to know whether or not her people were in the
profession."

"Yes, she did side-step that a bit."

"Side-step, Alice?"

"Well, avoid answering, if you like that better. But my way is shorter.
Say, maybe she has gone into this without her people knowing it, and she
wants to keep them from bringing her back."

"Maybe, though it didn't strike me as being that way. It was as though
she wasn't quite sure of herself."

"Sure of herself--what do you mean?"

"Well, I can't explain it any better."

"I'll think it over," said Alice, sleepily. "We've got lots to do
to-morrow," and she tumbled into bed with a drowsy "good-night."

Miss Laura Dixon and Miss Pearl Pennington most decidedly turned up
their noses at the breakfast table when they saw Estelle sitting between
Ruth and Alice. And their murmurs of disdain could be plainly heard.

"She here? Then I'm going to leave!"

"The idea of amateurs butting in like this! It's a shame!"

Fortunately Estelle was exchanging some gay banter with Paul and did not
hear. But Ruth and Alice did, and the latter could not avoid a thrust at
the scornful ones. To Ruth, in an unnecessarily loud voice, Alice
remarked:

"Do you remember that funny vaudeville stunt we used to laugh over when
we were children--'The Lady Bookseller?'"

"Yes, I remember it very well," answered Ruth. "What about it, Alice?"
for she did not catch her sister's drift.

"Why, I was just wondering how many years ago it was--ten, at least,
since it was popular, isn't it?"

"I believe so!"

"It's no such a thing!" came the indignant remonstrance from Miss
Pennington. It was in this sketch that she had made her "hit," and as
she now claimed several years less than the number to which she was
entitled, this sly reference to her age was not relished. "It was only
_six_ years ago that I starred in that," she went on.

"It seems much longer," said Alice, calmly. "We were quite little when
we saw you in that. You were so funny with your big feet----"

"Big feet! I had to wear shoes several sizes too large for me! It was in
the act. I--I----"

"They're stringing you--keep still!" whispered her chum, and with red
cheeks Miss Pennington subsided.

But Alice's remarks had the desired effect, and there were no more
references, for the present, directed at pretty Estelle. Miss Dixon and
Miss Pennington had a scene with Mr. Pertell, though, in which they
threatened to leave unless Estelle were sent back to the bungalow where
the other extra players boarded. But the manager remained firm, and the
two vaudeville actresses did not quit the company.

Hard work followed, and Estelle made some daring rides, once narrowly
escaping injury from the burning wad of a cannon, which went off
prematurely as she dashed past the very muzzle. But she put spurs to her
horse, who leaped over the spurt of fire and smoke. A few feet of film
were spoiled; but this was better than having an actor hurt.

Alice was sitting on the farmhouse porch one afternoon, waiting for
Estelle and Ruth to come down, for they were going for a walk together,
not being needed in the films. Estelle had been taken into companionship
by the two girls, who found her a very charming companion, though little
disposed to talk about herself.

Alice, who was reading a motion picture magazine, was startled by
hearing a voice saying, almost in her ear:

"Is Miss Brown in?"

"Oh!" and Alice looked up to see Maurice Whitlow smirking at her. He had
tiptoed up on the porch and was standing very close to her. She had
never been introduced to him, but that is not absolutely insisted on in
moving picture circles, particularly when a company is on "location."

"Is Miss Brown in?" repeated Whitlow.

"I don't know, I'm sure," replied Alice.

"Ah, well, I'll wait and find out. I'll sit down here by you and wait,"
went on the young man, drawing a chair so close to that of Alice that it
touched. "Fine day, isn't it? I say! you did that bit of acting very
cleverly to-day."

"Did I?" and Alice went on reading.

"Yes. I had a little bit myself. I carried a message from the field
headquarters to the rear--after more ammunition, you know. Did you
notice me riding?"

"I did not."

"Well, I saw you, all right. If Miss Brown isn't home, do you want to go
over to the village with me?"

"I do not!" and Alice was very emphatic.

"Then for a row on the lake?"

"No!"

"You look as though you would enjoy canoeing," went on the persistent
Whitlow. "You have a very strong little hand--very pretty!" and he
boldly reached up and removed Alice's fingers from the edge of the
magazine. "A very pretty little hand--yes!" and he sighed foolishly.

"How dare you!" cried Alice, indignantly. "If you don't----"

"See how you like that pretty bit of grass down there!" exclaimed a
sharp voice behind Alice, and the next moment Mr. Maurice Whitlow,
eye-glasses, lavender tie, socks and all, went sailing over the porch
railing, to land in a sprawling heap on the sod below.




CHAPTER VII

ESTELLE'S LEAP


"Oh!" murmured Alice, shrinking down in her chair. "Oh--my!"

She gave a hasty glance over her shoulder, to behold Paul Ardite
standing back of her chair, an angry look on his face. Then Alice looked
at the sprawling form of the extra player. He was getting up with a
dazed expression on his countenance.

"What--what does this mean?" he gasped, striving to make his tones
indignant. But it is hard for dignity to assert itself when one is on
one's hands and knees in the grass, conscious that there is a big grass
stain on one's white cuff, and with one's clothing generally
disarranged. "What does this mean? I demand an explanation," came from
Mr. Maurice Whitlow.

"You know well enough what it means!" snapped Paul. "If you don't, why,
come back here and try it over again and I'll give you another
demonstration!"

"Oh, don't, Paul--please!" pleaded Alice in a low voice.

"There's no danger. He won't come," was the confident reply.

By this time Whitlow had picked himself up and was brushing his
garments. He settled his collar, straightened his lavender tie and wet
his lips as though about to speak.

"You--you--I----" he began. "I don't see what right you had to----"

"That'll do now!" interrupted Paul, sternly. "It's of no use to go into
explanations. You know as well as I do what you were doing and why I
pitched you over the railing. I'll do it again if you want me to, but
twice as hard. And if I catch you here again, annoying any of the ladies
of this company, I'll report you to the director. Now skip--and stay
skipped!" concluded Paul significantly. "Perhaps you can't read that
notice?" and he pointed to one recently posted on the main gateway
leading to the big farmhouse. It was to the effect that none of the
extra players were allowed admission to the grounds without a permit
from the director.

"Huh! I'm as good an actor as you, any day!" sneered Whitlow, as he
limped down the walk.

"Maybe. But you can't get over with it--here!" said Paul significantly.

The notice had been posted because so many of the cowboys and girls had
fairly overrun the precincts of Mr. Apgar's home. He and his family had
no privacy at all, and while they did not mind the regular members of
Mr. Pertell's company, with whom they were acquainted, they did not want
the hundreds of extra men, soldiers, cowboys and horsewomen running all
over the place.

So the rule had been adopted, and it was observed good-naturedly by
those to whom it applied. Whitlow must have considered himself above it.

"Did he annoy you much, Alice?" asked Paul.

"Not so very. He was just what you might call--fresh. He asked for Miss
Brown, and when she wasn't here to snub him he turned the task over to
me. Ugh!" and Alice began to scrub vigorously with her handkerchief the
fingers which Whitlow had grasped. "I'm sorry you had that trouble with
him, Paul," she went on. "But really----"

"It was no trouble--it was a pleasure!" laughed Paul. "I'd like to do it
over again if it were not for annoying you. I happened to come up behind
and heard what he was saying. So I just pitched into him. I don't
believe he'll come back. He'll be too much afraid of losing the work.
Mr. Pertell has had a great many applications from players out of work
who want to be taken on as extras, and he can have his pick. So those
that don't obey the regulations will get short notice. You won't be
troubled with him again."

And Alice was not, nor was Miss Brown. That is, as regards the extra
player's trespassing on the grounds about the farmhouse. But he was of
the kind that is persistent, and on several occasions, when the duties
of the girls brought them near to where Whitlow was acting, he smiled
and smirked at them.

Alice wished to tell Paul about it and have him administer another and
more severe chastisement to Whitlow, but Ruth and Estelle persuaded the
impulsive one to forego doing so.

"I can look after myself, thank you, Alice dear," Estelle said. "Now
that I don't have to board in the bungalow with him it is easier."

"Don't make a scene," advised Ruth.

"Oh, but I just can't bear to have him look at me," Alice said.

Several of the scenes in the principal drama had been made, but most of
the largest ones, those of the battles, of Alice's spy work, and of
Ruth's nursing, were yet to come.

The making of a big moving picture is the work not of days, but of
weeks, and often of months. If every scene took place in a studio,
where artificial lights could be used, the filming could go on every day
the actors were on hand, or whenever the director felt like working them
and the camera men. Often in a studio, even, the director will be
notional--"temperamental," he might call it--and let a day go by, and
again the glare of the powerful lights may so affect the eyes of the
players that they have to rest, and so time is lost in that way.

But the time lost in a studio is as nothing compared to the time lost in
filming the big outdoor scenes. There the sun is a big factor, for a
brilliant light is needed to take pictures of galloping horses, swiftly
moving automobiles and locomotives, and every cloudy day means a loss of
time. For this reason many of the big film companies maintain studios in
California, where there are many days of sunshine. They can take
"outdoor stuff" almost any time after the sun is up.

But at Oak Farm there were times when everything would be in readiness
for a big scene, the camera men waiting, the players ready to dash into
their parts, and then clouds would form, or it would rain, and there
would be a postponement. But it was part of the game, and as the
salaries of the players went on whether they worked or not, they did not
complain.

One morning Alice, on going into Estelle's room, found her busy
"padding" herself before she put on her outer garments.

"What in the world are you doing?" Alice asked.

"Getting ready for my big jump," was the answer.

"Your big jump?"

"Yes, you know there is a scene where I carry a message from
headquarters to one of the Union generals at the front. Your father
plays the latter part."

"Oh, yes, now I remember. And Daddy is sure no one can do quite as well
as he can in the tent scene, where he salutes you and takes the message
you have brought through with such peril."

"Yes, that's nice. Well, I'm to ride along and be pursued by some
Confederate guerrillas. It's a race, and I decide to take a short cut,
not knowing the Confederates have burned the bridge. I have to leap my
horse down an embankment and ford the stream. I'm getting ready for the
jump now--that's why I'm padding myself. For Petro--that's my
horse--might slip or stumble in jumping down that embankment, and I want
to be ready to roll out of the way. It's much more comfortable to roll
in a padded suit--like a football player's--than in your ordinary
clothes. Your friend, Russ Dalwood, told me to do this, and I think it
is a good idea."

"It's sure to be if Russ told you, isn't it, Ruth?" asked Alice, with a
mischievous look at her sister, who had just come in.

"How should I know?" was the cool response. "I suppose Mr. Dalwood knows
what he is doing, though."

"Oh, how very formal we are all of a sudden," mocked Alice. "You two
haven't quarreled, have you?"

"Silly," returned Ruth, blushing.

"Are you really going to jump your horse down a cliff?" asked Alice.

"I really am," was the smiling answer. "There is to be no fake about
this. But really there is little danger. I am so used to horses."

"Yes, and I marvel at you," put in Ruth. "Where did you learn it all?"

"I don't know. It seems to come natural to me."

"You must have lived on a ranch a long time," ventured Ruth.

"Did I? Well, perhaps I did. Say, lace this up the back for me, that's a
dear," and she turned around so that Alice or Ruth could fasten a
corset-like pad that covered a large part of her body. It would not
show under her dress, but would be a protection in case of a fall.

Alice and Ruth were so greatly interested in the coming perilous leap of
Estelle's that they did not pursue their inquiries about her life on a
ranch, though Alice casually remarked that it was strange she did not
speak more about it.

The two DeVere girls had no part in this one scene, and they went to
watch it, safely out of range of the cameras. For there were to be two
snapping this jump, to avoid the necessity of a retake in case one film
failed.

"All ready now!" called Mr. Pertell, when there had been several
rehearsals up to the actual point of making the jump. Estelle had raced
out of the woods bearing the message. The Confederate guerrillas had
pursued her, and she had found the bridge burned--one built for the
purpose and set fire to.

"All ready for the jump?" asked the director.

"All ready," Estelle answered, looking to saddle girths and stirrups.

"Then come on!" yelled the director through his megaphone.

Estelle urged her horse forward. With shouts and yells, which, of
course, had no part in the picture, yet which served to aid them in
their acting, the players who were portraying the Confederates came
after her, spurring their horses and firing wildly. On and on rushed the
steed bearing the daring girl rider.

She reached the place of the burned bridge, halted a moment, made a
gesture of despair, and then raced for the bank, down which she would
leap her horse to the ford.

"Come on! Come on!" yelled Mr. Pertell. "That's fine! Come on! You men
there put a little more pep in your riding. Turn and fire at them, Miss
Brown! Fire one shot, and one of you men reel in his saddle. That's the
idea!"

Estelle had quickly turned and fired, and one man had most realistically
showed that he was hit, afterward slumping from his seat.

Now the girl was at the edge of the bank. She was to make a flying jump
over its edge and come down in the soft sand, sliding to the bottom--in
the saddle if she could keep her seat, rolling over and over if,
perchance, she left it.

"That's the idea! Get every bit of that, Russ! That's fine!" yelled Mr.
Pertell.

"There she goes!" cried Alice, grasping her sister's arm, and as she
spoke Estelle spurred her horse and it leaped full and fair over the
edge of the embankment. Estelle had made her big jump. Would she come
safely out of it?




CHAPTER VIII

A MASSED ATTACK


While Russ Dalwood and his helper were grinding their cameras, reeling
away at the film on which was being impressed the shifting vision of
Estelle Brown taking her hazardous leap, Alice, Ruth, and the others
were watching to see how the daring young horsewoman would come out of
it.

"She's going to land in a minute!" exclaimed Miss Dixon.

"In a minute? In a half second!" cried Alice. "But don't talk!"

"There--she's fallen!" gasped Miss Pennington.

With his feet gathered under him, Petro had come down straight on the
sliding, shifting sand of the embankment. For a moment it looked as
though he had stumbled and that Estelle would be thrown.

But she held a firm rein, and leaned far back in the saddle. The horse
stiffened and then, keeping upright with his forelegs straight out in
front of him and his hind ones bunched under him, he began to slide.

Down the embankment he slid, as the Italian cavalrymen sometimes ride
their horses, with Estelle firm in the saddle. And, as a matter of fact,
the girl said afterward it was from having seen some moving pictures of
these Italian army riders that she got the idea of doing as she did.

"She won't fall!" murmured Paul.

"Oh, I'm so glad! The picture will be a success, won't it?"

"I should think so," Paul said. "It certainly was a daring ride."

"I wouldn't mind doing it if I had her horse," put in Maurice Whitlow,
smirking at the girls. "I think you could do that, Miss DeVere," and he
looked at Alice.

She turned away with only a murmured reply, but, nothing daunted, the
"pest" went on:

"Estelle is certainly a fine rider. I think she must have been a cowgirl
on a ranch at one time, though she won't admit it."

"She wouldn't to you, at any rate," said Paul, significantly.

"Why not?"

"Oh, if you don't know it's of no use to tell you. Look! Now she goes
into the water!"

The action called for the halting at the top of the embankment of the
Confederate riders, who dared not make the jump. They fired some futile
shots at Estelle, then rode around to a less dangerous descent to try to
catch her. But Estelle was to ford the stream and continue on to the
Union lines with her message.

Reaching the bottom of the slope, her horse gathered himself together
for another bit of moving picture work. At the edge of the stream
another camera man was stationed, for Estelle and her horse were by this
time too far away from Russ and his helper to make good views possible.

Into the water splashed the girl, urging on her spirited horse, that was
none the worse for his jump and his long slide.

"Good work! Good work!" cried an assistant director, who was stationed
near the stream to see that all went according to the scenario. "Keep
on, Miss Brown!"

Estelle bent low over her horse's neck, to escape possible bullets from
the Confederate guns, and on and on she raced until she pulled up at the
tent of "General" DeVere. Here her mission ended, after the father of
Alice and Ruth, in a dusty uniform of a Union officer, had come out in
response to the summons from his orderly.

Estelle slipped from her saddle, registered exhaustion, saluted and held
out the paper she had brought through the Confederate lines at such
risk. Nor was the risk wholly one of the play, for she might have been
seriously hurt in her perilous leap.

But, fortunately, everything came out properly and a fine series of
pictures resulted.

"I'm so glad!" Estelle exclaimed, when it was all over, and, divested of
her padding, she sat in her room with Ruth and Alice. "I want to 'make
good' in this business, and riding seems to be my forte."

"Do you like it better than anything else?" asked Alice.

"Yes, I do. And I just love moving pictures, don't you?"

"Indeed we do," put in Ruth. "But we were never cut out for riders."

"I'd like it!" exclaimed Alice. "I'd like to know how to ride a horse as
well as you do."

"I'll show you," offered Estelle. "I'll be very glad to, and it's easy.
It's like swimming--all you need is confidence, and to learn not to be
afraid of your horse but to trust him. Let me show you some day."

"I believe I will!" decided Alice, with flashing eyes. "It will be
great."

"Better ask father," suggested Ruth.

"Oh, he'll let me, I know. We've ridden some, you know; but I would like
to ride as well as Estelle," and Alice and Estelle began to talk over
their plans for taking and giving riding lessons. In the midst of the
talk the return of the boy who went daily to the village for mail was
announced.

"Oh, I hope my new waist has come!" Alice exclaimed, for she had written
to her dressmaker to send one by parcel post. There was a package for
her--the one she expected--and also some letters, as well as one for
Ruth. Estelle showed no interest when the distribution of the mail was
going on.

"Don't you expect anything?" asked Alice.

"Any what?"

"Letters."

"Why, no, I don't believe I do," was the slowly given answer. "I don't
write any, so I don't get any, I suppose," and both girls noticed that
there was a far-away look in Estelle's eyes. Perhaps it was a wistful
look, for surely all girls like to get letters from some one.

"I believe she is estranged from her family," decided Alice to her
sister afterward. "Did you see how pathetic she looked when we got
letters and she didn't?"

"Well, I didn't notice anything special," Ruth replied. "But there is
something queer about her, I must admit. She is so absent-minded at
times. This morning I asked her if she wanted to go for a walk, and she
said she had no ticket."

"No ticket?"

"Yes, that's what she said. And when I laughed and told her one didn't
need a ticket to walk around Oak Farm, she sort of 'came to' and said
she was thinking about a boat."

"A boat--what boat?"

"That was all she said. Then she began to talk about something else."

"Do you know what I think?" asked Alice, suddenly.

"No. But then you think so many things it isn't any wonder I can't keep
track of them."

"I think, as I believe I've said before, that she has run away from some
ranch to be in moving pictures. That's why she doesn't write or receive
letters. She doesn't want her folks to know where she is."

"I can hardly believe that," declared Ruth. "She is too nice and refined
a girl to have done anything like that. No, I just think she is a bit
queer, that is all. But certainly she doesn't tell much about herself."

However, further speculation regarding Estelle Brown was cut short, as
orders came for the appearance of nearly the entire company in one of
the plays.

The first scene was to take place in a Southern town, and for the
purpose a street had been constructed by Pop Snooks and his helpers.
There was a stately mansion, smaller houses, a store or two and some
other buildings. True, the buildings were but shells, and, in some
cases, only fronts, but they showed well in the picture.

Ruth, Alice, and a number of the girls and women and men were to be the
inhabitants of this village, and were to take part in an alarm and flee
the place when it was known that the Confederate forces were being
driven back and through the place by the Unionists.

"Come on--get dressed!" cried Alice, and soon she, her sister, Estelle
and the other women were donning their Southern costumes, wide skirts,
with hoops to puff them out, and broad-brimmed hats, under which curls
showed.

There was to be a massed attack by the Unionists on the town, through
which the Confederates were to flee, and it was the part of Ruth and
Alice to rush from their father's "mansion" bearing a few of their
choice possessions.

All was in readiness. The Southern defenders were on the outskirts of
the town, drawn up to receive the Unionists. Toward these Confederates,
their enemies came riding. This was filmed separately, while other
camera men, in the made street, took pictures of the activities there.
Men, women and children went in and out of the houses. Though, as Mr.
Belix Apgar said, "If you call them houses you might as well call the
smell of an onion a dinner. There ain't nothin' to 'em!"

Suddenly an excited rider dashed into the midst of the peaceful
activities of the Southern town.

"They're coming! They're coming!" he cried, waving his hat. "The Yankees
are coming!" This would be flashed on the screen.

Then ensued a wild scene. Colored mammies rushed here and there seeking
their charges. Men began to look to their arms. Then came the advance
guard of the retreating Confederates, turning back to fire at their
enemies.

"Come on now, Ruth--Alice! This is where we make our rush--just as the
first of the Union soldiers appear!" called Paul, who was acting the
part of a Southern youth. "Grab up your stuff and come on!"

Ruth was to carry a bandbox and a case supposed to contain the family
jewels. Alice, who played the part this time of a frivolous young woman,
was to save her pet cat.

"Here they come!" yelled Paul, as the first of the Unionists came into
view at the head of the street. "Hurry, girls!"

Out they rushed, down the steps of the mansion, fleeing before the
mounted Union soldiers, who laughed and jeered, firing at the
Confederates, who were retreating.

Ruth and Estelle, with some of the other women, were in the lead. Alice
had lingered behind, for the cat showed a disposition to wiggle out of
her arms, and she wanted to keep it to make an effective picture.

Finally the creature did make its escape, but Alice was not going to
give up so easily. She started in pursuit, and then one of the Union
soldiers, Maurice Whitlow, spurred his horse forward. He wanted to get
in the foreground of the picture and took this chance.

"Get back where you belong!" yelled the director angrily. "Who told you
to get in the spotlight? Get back!"

But it was too late. Alice, in pursuit of the cat, was running straight
toward Whitlow's horse, and the next moment she slipped and went down,
almost under the feet of the prancing animal.




CHAPTER IX

MISS DIXON'S LOSS


"Look out!" shouted Paul, and, dropping what he was carrying, he made a
leap toward the animal Whitlow was riding.

"Roll out of the way of his feet!" cried the director.

"Shall I keep on with the film?" asked the camera man, for his duty was
to turn until told to stop, no matter what happened.

"Let it run!" Alice cried. "I can get out of the way. Don't stop on my
account!"

She had been in motion pictures long enough to know what it meant to
spoil a hundred feet or more of film in a spirited picture,
necessitating a retake. She had seen her danger, and had done her best
to get out of harm's way.

The cat had leaped into some bushes and was out of sight.

Whitlow, his face showing his fear and his inability to act in this
emergency, had instinctively drawn back on the reins. But it was to the
intelligent horse itself, rather than to the rider, that Alice owed her
immunity from harm. For the horse reared, and came down with feet well
to one side of the crouching girl, who had partly risen to her knees.

At the same moment Paul sprang for the steed's bridle and swerved him to
one side. Then, seeing that Alice was practically out of danger, Paul's
rage at the carelessness of Whitlow rose, and he reached up and fairly
dragged that young man out of the saddle.

"You don't know enough to lead a horse to water, let alone ride one in a
movie battle scene!" he cried, as he pushed the player to one side. "Why
don't you look where you're going?"

Whitlow was too shaken and startled to reply.

"Go on. Help her up and keep on with the retreat!" cried the director.
"That's one of the best scenes of the picture. Couldn't have been better
if we had rehearsed it. Never mind the cat, Miss DeVere. Run on. Paul,
you land a couple of blows on Whitlow and then follow Alice. Hold back,
there--you Union men--until we get this bit of by-play."

Paul, nothing loath, gave Whitlow two hard blows, and the latter dared
not return them for fear of spoiling the picture, but he muttered in
rage.

Then Paul, shaking his fist at the Unionists, hurried on after Alice,
and the retreat continued. What had threatened to be a disaster, or at
least a spoiling of the scene, had turned out well. It is often so in
moving pictures.

In the remainder of the scene the girls had little part. They had been
driven from their home, and, presumably, were taken in by friends. The
rest of the scenes showed the Union soldiers making merry in the
Southern town they had captured.

"My! That was a narrow escape you had!" exclaimed Ruth, when she and her
sister were at liberty to return to the farmhouse. "Were you hurt?"

"No; I strained one arm just a little. But it will make a good scene, so
Russ said."

"Too good--too realistic!" declared Paul. "When I get a chance at that
Whitlow----"

"Please don't do anything!" begged Alice. "It wasn't really his fault.
If I hadn't had the cat----"

"It was his fault for pushing himself to the front the way he did," said
the young actor. "Only the best riders were picked to lead the charge.
He might have known he couldn't control his horse in an emergency.
That's where he was at fault."

"He is a poor rider," commented Estelle. "But you showed rare good
sense, Alice, in acting as you did. A horse will not step on a person if
he can possibly avoid it. Mr. Whitlow's horse was better than he was."

"Just the same, I got in two good punches!" chuckled Paul, "and he
didn't dare hit back."

"He may make trouble for you later," Alice said.

"Oh, I'm not worrying about that. I'm satisfied."

There was a spirited battle scene later in the day between the Union and
Confederate forces; the latter endeavoring to retake the village.

A Confederate battery in a distant town was sent for, and the Union
position was shelled. But as by this time the Union cannon had come up
and were entrenched in the town, an artillery duel ensued.

Views were shown of the Union guns being manned by the men, who wore
bloody cloths around their foreheads and who worked hard serving the
cannon. Real powder was used, but no balls, of course, and now and then
a man would fall dead at his gun.

Similar views with another camera were taken of the Confederate guns and
the scenes alternated on the screen afterward, creating a big
sensation.

Then came an attack of the Confederate infantry under cover of the
Southern battery. This was spirited, detachments of men rushing forward,
firing and then seeking what cover they could. At times a man would roll
over, his gun dropping, sometimes several would drop at the same time.
These were those who were detailed to be shot.

The Unionists replied with a counter charge, and for a time the battle
waged fiercely on both sides. Then came a lull in the fighting, with the
Confederates ready to make a last charge in a desperate attempt to
recapture the town.

"I know what would make a good scene," said Maurice Whitlow, during the
lull when fresh films were being loaded into the cameras. "If we had an
airship now some of us Union fellows could go for reinforcements in
that. It would make a dandy scene."

"An airship!" cried Russ. "Say! remember that these scenes are supposed
to have taken place in 1863. The only airships then were those the
inventors were dreaming about or making in their laboratories. No
airships in Civil War plays! I guess not! Balloons, maybe, but no
airships."

"More fighting! Camera!" called Mr. Pertell, and again the spirited
action was under way. Cannon boomed; rifles spat fire and smoke; men
fought hand to hand, often rolling over dead; riderless horses dashed
here and there. Now and then a man would narrowly escape being run down.
As it was, several were burned from being too near the cannon or the
guns, and one man's leg was broken in a fall from his horse.

But it was part of the game, and no one seemed to mind. A real hospital
was set up at Oak Farm, not a mere shell of a building, and here the
injured, as well as those who simulated injury, were attended.

Ruth and some of the women made up as nurses, though this was not the
big scene in which Ruth and Alice were to take part.

"Confederates retreat!" directed Mr. Pertell, and the Southern forces,
having been defeated, were forced to withdraw. Their attempt to
recapture their town had failed.

"Whew! that was hot work!" cried Paul, as he came back to the farmhouse,
having played his part as a Confederate soldier.

"It certainly was," agreed Mr. DeVere, who had been the directing Union
General. Now that the "war" was over Northerners and Southerners mingled
together in friendly converse, their differences forgotten.

"I just can't bear the smell of powder!" complained Miss Dixon. "I wish
I had my salts."

"I'll get them for you, dear," offered Miss Pennington. "I'm going up to
our rooms." The former vaudeville actresses, with Ruth, Alice, and some
of the others, were resting on the farmhouse porch.

Miss Dixon smelled the salts and declared she felt much better.

"There's to be a dance in the village to-night," Paul remarked at the
supper table.

"Let's go!" proposed Alice. "Will you take me, Paul?"

"Of course I will."

"May I have the pleasure?" asked Russ, of Ruth.

"Why, yes, if the rest go."

"We'll all go!" chimed in Miss Dixon. "Some of the extra men are good
dancers. They proved it in the ballroom scene the other day. We can get
a man, Pearl."

"All right, my dear, just as you say."

The little party was soon arranged.

"Estelle might like to go," suggested Alice.

"I'll go to ask her," offered Ruth, for Miss Brown had quit the supper
table early and gone to her room.

As Ruth mounted the stairs she heard Miss Dixon and Miss Pennington
talking in the hall outside their rooms.

"I can't see where it can be," Miss Dixon was saying.

"It was on your dresser when I went up for the salts," said her chum.
"Are you sure you didn't take it after that?"

"Positive! It's gone--that's all there is to it."

"What's gone?" asked Ruth.

"One of my rings," was Miss Dixon's answer. "I left it on my dresser and
my door was open. It was there when I went down to supper, and we were
all at the table together----"

"Except Estelle Brown!" said Miss Pennington quickly.




CHAPTER X

LIEUTENANT VARLEY


For a moment Ruth stood looking with wide-open eyes at the two former
vaudeville actresses. On their part they stared boldly at Ruth, and then
Miss Dixon turned and slightly winked at Miss Pennington.

"That was one of your valuable rings, wasn't it, dear?" asked Miss
Pennington, in deliberate tones.

"It certainly was--the best diamond I had. I simply won't let it be
lost--or taken. I'm going to have it back!"

She spoke in a loud tone, and the door of Estelle's room, farther down
the hall, opened. Estelle looked out. She was in negligée, and she
seemed to be suffering.

"Has anything happened?" she asked.

"Yes," answered Miss Dixon. "Something has happened. Some one has stolen
my diamond ring!"

"Oh!" gasped Ruth, "you shouldn't say that!"

"Say what?"

"Stolen. It's such a--such a harsh word."

"Well, I feel harsh just now. I'm not going to lose that ring. It was on
my dresser when I went down to supper, and now it's gone. It was
stolen--or taken, if you like that word better. Perhaps you want me to
say it was--borrowed?" and she looked scornfully at Ruth.

"It may have slipped down behind your dresser."

"I've looked," said Miss Pennington. "You came up here from the table
before we did," she went on, addressing Estelle. "Did you see anything
of any one in Miss Dixon's room?"

"I? No, I saw no one." Estelle was plainly taken by surprise.

"Did you go in yourself," asked Miss Dixon brusquely. "Come, I don't
mind a joke--if it was a joke--but give me back my ring. I'm going into
town, and I want to wear it."

"A joke! Give you back your ring! Why, what do you mean?" and Estelle,
her face flashing her indignation, stepped out into the hall.

"I mean you might have borrowed it," went on Miss Dixon, not a whit
daunted. "Oh, it isn't anything. I've often done the same thing myself
when we've been playing on circuit. It's all right--if you give things
back."

"But I haven't taken anything of yours!" cried Estelle. "I never went
into your room!"

"Perhaps you have forgotten about it," suggested Miss Pennington coldly.
"You seem to have a headache, and sometimes those headache remedies are
so strong----"

"I am tired, but I have no headache," said Estelle simply, "nor have I
taken any strong headache remedies, as you seem to suggest. I haven't
been walking in my sleep, either. And I certainly was not in your room,
Miss Dixon, nor do I know anything about your ring," and with that she
turned and entered her room, whence, presently, came the sound of
sobbing.

For a moment Ruth stood still, looking at the two rather flashy
actresses, and wondering if they really meant what they had insinuated.
Then Alice's voice was heard calling:

"I say, Ruth, are you and Estelle coming? The boys have the auto and
they'll take us in. Come on."

Ruth did not answer, and Alice came running up the stairs. She came to a
halt as she saw the trio standing in the hall.

"Well, for the love of trading stamps! what's it all about?" she asked.
"Are you posing for Faith, Hope and Charity?"

"Certainly not Charity," murmured Ruth.

"And I certainly have lost what little faith I had, though I hope I do
get my ring back," sneered Miss Dixon.

"Your ring? What's the matter?" asked Alice. "Have you lost something?"

"My diamond ring was taken off my dresser," said the actress.

"And that Estelle Brown was up here ahead of us, and all alone," said
Miss Pennington. "She may have borrowed it and forgotten to return it."

"That's what one gets for leaving one's valuable diamond rings around
where these extra players are allowed to have free access," sneered Miss
Dixon.

"You mean that little chip diamond ring of yours with the red garnets
around it?" asked Alice.

"It isn't a chip diamond at all!" fired back Miss Dixon. "It was a
valuable ring."

"Comparatively, perhaps, yes," and Alice's voice was coolly sneering,
though she rarely allowed herself this privilege. "I'm sorry it is
lost----"

"Why don't you say taken?" asked Miss Pennington.

"Because I don't believe it was," snapped Alice. "Either you forgot
where you laid it or it has dropped behind something. As for thinking
Estelle Brown even borrowed it, that's all nonsense! I don't believe a
word of it."

"Nor I!" exclaimed Ruth.

"Did you speak to her about it?" asked Alice, and then as the sound of
sobbing came from Estelle's room she burst out with:

"You horrid things! I believe you did! Shame on you!" and she hurried to
the closed door.

"It is I--Alice," she whispered. "Let me in. It's all a terrible
mistake. Don't let it affect you so, Estelle dear!"

Then Alice opened the unlocked door and went in. Ruth paused for a
moment to say:

"I think you have made a terrible mistake, Miss Dixon," and then she
followed her sister to comfort the crying girl.

"Humph! Mistake!" sneered Miss Dixon.

"That's what we get for mixing in with amateurs," added her chum. "Come
on, we'll speak to Mr. Pertell about it."

But, for some reason or other, the director was not told directly of the
loss of the ring, nor was Estelle openly accused. She felt as badly,
though, as if she had been, even when Ruth and Alice tried to comfort
her.

Estelle had left the table early, but though she had passed Miss Dixon's
room, she said she had seen no one about.

"Don't mind about the old ring!" said Alice. "It wasn't worth five
dollars."

"But that I should be accused of taking even five dollars!"

"You're not!" said Ruth, quickly. "They don't dare make an open
accusation. I wouldn't be surprised if Miss Dixon found she had lost her
ring and she's ashamed to acknowledge it."

"Oh, but it is dreadful to be suspected!" sighed Estelle.

"You're not--no one in his senses would think of even dreaming you took
so much as a pin!" cried Alice. "It's positively silly! I wouldn't make
such a fuss over such a cheap ring."

But Miss Dixon did make a "fuss," inasmuch as she talked often about her
loss, though she still made no direct accusation against Estelle. But
Miss Dixon and her chum made life miserable for the daring horsewoman.
They often spoke in her presence of extra players who did not know their
places, and made sneering references to locking up their valuables.

At times Estelle was so miserable that she threatened to leave, but Ruth
and Alice would not hear of it and offered to lay the whole matter
before Mr. Pertell and have him settle it by demanding that the loser of
the ring either make a direct accusation or else keep quiet about her
loss.

Mr. DeVere, who was appealed to by his daughters, voted against this,
however.

"It is best not to pay any attention to those young ladies," he advised.
"The friends of Estelle know she would not do such a thing, and no one
takes either Miss Dixon or Miss Pennington very seriously--not half as
seriously as they take themselves. It will all blow over."

There were big times ahead for the moving picture girls and their
friends. Some of the most important battle scenes were soon to be
filmed, those that had already been taken having been skirmishes.

"I have succeeded in getting two regiments of the state militia to take
part in a sham battle for our big play," said Mr. Pertell one day. "They
are to come to this part of the country for their annual manoeuvers
under the supervision of the regular army officers, and by paying their
expenses I can have them here for a couple of days.

"They will come with their horses, tents, and everything, so we shall
have some real war scenes--that is, as real as can be had with blank
cartridges. It will be a great thing for my film."

"And will they work in with our players?" asked Mr. DeVere.

"Oh, yes, indeed! I intend to use your daughters in the spy and hospital
scenes, and you as one of the generals. In fact, Mr. DeVere, I depend
on you to coach the militia men. For though they know a lot about
military matters, they do not know how best to pose for the camera. So
I'll be glad if you will act as a sort of stage manager."

"I shall be pleased to," answered the old player. And he was greatly
delighted at the opportunity.

About a week after Mr. Pertell had mentioned that two regiments of
militia were coming to Oak Farm, Ruth and Alice awakened one morning to
see the fields about them dotted with tents and soldiers moving about
here and there.

"Why, it does look just like a real war camp!" exclaimed Alice, who, in
a very becoming dressing gown, was at the window. "Oh, isn't it
thrilling! How dare you?" she exclaimed, drawing hastily back.

"What was it?" asked Ruth from her room.

"One of the officers had the audacity to wave his hand at me."

"You shouldn't have looked out."

"Ha! A pity I can't look out of my own window," and to prove that she
was well within her rights Alice looked out again, and pretended not to
see a young man who was standing in the yard below.

There was a bustle of excitement at the breakfast table. All the players
were eager to know what parts they would have, for this was the biggest
thing any of them had yet been in--with two regiments taking the field
one against the other, with many more cannon and guns than Mr. Pertell
had hitherto used.

"I'll be able to throw on the screen a real battle scene," he said.

"The only trouble," declared Pop Snooks, "is that their uniforms aren't
like those of the days of sixty-three." Pop was a stickler for dramatic
correctness.

"It won't matter," said Mr. Pertell. "The views of the battle will be
distant ones, and no one will be able to see the kind of uniforms the
men wear. Those who are close to the camera will wear the proper Civil
War uniforms we have on hand. The officers of the Guard have agreed to
that."

Considerable preparation was necessary before the big film of the battle
could be taken, and to this end it was necessary to have several
conferences among the officers and Mr. Pertell and his camera men and
assistants, including Mr. DeVere. A number of the Guard officers were
constantly about the farmhouse, arranging the plans.

One afternoon Alice was sitting on the porch with Estelle, waiting
until it was time for them to take their parts in a side scene of the
production. A nattily attired young officer came up the walk, doffing
his cap.

"I beg your pardon," he said. "I am Lieutenant Varley, and I was sent
here to ask for Mr. Pertell. Perhaps you can tell me where I can find
him?"

Alice looked and blushed. He was the one who had audaciously waved to
her beneath her window, but now he showed no sign of recognition. As his
gaze rested on the face of Estelle Brown, however, he started.

"Excuse me!" he began, "but did you reach your destination safely?"

"My destination!" exclaimed Estelle. "What do you mean? I don't know
you!"

"Perhaps not by name. But are you not the young lady whom I met some
years ago in Portland, Oregon, inquiring how to get to New York?"

"You are mistaken," said Estelle, and her voice was frigid in tone. "I
have never been in Portland in my life," and she turned aside.




CHAPTER XI

WONDERINGS


For a moment Lieutenant Varley seemed to hesitate, and Alice felt sorry
for him. He was distinctly not of the type that would try to make an
acquaintance in this way just because Estelle was a pretty girl. He
seemed embarrassed and ill at ease. But he was not the sort of young man
to give up, once he thought he was right, as he obviously did in this
case. To do so, Alice felt sure he reasoned, would have been to
acknowledge that he was just the sort he seemingly was not.

"I really beg your pardon," he went on, in a firm but respectful tone.
"I am sure I have met you before. I do not wonder that you do not
remember me, but I cannot forget you. Yours isn't a face one easily
forgets," and he smiled genially, and in a manner to disarm criticism.

"But I never was in Portland," insisted Estelle, and it was plain that
she was puzzled by his persistence but not offended by it. "And I don't
remember ever having seen you before."

"Perhaps if I recall some of the circumstances to you it may bring back
the memory," suggested the lieutenant. "Believe me, I do not do it out
of mere idle curiosity, but you seemed in such distress at the time, and
so uncertain of where you wanted to go, that I really wished after I had
directed you that I had placed you in charge of the conductor of your
train."

"But I never was in Portland," said Estelle again, "and though I have
been in New York, I went there from Boston. Surely you have confused me
with some one else."

The young officer shook his head.

"I couldn't do that," he said with a smile that showed his white, even
teeth. "It was just about this time three--no, four years ago. I was in
Portland on business, and as I entered the railroad station you were
standing there----"

Estelle shook her head, smiling.

"Well, for the sake of argument," admitted the lieutenant, "say it was
some one who looked like you."

"All right," agreed Miss Brown, and she and Alice drew near the porch
railing, on the other side of which stood the officer with doffed hat.

"A young lady was standing there, and she seemed quite bewildered," went
on Lieutenant Varley. "I saw that she was in some confusion, and asked
if I could be of any service to her. She said she wanted to get to New
York, but did not know which train to take. I asked her if she had her
ticket, and she replied in the negative. I asked her if she wanted to
buy one, and she said she did, showing a purse well filled with
bills----"

"Then surely it could not have been I!" exclaimed Estelle with a merry
laugh. "I never had a purse well-filled with bills. We moving picture
players--at least in my class--don't go about like millionaires.
Gracious! I only wish I did have a well-filled purse, don't you, Alice?"

"Surely. But what else happened? I'm interested in the story."

"And I was interested in the young lady," went on the officer. "I bought
her ticket for her with the money she handed me, and put her on the
train. She was quite young--about as old as you"--and he smiled at
Estelle, "and I asked her if some one was going to meet her. She said
she thought so, but was not sure, at any rate she felt that she could
look after herself. I left her, and meant to speak to the conductor
about her, but did not have time.

"I have often wondered since whether she arrived safely, and when I saw
you sitting here I felt that I could ascertain. For I certainly took you
for that young lady."

"I am sorry to spoil your romance," said Estelle, "but I am not the one.
I never was farther West than Chicago, and then only for a little while,
filling a short engagement in the movies."

"Well, I won't insist on your identity," said the lieutenant, "but I'm
sure I'm not mistaken. However, I won't trouble you further----"

"Oh, it has been no trouble," interrupted Estelle. "I'm sure I hope you
will find that young lady some day."

"I hope so, too," and the lieutenant bowed. But, judging from his face,
Alice thought, it was plain that he was sure he had already found the
young lady in question.

At that moment Mr. Pertell came out on the porch and saw the lieutenant.

"Ah, I'm glad you are here," observed the manager. "I want to ask you a
great many things. This staging of sham battles is not as easy as I
thought it would be."

"We can have the sham battles all right," answered the officer, with a
smile. "But I can imagine it is not easy to get good moving pictures of
them. We have to operate over a large area, and we can't always tell
what the next move will be. Though, of course, for the purpose of making
views we can ignore military regulations and strain a point or two."

"That's just what I want to talk about," remarked Mr. Pertell. "In the
attack, for instance, the way the plans have been made the sun is wrong
for getting good views. Can't we switch the two armies around?"

"Well, I suppose we can. I'll speak to the colonel about it," and then
the two went inside, where Mr. Pertell had his office in the parlor of
the farmhouse.

"What do you think of him, Estelle?" asked Alice.

"Why, I think he's very nice, but he's altogether wrong about me."

"And yet he seemed so positive."

"Yes, that is what makes it strange. But I never saw him before--that
is, as far as I know; and I'm certain I was never in Portland. He must
be mistaken, but it was nice of him to admit it. I thought at first he
was using the old method to get acquainted."

"So did I. But he isn't that kind."

"He doesn't seem to be."

Russ Dalwood came around the corner of the porch with Paul Ardite and
Hal Watson, a young man lately engaged to play juvenile roles. Hal had
become very friendly with the little group that circled around Ruth and
Alice.

"You girls have an hour yet before you go on," Russ informed them. "We
haven't anything to do until then, either. Want to take a run in to
town? I've got to call at the express office for some extra film, and
the auto is ready. Where's Ruth?"

"Up in her room. I'll go for her," offered Alice. "Shall we have time?"

"Plenty. You can even buy yourself some candy--or let us do it for you,"
laughed Paul.

"We'll let you do it!" said Estelle, as Alice hastened to summon her
sister.

"Ruth! Ruth! where are you?" called Alice, as she ran upstairs--Alice
seldom walked.

"Here, just reading over my new part. What's the matter?"

"We're going for an auto ride with the boys. Come along. You can study
in the car."

"Yes, a lot of studying I could do under those circumstances. But I'll
come--I want a bit of diversion. Who else is going?"

Alice told her, and then spoke about the young lieutenant.

"Wasn't it queer he should be mistaken?" she asked.

Ruth did not reply for a moment.

"Wasn't it?" repeated her sister.

"I was just wondering," said Ruth, slowly. "Was it?"




CHAPTER XII

AN INTERRUPTION


While Alice was putting on her hat Ruth looked at her in some surprise.

"Was it?" she repeated.

"Was what?" asked her sister.

"Was it a mistake?"

"Of course it was, Ruth! Didn't I tell you Estelle said he must have
taken her for some one else, as she had never been in Portland in her
life? Of course, it was a mistake. What makes you think it wasn't?"

"Because, Alice, I am beginning to have doubts regarding Estelle."

"Doubts! You don't mean about the ring?"

"Of course not! But I am beginning to think she is not altogether what
she seems to be."

"What do you mean?"

"Well, nothing serious, of course. And if she has done what I think she
has it isn't any worse than many girls have done, and have gained by it,
rather than lost, though it was risky."

"You mean?"

"I mean that I believe she isn't telling us all she knows. She is hiding
something about her past. And I believe it is that she has run away from
home because her family would not let her go into moving pictures. You
know we sort of suspected that before. Now, in that case, she would have
every reason to deny that she had seen that young lieutenant in
Portland."

"Why should she, providing I grant that you are right?"

"Because he might know her friends and would tell them where she was.
And she doesn't want that known until she has made a reputation. I don't
blame her. If ever I ran away----"

"Ruth! _you_ are not thinking of it, are you?"

"Silly! Of course not. But if I should I wouldn't want to run back home
until I had something to show for my efforts. It may be that way in
Estelle's case. She doesn't want to return like the prodigal son."

"I believe you're entirely wrong," declared Alice. "What I think is that
she perhaps comes of good people. When I say that I don't mean that they
were any better than we are, but that they so regarded themselves, and
would look askance at motion picture players. Well, Estelle doesn't want
to bring any annoyance on her family, and that may be the reason she
doesn't tell much about herself. But as for that young officer's having
seen her, I believe Estelle when she says he is mistaken. Don't you?"

"I don't know what to believe," returned Ruth. "But I'm not going to
worry over it."

"And you won't tell her you don't believe she is what she seems to be?"

"Of course not, you little goose! But I'm going to keep my eyes open.
You know we may be able to give her some good advice. You and I, Alice,
don't meet with near the temptations that assail other girls in this
business, and it's because father is with us all the while. Now Estelle
isn't so fortunate; so I propose that we sort of look after her."

"Oh, I'm very willing to do that."

"And if we see anything that is likely to cause her trouble, we must
shield her from it. That is what I mean by sort of keeping watch over
her. At the same time, I believe that she is not altogether what she
seems. She is hiding something from us--even though we are trying to be
so kind to her. But she doesn't really mean to do it. She is just
afraid, I think."

"And you really believe that lieutenant knows her?"

"He may. At least I think, from what you said, that he is honest in his
belief. But we will watch and wait. We must try to help Estelle in the
hour of trial."

"Of course we will. Now hurry, for they are waiting for us."

"Such a funny thing just happened to me!" cried Estelle to the party of
young folks when they were in the automobile and on the way to the
village. "I was mistaken for some one else."

"What--again?" asked Alice.

"No, the same incident that you witnessed," and she related the episode
of the lieutenant as Alice had detailed it to Ruth.

"That was queer," commented Hal Watson.

"I should say so!" exclaimed Russ.

"Was he at all fresh?" Paul asked, and his air was truculent.

"Not in the least!" Estelle hastened to assure him. "He was honestly
mistaken about it, that was all," and she enlarged on the incident, and
seemed so genuinely amused by it that Alice nudged her sister as much as
to say:

"See how much in error you are."

But Ruth only smiled, and Alice noticed that she regarded Estelle more
closely than ever.

The party made merry in the town, going into the "Emporium," for
ice-cream sodas; and even the presence of Maurice Whitlow at the other
end of the counter, where he was imbibing something through a straw,
could not daunt Alice's high spirits. Whitlow smiled and smirked in the
direction of his acquaintances, but he received no invitation to join
them.

As Estelle was going out in the rear of the party, the extra player slid
up to her and asked:

"Mayn't I have the pleasure of buying you some more cream?"

"You may not!" exclaimed Estelle, not turning her head, and there were
snickers from the other patrons in the place. Maurice turned the shade
of his scarlet tie, and slid out a side door.

"You're getting too popular," chided Alice to her friend. "First it's
the young lieutenant, and now it's your former admirer."

"I can dispense with the admiration of both!"

"Even the lieutenant?" asked Ruth, meaningly.

"Oh, he wasn't so bad," and Estelle either was really indifferent, or
she assumed indifference in a most finished manner that would have done
credit to a more experienced actress than she was.

"What's the matter--are we late?" asked Paul, as, on the way back to Oak
Farm, he saw Russ look at his watch and then speed up the car a bit.

"Yes, a little. Mr. Pertell said he wanted to begin that skirmish scene
at eleven exactly, and it's ten minutes to that now. We can just about
make it. The sun will be in just the right position for making the film.
It's in a thicket you know, and the light isn't any too good. That's the
scene you girls are in," he went on.

"Speed along," urged Paul. "I've got to get into my uniform and make up
a bit."

There is very little "make up" done for moving pictures taken in the
open, and not as much done for studio work as there is on the regular
stage. The camera is sharper than any eye, and make-up shows very
plainly on the screen. Of course, eyes are often darkened and lips
rouged a bit to make them appear to better advantage. Even the men make
up a little but not much. For close-up views, though, where the faces
are more than life size, artistic make-up is very essential. The camera,
in this case, is a magnifying glass, and the most peach-blow complexion
would look coarse unless slightly powdered.

"We'll be all right if we don't get a puncture," said Hal.

No sooner were these words out of his mouth than there came a hiss of
escaping air.

"There she goes!" cried Paul. "Stop, Russ!"

"No, we haven't time. I'm going to keep on. It's better to get in on the
rims and cut a shoe to ribbons than to spoil the film."

They sped along in spite of the flat tire. And it was well they did, for
Mr. Pertell was anxiously waiting for his players when they arrived at
Oak Farm.

"You cut it pretty fine," was his only comment. "Don't do it again. Now
get ready for that skirmish scene."

This was one little incident in the big war play. In it Ruth and Alice
were to be shown driving along a country road. There was to be an alarm,
and a body of Confederate cavalry was to encounter one of the outposts
of the Union army. There was to be a skirmish and a fight, and the Union
men were to be driven off, leaving some dead and wounded. The girls,
though shocked, were to look after the wounded.

All was in readiness. The soldiers, some drawn from the newly-arrived
National Guards, were posted in their respective places. Lieutenant
Varley was to play the part of one of the wounded Unionists.

"All ready--come on with the carriage!" called Mr. Pertell to Ruth and
Alice, who were waiting out of range of the camera. They had rehearsed
the direction they were to take. "Go on!" called the director to Russ.
"Camera!"

The grinding of the film began, and Ruth and Alice acted their parts as
they drove along in the old-fashioned equipage. Suddenly, in front of
them the bushes crackled.

"There they come!" cried Ruth, pulling back the horses as called for in
the play. "The soldiers!"

But instead of a band of men in blue breaking out on the road, there
came a herd of cows, that rushed at the carriage, while the horses
reared up and began to back.

"Stop the camera! Stop that! Cut that out!" frantically cried Mr.
Pertell through his megaphone. "Hold back those men!" he added to his
assistant who had signaled for the Confederates to rush up.




CHAPTER XIII

FORGETFULNESS


Ruth and Alice for the moment were not quite certain whether or not this
was a part of the scene. Very often the director would spring some
unexpected effect for the sake of causing a natural surprise that would
register in the camera better than any simulated one.

But these were real cows, and they did not seem to have rehearsed their
parts very well, for they rushed here and there and surrounded the
carriage, to the no small terror of the horses, which Ruth had all she
could do to hold in.

"Oh, what shall we do?" cried Alice. "I'm going to jump out!"

"You'll do nothing of the sort!" exclaimed her sister. "Sit where you
are! Do you want to be trampled on or pierced with those sharp horns,
Alice?"

"I certainly do not!"

"Then sit still! This must be a mistake."

It did not take much effort on Ruth's part to make Alice remain in the
carriage with all those cows about. For she had learned on Rocky Ranch
that while a crowd of steers will pay no attention to a person on a
horse, once let the same person dismount, and he may be trampled down.

These, of course, were not wild steers--Alice could see that. But she
thought the same rule, in a measure, might hold good.

More cows crashed through the bushes until the road was fairly blocked,
and then came another rush of many feet and the Union skirmish party
came galloping along. They had received no orders to hold back, and so
dashed up.

At the same moment a ragged boy with a long whip came rushing up.
Evidently, he was in charge of the cows, but when he saw the soldiers in
their uniforms, a look of fear spread over his face.

"I didn't do nothin', Mister Captain! Honest I didn't!" he yelled.
"These is pap's cows, an' I'm drivin' 'em over to the man he sold 'em
to. I didn't do nothin'."

"Nobody said you did!" laughed Lieutenant Varley with a bow to Ruth and
Alice in the carriage. "But why did you drive them in here to spoil the
picture?"

"I didn't know nothin' about no picture--honest I didn't! I took this
road because it was shorter. Don't shoot pap's cow-critters. I'll take
'em away."

"Well, that's all we want you to do," said Mr. Pertell, coming up with a
grim smile. "You nearly got yourself and your cow-critters in trouble,
my boy. Drive 'em back now, and we'll go on with the film. Did any of
'em get in, Russ?" he asked.

"Just a few, on the last inch or so of the reel. I can cut that out and
go on from there. Hold the carriage where it is, Ruth," he called.

"All right," she answered, for she had now quieted the restive horses.

"Don't be afraid, boy," said Alice to the lad. "You won't be hurt."

"And won't they hurt pap's cow-critters, neither?"

"No, indeed. It was all a mistake."

"I--I didn't know there was no war goin' on," remarked the lad, as he
sent an intelligent dog he had with him after the straying animals. "Me
an' pap we lives away over yonder on t'other side of the mountain. An'
we don't never hear no news. I was plum skeered when I seen all them
ossifers. Thought sure I was ketched, same as I've heard my grandpap
tell about bein' ketched in the army. He was a soldier with Sherman,
and I've heard him tell about capturin' cow-critters when they was on
the march."

"Well, this would be like old times to him, I suppose," said Mr.
Pertell. "But this is only in fun, my boy--to make motion pictures. So
take your cows away and we'll go on with the work. Drive 'em on," and
the boy did so with a curious, backward look at the girls in the
carriage, and at the Union soldiers, who were going back to their places
to get ready anew for the skirmish charge.

"And this time we'll have it without cows," said Mr. Pertell. "They
might go all right in a film of Sherman's march, but not in this
skirmish fight. All ready now. Take your places again."

The preliminary advance of the carriage, containing Ruth and Alice had
been filmed all right. Very little need be cut out. Once the cows were
beyond the camera range, Russ again began grinding away at the film.

"Now come on--Union soldiers!" cried the director.

From their waiting place Lieutenant Varley led his men; and as they
swept on past the carriage, Alice and Ruth registering fear, the
Confederates rushed out to meet them.

Then began the skirmish. Guns popped. Horses reared, some throwing their
riders unexpectedly, but this made it all the more realistic. Men
fought hand to hand with swords, using only the flats, of course. Horses
collided one with another, and the animals seemed to enter into the
spirit of the conflict fully as much as did the men. There was a rattle
of rifles, but no cannon were used in this scene.

Russ and his helpers filmed it, and, standing behind them watching the
mimic fight, was the director, shouting orders through his megaphone
and, when he could not make himself heard in this way, using a field
telephone, calling his instructions to helpers stationed out of sight in
the bushes, where they could relay the commands to those taking part in
the skirmish.

"A little livelier now!" yelled Mr. Pertell. "Give way, you Union
fellows, as though you were beaten, and then drive them back to the
fight, Mr. Varley. That's the way!"

The conflict raged and the cameras clicked away. It was all one to the
camera men--a parlor drama or a sanguinary conflict. So long as the
shutter worked perfectly, as long as the focus was correct and the film
ran freely, the camera men were satisfied.

"Now you Confederates pretend to be overwhelmed, and then rally with a
rush and sweep the Unionists out of the thicket!" ordered the director.

This was done, and, all the while, at one side of the picture crouched
Ruth and Alice, as two Southern girls. They had leaped from their
carriage and were waiting the outcome of the conflict, stooping down out
of the way of flying bullets.

This was a side scene in the war play, and did not involve the main
story. Ruth and Alice, as did the other main characters, assumed various
roles at times.

"Come on now! You Unionists are beaten. Retreat!" called the director,
and Lieutenant Varley's men rode off, leaving him and some others
injured on the field of the conflict.

It was here that Alice and Ruth took an active part again. Ruth rushed
up to the fallen lieutenant and felt his pulse. No sooner had she done
so than the director cried:

"Stop the camera! That won't do, Miss DeVere!"

"Why not?" she asked.

"Because you felt his pulse with your thumb. No nurse would do that. The
pulse in the thumb itself is too strong to allow any one to feel the
pulse in another's wrist. Use the tips of your first and second fingers.
Now try again. Ready, Russ!"

This time Ruth did it right. It was characteristic of Mr. Pertell to
notice a little detail like that.

"Not one person in a hundred would object to the pulse being felt with
the thumb," he explained afterward; "but the hundredth person in the
audience would be a doctor, and he'd know right away that the director
was at fault. It is the little things that count."

Ruth and Alice busied themselves ministering to the wounded who were
made prisoners by the Confederates. The lieutenant was put in their
carriage and driven away. That ended the scene at the place of the
skirmish.

"Very well done!" Mr. Pertell told the girls, as they prepared for the
next act, which was in a room of a Southern house, whither the wounded
had been carried.

These were busy days at Oak Farm. With the arrival of the two regiments
of the National Guard, pictures were taken every day, leading up to the
big battle scene, which had been postponed. When they were not posing
for the cameras, the guardsmen were drilling in accordance with the
regulations of the annual state encampment under the direction of the
regular army officers.

"Well, have you quite recovered from your wounds?" asked Alice of
Lieutenant Varley one day, as she met him outside the farmhouse.

"Oh, yes, thanks to the care of your sister and yourself. By the way, I
hope your friend Miss Brown is not angry with me."

"Why should she be?"

"Well, because I thought I had seen her before."

"I don't believe she is. I haven't heard her say. But here she comes
now. You can ask her," and Estelle came around the turn of the path.
Seeing Alice talking with the lieutenant, she hesitated, but Alice
called:

"Come on--we were just speaking about you."

"I wondered why my ears burned," laughed Estelle.

"Perhaps you two are going somewhere," said the officer, preparing to
take his leave.

"Oh, to no place where you are not welcome," answered Alice, graciously,
with a side look at her companion to see if Estelle objected. But the
latter gave no sign, one way or the other.

"Thank you!" exclaimed the guardsman. "I have to take part in a little
scene in about an hour, but I would enjoy a walk in the meanwhile. You
are both made up, I see?"

"Yes, we are Southern belles to-day," laughed Alice.

"Belles every day," returned the lieutenant with a bow.

"Nicely said!" laughed Estelle. "You are improving!"

She and Alice wore the costumes of generations ago, big bonnets and
hoopskirts.

"Let's go over and see what they're filming there," suggested Alice,
pointing to where a crossroads store had been put up.

The scene at the store was one to represent a dispute among some
Southerners and some Northern sympathizers. It was to end in a fight in
which one man was to draw his revolver.

All went well up to the quarrel, and then it became too realistic, for,
by some chance, there was a bullet in the revolver instead of a blank
cartridge, and it entered the leg of one of the disputants. He fell and
bled profusely.

"Get Dr. Wherry!" yelled Mr. Pertell.

"Dr. Wherry went into the village this morning to get some stuff," Russ
said, "and he hasn't come back yet."

"Then somebody will have to go after him!" cried the director.

"I'll go!" offered Alice. "I can take this horse and carriage!" for a
rig was hitched outside the "store."

"I'll go with you!" cried Estelle, and then, in costume and made up for
the pictures as they were, they got into the vehicle and drove off.




CHAPTER XIV

IN THE SMOKE


"Do you think he'll die?" asked Estelle, as she took the reins and
flicked the horse lightly with the whip.

"I hope not," answered Alice.

"Did it make you faint to see the blood?"

"A little. Did it you?"

"Yes. I can't bear it! It makes me---- Oh, it makes me----"

Estelle closed her eyes, and Alice was surprised to see her turn pale,
even under her rouge, and shudder.

"That's queer," Alice said. "I should have thought, being on a ranch as
you were, you might have become used to accidents and scenes of
violence."

"Who said I was on a ranch?"

"Why, you did!"

"I did?"

"Yes; don't you remember? That day when we were talking about branding
cows----"

"Oh, maybe I did. I'd forgotten. Oh, dear! here comes an auto, and I'm
not sure about this horse. I'm afraid he'll start to rear."

At this intimation that there might be trouble, Alice's face took on a
worried look, and she fore-bore to press the questions she had been
asking Estelle.

The horse showed some signs of fear as he passed the automobile in the
road, but the man driving the car was considerate enough to stop his
machine and motion to the girls to pass. They did so, the horse getting
as far to one side of the road as he could, his nostrils distended and
his ears pricked forward.

"There! Thank goodness that's over!" sighed Estelle. "Now to make speed
and get that doctor. I hope the man doesn't die."

"I do too," acquiesced Alice. "Did you see how sharply the man looked at
us?"

"Who, the man that was shot?"

"No, the one in the auto. He stared and stared!"

"Probably he wondered where in the world we got a horse in these days
that was afraid of an auto. I wonder myself where this steed has been in
hiding. There are so many cars now that it is a wonder horses aren't
using gasoline as perfume."

"No, he wasn't looking at the horse," persisted Alice. "He was looking
at us. Perhaps he knew you, Estelle."

"Why do you say that? I'm sure I never saw him before. Maybe it was you
he was staring at."

"No, it was you he was staring at, but I don't blame him. You are very
striking looking to-day."

"It's this dress. Isn't it quaint?"

"And pretty! Oh, but we mustn't talk so frivolously when that poor man
may be dying. We must drive faster."

"Talking isn't going to make the horse go any slower. In fact, I think
maybe he'll go quicker to get the trip over with sooner so he can be rid
of our chatter. But I don't think the poor man is badly hurt. He may
bleed a lot, but they can hold that in check until we get the doctor."

They drove on, and were presently in the village. They had been told
where Dr. Wherry had gone--to a drugstore to get some medical
supplies--and thither they made their way.

"Do you notice how every one is staring at us?" asked Alice, as they
drove along the streets.

"They do seem to be," admitted Estelle, looking for the drugstore. "I
guess it's the horse; he is so bony he has many fine points about him,
as Russ said. And we're queer looking in these costumes ourselves."

When they alighted at the pharmacy and started in, they became aware of
the growing sensation they were creating. For a little throng had
gathered in front of the store, and more men and boys came running up,
to form in two lines--a living lane--through which Alice and Estelle had
to pass.

"We certainly are creating a sensation," gasped Alice, growing
embarrassed.

"Look! a regular bridal crowd," said Estelle in a low voice.

Though they undeniably presented a pretty picture in their paint,
powder, curls and hoopskirts, they were also an unusual one for that
little country village.

"Look at the society swells!" cried one boy.

"Dat's de new fashion--makin' your nose look like a flour barrel!" added
another.

"Aren't those dresses sweet?" sighed a girl.

"They must be the latest New York style," added a companion. "I heard
that full skirts were coming in again."

"Well, ours are certainly full enough," murmured Alice, looking down at
her swaying hoops.

And then some one guessed the truth.

"They're actresses--the movie actresses!" came the cry, and this
attracted more attention than ever, for if there is one person about
whom the American public is curious, it is the actor.

"Oh my!" exclaimed Estelle, "now we are in for it. Hurry inside the
store!"

The girls fairly ran into the friendly shelter, and some of the crowd
attempted to follow, but the drug clerks barred the way, guessing what
the excitement was about.

"Dr. Wherry!" gasped Alice. "Is he here?"

"Right back there--in the prescription department," a clerk said. "Which
of you is ill?"

"Neither one!" cried Estelle. "We want him for a man out at Oak Farm.
He's been shot--an accident in the play. Tell him to hurry, please, and
then show us some way of getting out through a side door. I can't face
that crowd--this way," and she looked down at her elaborate hoop-skirted
costume, which might have been all right in the days of sixty-three, but
which was unique at the present time.

"What's the trouble?" asked Dr. Wherry, coming from behind the
ground-glass partition. "Oh, Miss DeVere and Miss Brown!" he went on as
he recognized the moving picture girls. "Is some one hurt?"

They told him quickly what the trouble was, and he cried:

"I'll go at once. You'd better come back with me in the auto if you
don't want to run the gauntlet of the staring crowd. I'll bring my
machine around to the side door."

"What about the horse we drove over?" asked Alice.

"I'll have Mr. Pertell send a man for that."

The girls, in their curiosity-exciting costumes, managed to slip out the
side door and into the doctor's automobile without attracting the
attention of the crowd. Then they made the trip back in good time and
comfort.

"And to think we never for a moment thought of changing our things!"
cried Alice, when they were at Oak Farm again.

"Or even of rubbing off some of the make-up," added Estelle. "But we
were so excited--at least I was--when I saw the poor fellow hurt. I hope
it is not serious."

"No, he's lost a little blood, that's all," said Dr. Wherry. "But I
thought you were used to such scenes, Miss Brown, coming from the West,
as you did."

"I from the West? Oh, yes, I have been there. Come on, Alice, let's see
if they still want us for anything, and, if they don't, we'll change our
clothes," and Estelle seemed glad of a chance to hurry away.

"I wonder," said Alice to her sister afterward, "whether she is really
so squeamish as she pretends, or if she doesn't want it known that she
is from the West?"

"It's hard to say. Estelle is acting more and more queerly every day, I
think."

"So do I. Though I am quite in love with her. She has such a sweet
disposition."

"Yes, she is a lovely girl. I only wish there wasn't that bit of mystery
about her."

"And it is a mystery," went on Alice. "Every once in a while I catch
Lieutenant Varley looking at her, when he thinks he isn't observed, and
he shakes his head as though he could not understand it at all."

"Then you think he still feels sure she is the girl he met in Portland?"

"I'm positive he does, and he isn't doing it to further his own ends and
force an acquaintance with her, either. He honestly believes he has met
her before."

"Well, it is very strange. But she doesn't seem to want to talk about
anything connected with her past."

"No, and I suppose we should not try to force matters."

The man who was shot was soon out of danger, and, meanwhile, the taking
of the war scenes went on with some one else in his place. A number of
sham engagements had been fought, all working up to the big final
battle, in which Ruth would play her part as an army nurse, and Alice
would act as the spy. Estelle, too, had been given a rather important
part, much to the annoyance of Miss Dixon, who had been expecting it.

The vaudeville actress made sneering and cutting remarks about "extra
players butting in," and there were veiled insinuations concerning the
missing ring, but Estelle took no notice, and Alice, Ruth and her other
friends stood loyally by her.

"We'll film that burning barn scene to-day," said Mr. Pertell one
morning at the breakfast table, when he had ascertained that the
atmospheric conditions were right. "That's the one where you two DeVere
girls are surprised on your little farm by the visit of some Union
soldiers. You have been caring for a wounded cousin, who has escaped
through the Union lines, and at the news that the Yankees are coming you
hide him in the barn. Then the Unionists set fire to it, and you girls
have to drag him out.

"There'll be no danger, of course, for the fire won't be near you--in
fact, the barn won't burn at all--only a shack nailed to it. And the
smoke will be from the regular bomb. You have plenty of them, haven't
you, Pop Snooks?"

"Oh yes, plenty of smoke bombs, Mr. Pertell."

All was soon in readiness for the burning-barn scene. Ruth and Alice
received the wounded cousin (an inside scene this) and then, when an old
colored mammie (Mrs. Maguire) came panting with the news that the
Yankees were coming, the wounded Confederate was carried out to the
barn. Then came the visit of the Yankees, who, suspecting the presence
of the escaped prisoner, made diligent search, but without success.

"Fire the barn, anyhow!" cried the captain.

Then came the spirited scene where Ruth and Alice got their wounded
relative out. He was a slim young man, and they could easily carry him,
for he was supposed to be overcome by the smoke.

"Ready, Alice?" asked Ruth, as they went through the action called for
in the script.

"Yes, ready. You take his head and I'll take his heels. Don't be too
stiff," Alice admonished the young man. "We can carry you better if
you're limp."

"I'll be limp enough if I swallow any more of that smoke," choked the
actor. "It's fierce!"

Indeed, Pop Snooks had been very liberal in the matter of smoke bombs.
Great clouds of the black vapor swirled here and there, and Ruth and
Alice had to get free breaths whenever they could.

"Come on!" yelled the director through his megaphone. "Lively!"

Alice and Ruth, half carrying, half dragging, the wounded soldier,
staggered out, Russ clicking away at the camera.

"Good! That's good! It's fine!" exclaimed the enthusiastic director.

Ruth was conscious that she was suddenly dragging more of the weight of
the man's body than at first. But she thought one of Alice's hands had
possibly slipped off, and she did not want to call a halt to get a
better hold.

"My! But this is choking!" gasped Ruth.

Finally, she staggered out into the open, dragging the soldier by his
shoulders. She slumped down on the ground, in a place free from smoke,
and registered exhaustion.

"Where's Alice?" cried Paul, who was holding back in readiness for his
appearance in the scene. "Where's Alice?"

"Isn't she there?" gasped Ruth, rising on her elbow.

"No, she isn't. She must be----"

"Hold that pose, Ruth! Don't stir or you'll spoil the scene!" yelled the
director. "We'll get your sister!"




CHAPTER XV

THE HOSPITAL TENT


"The show must go on!" This is the motto of circus and theatrical
performers the world over. No matter what happens, under what strain or
pain the player labors, no matter what occurs short of death itself, the
public must not be allowed to guess that anything is wrong. And
sometimes even death itself has been no barrier--for players have gone
through with their parts on the stage when, but the act previous, they
have learned that some loved one had passed away.

And more than one clown has bounded into the sawdust ring with merry
quip and jest, with a smile on his painted face, while his heart was
breaking with grief.

And so it was with Ruth DeVere. As she staggered out of the smoke clouds
and saw that Alice had not followed, at once the dreadful thought came
to her that her sister had been overcome by the fumes. And, although the
smoke bombs were harmless as regards fire, the breathing of the
chemical fumes for any length of time might mean death.

Thus, as Ruth was about to stagger to her feet to go back into the murky
cloud to look for Alice, there came the director's orders to "hold that
pose!"

The show must go on! That meant it would not do to spoil the scene, ruin
the film, and necessitate a retake if, by any possibility, it could be
avoided.

"Stay where you are, Ruth! Stop the camera, Russ! Hold the pose--both of
you. We'll go on from there when we get Alice out!"

And Ruth, her heart torn with anguish, must remain. She was glad her
father was not present.

"Get in there and get the girl!" cried Pop Snooks who was busy lighting
more smoke bombs. "Get that girl, some of you fellows!" For he had
guessed in an instant what had happened. It was not the first time one
of the players had been overcome by the heavy fumes.

Into the cloud dashed some of the head property man's helpers. Russ and
Paul, who could leave their posts while the camera was not in motion,
also penetrated the murkiness.

Fortunately, Alice had been overcome when within a few feet of the clear
atmosphere, and it was the work of but an instant for Paul to carry her
outside, where she could breathe pure air.

"The poor dear!" cried Mrs. Maguire. "Here, give her this ammonia and
water."

"Don't come too close to her, Mrs. Maguire!" warned the director. "Your
black make-up will come off on her face, and it will show in the film."

The director had to think of all those things, though it might seem a
bit heartless.

"I'll be careful," promised the motherly old woman. "I'll be careful."

Alice sipped the aromatic spirits of ammonia, and felt better.

"Did I faint?" she asked. "How silly of me!"

"Are you all right?" asked Ruth, still in her place by the side of the
soldier, who was supposed to be unconscious.

"Yes, Ruth dear. I'm all right now. Oh, and did I leave you to carry him
all alone? I'm so sorry!"

"It was all right. I dragged him."

"Yes, the scene is all right," said Mr. Pertell. "Now, Alice, I don't
want to be heartless, but will you be ready to go on in this, or shall
we abandon it and make a retake?"

"Oh, I'll go on. Just a moment, and I'll be all right."

After a minute or two the plucky girl recovered from the effects of the
smoke, and, though she was weak and wan, managed to go through her part.
She and Ruth carried their "cousin" out of the burning barn which was
then allowed to fall to ruins. Or rather, the extra part, built on for
the purpose, was, Pop Snook's smoke bombs effectually concealing from
the audience the fact that the real barn was not in the least harmed.

"Well, I'm glad that's over," said Alice with a sigh, as a little later
she washed off her make-up and donned her ordinary clothes.

"Do you feel bad?" her sister asked.

"Yes, sort of choked."

"Then let's take a walk up on the hill where there is always a breeze."

On the grassy eminence with the fresh breezes blowing about them, Alice
soon felt much better. But Mr. Pertell called off some of the scenes set
down for next day, so that she might have a rest.

"We'll soon be ready for the big hospital scene, Ruth, and also for the
one where you try to get away with the papers, Alice," said Mr. Pertell
to the two girls one day. "And, in order that everything may run
smoothly I've made a little change in the scenario. I'm going to have a
preliminary hospital scene. In that you will be a sort of orderly, or
assistant nurse, Ruth. And there comes an emergency in which you do so
well that you are sent for to be a nurse in one of the big hospitals
maintained near the front. That will make the story more logical.

"So we'll have one of those hospital scenes to-day. I'll stage a small
engagement, and have a number of men wounded. They'll be brought in, and
there will be a night scene. The doctors and other nurses go off duty,
and you are in charge. An emergency occurs--maybe a bandage slips from
an artery and you sit and hold the wound until a doctor can come and tie
the artery again. We'll work it out as we go along."

"Is there anything for me?" asked Alice.

"No, your part will stand all right as it is until you get to the big
hospital scene. Come on now, Ruth; we'll have a rehearsal."

The rehearsal went off well, and the little change promised to
strengthen the story of the war play. The hospital was set up near Mr.
Apgar's corn-crib.

"And maybe that'll be a good thing," he said. "If you folks use enough
of them there disinfectants and carbolic acid, you may scare away all
the rats and mice that eat my corn in the winter."

"Oh! will there be rats and mice?" asked Ruth, apprehensively.

"Not in the hospital," said Mr. Pertell with a laugh. "It will be
strictly sanitary--as much so as things were in the days of
sixty-three."

The fight between the two forces was staged some distance away from the
hospital, and the guns soon began to rattle and to roar again. The girls
did not mind them by this time, however.

This skirmish had no particular part in the general story, but it was
filmed just the same, as it could be spliced in with the other fighting
scenes.

"And you can't get too much of that," Mr. Pertell said.

Russ, with some helpers, was taking the fighting pictures preliminary to
the hospital act. He was nearing the end of the reel in his machine
when, to his dismay, he found he had forgotten to bring a spare one.

"Here, you!" he called to one of the extra soldiers lying lazily on the
grass near the camera, "hop over and ask Pop Snooks to give you an extra
reel for me."

The man did not answer.

"Don't you hear me?" yelled Russ, grinding away at the film which was
being quickly used up. "Go and get me that reel!"

Still no response.

"Are you deaf?" shouted Russ, and then he thought perhaps the discharge
of so many cannon had made the man unable to hear.

"Go over and punch that fellow!" cried Russ to Paul. "Wake him up, and
tell him to get me that extra reel."

"All right," Paul assented. "I'd go myself only I have to carry a
message to headquarters in a minute or two."

He ran over and kicked the soldier, who seemed to be asleep.

"Hi! What's the idea?" demanded the rudely awakened one.

"The camera man wants you to go to get him some film."

"Who--me?"

"Yes--you! Skip!"

"I can't go get no film!"

"You can't? Why not?"

"'Cause I'm dead, that's why! I was told to be killed, and I was. I fell
off my hoss dead, an' I'm deader'n a door nail. I dassn't git up to git
no film for nobody. I'm dead!"

And the man rolled over and closed his eyes.




CHAPTER XVI

A RETAKE


"What's the matter over there?" called Russ to Paul. "Is he going to get
my film?"

"He says he can't."

"Can't? Why not? Has he lost his legs?"

"No. But he's dead. This is carrying realism to the extreme."

"Oh, good-night!" cried Russ. "I haven't but a few feet left. Make him
go."

"I won't go I tell you," the man cried. "I was told to play dead, and
I'm goin' to," and he stuck to the instructions he had received.

Fortunately, one of Russ' helpers was free a moment later, and he went
for the extra roll of film, while the dead man enjoyed his part to his
satisfaction.

"Well, he did just right," said Mr. Pertell, when told of the incident
afterward. "I wish more performers would do exactly as they are told. Of
course, I don't mean to say a player must slavishly do just as I tell
him. But in some cases a dead man's coming to life might spoil a big
scene."

Matters were now in readiness for the preliminary hospital scene. A ward
had been fitted up in a shed where electric lights could be used to get
the necessary illumination, the current being brought from town. In the
shed were ranged white beds, in which a number of wounded men were
reposing. Other men were in wheeled chairs, while still others sat up as
if recovering from a long and dangerous siege from wounds. All were
picturesquely bandaged.

The preliminary scenes had been taken. The doctor had made his rounds of
the wounded on the cots. He had taken their temperature and had felt
their pulses, while the other women of the company, as nurses,
accompanied the surgeon on his journey. Other wounded were brought in.

Night settled down in the hospital. The big, hissing electric lights
were turned off, and from outside a window "moonlight" streamed in. The
moonlight, of course was made by another electric light, properly
shaded.

"Now, I think we're ready for you, Ruth," said the director. "You are on
duty alone in the ward when the emergency occurs."

In the glow of the beams of light from the window Ruth, on duty alone,
took her place.

"All ready now!" called Mr. Pertell, from where he was standing behind
Russ, who was grinding away at the camera. "You start from your
half-doze, Ruth, and listen. Then you approach one of the cots and
discover that the bandage has slipped and that the man is bleeding to
death. You press on the artery, and finally rouse another of the
hospital patients--one not badly wounded--and send him for the surgeon."

Ruth carried out the instructions perfectly. Her acting was so very
natural that afterward, when the film was shown, more than one person
found himself holding his breath lest Ruth should remove her thumb from
the severed artery.

The slightly wounded man limped out to get the surgeon, who came rushing
in, and the artery was tied. Then followed words of praise for Ruth.
This laid the foundation for her summons to a larger hospital when the
proper time came.

The next day more battle views were the order of the day. In one of
these Estelle had to do some fast riding, to leap her horse across a
ditch and speed away from pursuing troopers.

"Aren't you nervous for fear you'll fall?" asked Ruth, as the young
horsewoman was making ready.

"Well, no. I don't think about that part. All I am afraid of is that I
may get out of range of the camera. You see I'm not very old at this
business."

"Just how did you come to get into it?" asked Alice.

"Why, it was a sort of accident. I was on a boat one day, leaning over
the rail looking at the water, when a gentleman came up, begged my
pardon for speaking without being introduced, and asked me if I had ever
been in the movies.

"I hadn't, though I had often thought I would like to be, and I told him
so. He asked me to call at his studio, and I did. They gave me a 'try
out,' found I photographed well, and they cast me for small parts. Then
they found out I could ride and they let me do some outdoor stuff. From
then on I did very well, and when I heard your company was going to make
a big war play, I applied to Mr. Pertell. He took me, I'm glad to say."

"And we're glad you're here," ejaculated Alice.

"We'll go out and watch you jump; it fascinates me, though it makes me
afraid," Ruth declared. "My sister and I did some riding while we were
at Rocky Ranch, but it was nothing to what you do."

"Oh, it takes practice, that's all," answered Estelle.

There were some animated scenes previous to the one in which Estelle
took part. There was a fight over the possession of a bridge, and the
Confederates, having driven off their enemies, prepared to blow it up to
prevent the Union army from using it.

Estelle was to try to reach the bridge before it was destroyed, but,
failing in that, she was to ride her horse to a narrow part of the
stream and leap over.

All went well, and the time came for her to take her swift ride to try
to reach the bridge. On and on she galloped, until she was met by a
colored man who warned her of the fact that in another moment the bridge
would be destroyed.

"She's going pretty close!" murmured Mr. Pertell, as he stood near Russ,
who was filming the scene. "Some of those timbers may fall pretty near
her."

But Estelle seemed to know no fear. She rode straight for the bridge,
and she was only a short distance away when it blew up, the planks and
rails flying high into the air.

Then she turned her horse to reach, ahead of her pursuers, the place she
was to jump the stream. So near was she to the bridge that she had to
swerve her horse quickly to avoid being struck by a fragment of the
falling wood.

"Plucky girl, that!" murmured Mr. DeVere.

While Estelle was being filmed down by the stream, one of the assistant
camera men, a new hand, prepared to take a scene where a Southern farmer
rides up to warn the Confederate cavalry of Estelle's escape, so they
may take after her. Maurice Whitlow was the farmer.

"Here, you!" cried Mr. Pertell to Whitlow, "ride down there and deliver
the message--that's your part in this scene."

There was a small automobile which Mr. Pertell had been using standing
near, and Maurice leaped into this and started across the field toward a
detachment of the Southern cavalry.

Away rattled Maurice in the car, and the camera man ground away, showing
the farmer on his way to give the warning. Suddenly Mr. Pertell turned
and saw what was going on.

"For the love of gasoline, stop!" he cried. "The whole scene is spoiled.
There'll have to be a retake! Of all the stupid pieces of work this is
the worst! Stop that camera!"




CHAPTER XVII

ESTELLE'S STORY


"What's the matter?" cried Russ Dalwood, running back from the stream
where he had been to see that an assistant was successfully getting the
scene after Estelle had leaped to the other bank.

"Matter! Look!" cried the director, and he pointed to Maurice, speeding
to carry his message in the small runabout.

"Good-night!" gasped Russ, who understood at once.

"Why, what's wrong with it?" asked Paul. "Isn't he running the machine
all right?"

"Oh, he's running it all right," said Mr. Pertell in tones of disgust.
"And that's just the trouble! I told him to jump on a horse with that
dispatch, and he goes in the auto!"

"I suppose he thought it was quicker," commented Paul.

"Quicker! Yes, I should say it was! But I'll get him out of there
quicker than he can shake a stick at a dead mule. The idea of riding in
an auto to carry a message in Civil War days. Why, there wasn't a real
auto in the whole world then. How would it look in a film to see an
up-to-date runabout butting in on a scene of sixty-three. Get him back
here and make him start over again on a horse as he ought to," went on
the director. "An auto in sixty-three! Next he'll be sending wireless
telephone messages about fifty years before they were ever dreamed of!"

Fortunately, not much of the film had been reeled off, and the scene was
one that could easily be made over. Estelle's leap was not spoiled, nor
was the blowing up of the bridge.

"Huh! I didn't think anything about there not being autos in those
days," said Maurice, when he had been brought back and mounted on a
horse.

"That's just it," commented Mr. Pertell. "You've got to think in these
days of moving pictures. The audiences are more critical than you would
suppose. Even the children now laugh at fake scenes and incongruities.
And as for using a dummy in danger scenes, it's getting harder and
harder every day to get by with it. You stick to horses or to Shank's
mules, young man, when it comes to transportation in this war film. No
autos where they are going to show in the film."

That was only one of the many details the director and his assistants
had to look after. If eternal vigilance is the price of liberty, it is
much more so the price of good films. The camera sees everything in a
pitiless light. It exaggerates faults and it refuses to shut its eye to
anything at which it is pointed. The absolute truth is told every time.

Of course, there are trick films, but even then the camera tells the
truth fearlessly. It is only the on-lookers' eyes that are deceived. The
camera can not be fooled. And though a man may be seen to be shaking
hands with himself or cutting off his own head, it is done by double
exposure, and could not be accomplished were it not for the fact that
the camera and the film are so fearlessly honest and truth-telling.

"What's the matter, Estelle?" asked Alice of the rider that afternoon,
when they were in Ruth's room resting after the work of the day. "You
seem to be in pain."

"I am. I strained my side a little in that water jump. Petro slipped a
bit on the muddy bank."

"Did you do much jumping out West?" asked Ruth, while Alice was getting
a bottle of liniment.

"In the West? I don't know that I ever jumped there. I can't
remember----"

Estelle paused, and passed her hand across her eyes as though to shut
out some vision.

"Are you faint?" asked Ruth.

"No--no, it isn't that. It--it is just that I--that I---- Oh, I wonder
if I can tell you?" and Estelle seemed in such distress that the two
sisters hastened to her.

"What is it? Tell me, are you badly hurt?" asked Ruth. For she had known
of performers who concealed injuries that they might not be laid off,
and so lose a day's work. "What is the matter, Estelle?"

"It is my--my head."

"Did you fall? I didn't hear them say anything about it!" exclaimed
Alice.

"No, it isn't that," and the girl looked from one sister to the other.
"Oh, I wonder if I dare tell you?"

"If there is anything in which we can help you, tell us, by all means!"
answered Ruth, warmly--sympathetically. "But we don't want to force
ourselves----"

"Oh, no! It isn't that. I'm only wondering what you will think of me
afterward."

"We shall love you just the same!" cried impulsive Alice.

"Don't be too sure. But I feel that I must tell some one. I have borne
all I can alone. It is getting to the point where I fear I shall scream
my secret to the cameras--or some one!"

Then Estelle had a secret!

"Do tell us. Perhaps we can help you--or perhaps my father can,"
suggested Ruth.

"I don't believe any one can help me," said Estelle. "But at least it
will be a relief to tell it. I--I am living under false pretenses!" she
blurted out desperately.

"False pretenses!" repeated Alice. At once her mind flashed back to Miss
Dixon's ring. Was it the taking of this that Estelle was hinting at? The
girl must have guessed what was in the mind of her hearers, for she
hastened to add:

"Oh, it isn't anything disgraceful. It's just a misfortune. You remember
you have been asking me where I learned to ride--whether I didn't use to
live on a ranch--questions like that. Well, you must have noticed that I
didn't answer."

"Yes, we did notice, and we spoke about it," said truthful Ruth.

"We thought you didn't wish to tell," added Alice.

"Wish to tell! Oh, my dears, I would have been only too glad to tell if
I could."

"Why can't you?" asked Ruth. "Are you bound by some vow of secrecy? Is
it dangerous for you to reveal the past?"

"No, it is simply impossible!"

"Impossible!" the two sisters exclaimed.

"Yes, I can no more tell you what life I lived, where I lived, who I
was, or what I was doing, up to a time of about three or four years ago,
than I can fly."

"Why not?" asked Alice, puzzled.

"Because the past--up to the time I named--is a perfect blank to me. My
mind refuses absolutely to tell me who I was or where I lived--who my
people were--anything of the past. My mind is like a blank sheet of
paper. I can remember nothing. Oh, isn't it awful!" and she burst into
tears.




CHAPTER XVIII

"WHAT CAN WE DO?"


"You poor dear!" cried Alice, and she knelt down on the floor beside
Estelle and put her arms about the weeping girl. Ruth, too, with an
expression of sympathy, stroked the bowed head.

"We want so much to help you," Ruth murmured.

"Let me get you something," begged Alice. "Some smelling salts--some
ammonia--shall I call any one--the doctor----?"

"No, I--I'll be all right presently," said Estelle in a broken voice.
"Just let me alone a little while--I mean stay with me--talk to me--tell
me something. I want to get control of my nerves."

Ruth did not seem to know what to say, but Alice pulled a small bottle
from her pocket, and held it under Estelle's nose.

"It's the loveliest new scent," she said. "I bought a sample in town."

Estelle burst into a laugh, rather a hysterical laugh, it is true, but a
laugh nevertheless. It showed that the strain and tension were relaxing
to some extent.

"Isn't it sweet?" Alice asked.

"It is, dear. Let me smell it again. It makes me feel better," and
Estelle breathed in deep of the odorous scent.

"How silly I was to give way like that," she went on. "But I simply
couldn't help it. This has been going on for so long, and it got so I
couldn't stand it another minute. How would you like it not to know who
you are?"

"Not very much, I'm afraid," said Ruth, softly.

"That, in a way, is why it has been such a relief to be in the moving
pictures," Estelle went on. "I could be so many different characters,
and, at times, I thought perhaps, by chance, I might be cast for the
very part I have lost--cast for my real self, as it were."

"You must have had a hard time," said Alice.

"I haven't told you half the story yet," Estelle went on. "Would you
like to hear the rest?"

"Indeed we would!" exclaimed Ruth. "Not from any idle curiosity, but
because we want to help you."

"And I do need some one to help me," murmured Estelle. "I am all alone
in the world."

"You must have relatives somewhere!" insisted Alice.

"None that I ever heard of. But then, who knows what might have happened
in the life that is a blank to me--in the life that lies beyond that
impenetrable wall of the past?

"But I mustn't get hysterical again. Just let me think for a moment, so
I may tell you my story clearly. I shall be all right in a moment or
two."

"Let me make you a cup of tea," proposed Ruth. "I'll make some for all
of us," and presently the little kettle was steaming over the spirit
lamp, and the girls were sipping the fragrant beverage.

"Thank you. That was good!" murmured Estelle. "I feel better now. I'll
tell the rest of my miserable story to you."

"Don't make it too miserable," and Alice tried to make her laugh a gay
one.

"I won't--not any more so than I can help. I think it will do me good to
let you share the mystery with me."

"Then it is a mystery?" asked Ruth.

"Somewhat, yes. You may think it strange, but I can not think back more
than three years--four at the most. I am not at all certain of the time.
But go back as far as I can, all I remember is that I was on a large
steamer."

"On the ocean?" asked Alice.

"No, on the Great Lakes. I was going to Cleveland, which I learned when
I asked one of the officers."

"And didn't you know where you were going before you asked?" Ruth
questioned.

"I hadn't the least idea, my dear. I might just as well have been going
to Europe. In fact, when I first looked out and saw the water, I thought
I was on the ocean."

"But where did you come from, what were you doing there, where were your
people?" cried Ruth.

"That's it, my dear. Where were they? I didn't know. No one knew. All I
could grasp was the fact that I was there on the boat."

"Alone?"

"Yes, all alone."

"But who bought your ticket--who engaged your stateroom?" questioned
Ruth.

"That is the queer part of it. I did it myself. When I first became
conscious that I was in a strange place I was so shocked that I wanted
to scream--to cry out--to ask all sorts of questions. Then I realized if
I did that I might be taken for an insane person and be locked up. So I
just shut myself in my stateroom and did some thinking.

"The first thing I wanted to know was how I got on the steamer, but how
to find that out without asking questions that the steamship people
would think peculiar, was a puzzle to me. Finally, I decided to pretend
to want to change my room, and when I went to the purser I asked him if
that was the only room to be had.

"'Why no, Miss,' he said, 'but when you came on board and I told you
what rooms I had, you insisted on taking that one.' That was enough for
me. I realized then that I had come on board alone, and of my own
volition, though I had not any recollection of having done so, and I
knew no more of where I came from than you do now."

"How very strange!" murmured Alice. "And what did you do?"

"Well, I pretended that I had been tired and had not made a wise choice
of a room, and asked the purser to give me another.

"'I thought, when you picked it out, you wouldn't like that one,' he
said to me, 'but you looked like a young lady who was used to having her
own way, so I did not interfere.'

"That was another bit of information. Evidently, I looked prosperous, a
fact that was borne out when I examined my purse. I had a considerable
sum in it, and the large valise I found in my room was filled with
expensive clothes and fittings. Yet where I had obtained it or my money
or my clothes I could not tell for the life of me. All I knew was that
I was there on board the ship."

"And did you change your stateroom?" asked Ruth.

"Yes; the purser gave me another one. And then I sat down and tried to
puzzle it out. Why was I going to Cleveland? I knew no one there, and
yet I had bought a ticket to that port--or some one had bought it for
me."

"Did that occur to you?" asked Alice. "That some one might have had an
object in getting you out of the way."

"Well, if they had, they took a very public and expensive method of
doing it," Estelle said. "I was on one of the best boats on Lake Erie,
and I had plenty of money."

"Did you find in what name your room was taken?" asked Ruth. "That might
have given you a clue."

"The name given was Estelle Brown," was the answer. "I gave that name
myself, for I recognized my handwriting on the envelope in which I
sealed some of my jewelry before handing it to the purser to put in his
safe. Estelle Brown was the name I gave."

"And was it yours?" asked Alice.

"I haven't any reason to believe that it was not. In fact, as I looked
back then, and as I look back now, the name Estelle Brown seems to be
my very own--it is associated closely with me. So I'm sure I'm Estelle
Brown--that is the only part I am sure about."

"But what did you do?" asked Ruth. "Didn't you make some inquiries?"

"I did; as soon as I reached Cleveland. At first I hoped that my memory
would come back to me when I reached that place. I thought I might
recognize some of the buildings. In fact, I hoped it would prove to be
my home, from which I had, perhaps, wandered in a fit of illness.

"But it was of no help to me. I might just as well have been in San
Francisco or New York for all that the place was familiar to me. So I
gave that up. Then I began to look over the papers to see if any Estelle
Brown was missing. But there was nothing to that effect in the news
columns. All the while I was getting more and more worried.

"I went to a good hotel in Cleveland and stayed two or three days. Then
I happened to think that perhaps my clothes might offer some clue. I
examined them all carefully, and the only thing I found was the name of
a Boston firm on a toilet set. At once it flashed on me that I belonged
in Boston. I seemed to have a dim recollection of a big monument in the
midst of a green park, of narrow, crooked streets and historical
buildings.

"Then, in a flash it came to me--I did belong in Boston. How I had come
from there I could not guess, but I was sure I lived there. So I bought
a ticket for there and went as fast as the train could take me.

"But my hopes were dashed. Even the sight of Bunker Hill monument did
not bring the elusive memory, nor did viewing the other places of
historic interest. Yet, somewhere in the back of my brain, I was sure I
had been in that city before. I went to the place where my toilet set
was bought, but the man had sold out and the new owner could give me no
information.

"I did not know what to do. My money was running low, and I had not a
friend to whom to turn. I happened to go in to see some moving pictures,
and the idea came to me that perhaps I could act. I had rather a good
face, so some one had hinted."

"You do photograph beautifully," said Alice.

"That's what one of the managers in Boston told me when I applied to
him," said Estelle. "He gave me a small part, and then I learned that
New York was really the place to go to get in the movies, so I came on,
with a letter to a manager from the Boston firm.

"It must have been my face that got me my first engagement, for now I
know I couldn't act. But, somehow or other, I made good, and then I got
this engagement with Mr. Pertell.

"And that is my story. You can see what a strange one it is--for me not
to know who I am. I'm almost ashamed to admit it, and that is why I have
been avoiding all references to my past. But now I have told you, what
do you think?"

"I think it's just terrible!" cried Alice. "The idea! Not to know who
you are."

"The question is," said Ruth, "what can we do to help you? This must not
be allowed to go any further. Valuable time is being lost. We want to
help you, Estelle. What can we do? We must try to find out who you are."

"Yes, but how can you?" asked the strange girl.




CHAPTER XIX

A BIG GUN


Ruth did not answer for several seconds. She seemed to be thinking
deeply, and Alice, who was fairly bursting with numberless questions she
wanted to ask, respected her sister's efforts to bring some logical
queries to the fore.

"Then your hopes that Boston would prove to be your home were not borne
out?" asked Ruth, after a bit.

"No, but even yet I feel sure that I have lived at least part of my life
in Boston, or near there. One doesn't have even shadowy memories of big
monuments and historic places without some basis; and it was not the
memory of having seen pictures of them. It was a real vision."

"And the name Estelle Brown?"

"Oh, I'm sure that belongs to me. It seems a very part of myself."

"Did you tell any of this to Mr. Pertell or to the other moving picture
managers?" asked Alice.

"No. You are the first persons to whom I have told my secret," Estelle
said. "I was afraid if I mentioned it they might make it public for
advertising purposes, you know. They might make public the fact that a
young actress was looking for herself and her parents. I never could
bear that!"

"But you want to find your folks, don't you?" asked Alice.

"That's the queer part of it," Estelle replied. "I seem never to have
had any relatives. The way I feel about it now, I would never know that
I had had a father or a mother. I seem to have just 'growed,' the way
poor Topsy did in Uncle Tom's Cabin. That is another strange part of my
present existence. I seem to be in a world by myself, and, as far as I
can tell, I have always been there."

"What about Lieutenant Varley?" inquired Alice.

"Lieutenant Varley?" and Estelle's voice showed that she was puzzled.

"The young officer who said he met you in Portland."

"Oh, yes. I had forgotten. Well, I have absolutely no recollection of
that, and I'm sure I would remember if I had been in the West. I'm
certain I never was there."

"And yet if you weren't in the West how did you learn to ride so well?"
Ruth queried.

"That's another part of the puzzle, my dear. Riding seems to come as
natural to me as breathing. I don't seem ever to have learned it any
more than I learned how to dance. I seem always to have known how."

"There's only one way to account for that," Alice said.

"How?"

"From the fact that you must have started to learn to ride and to dance
when you were very young--a mere child."

"I suppose that would account for it. And yet, I can't remember ever
being a child. I don't recall having played with dolls or having made
mud pies. For me my existence begins about three or four years back, and
goes on from there, mostly in moving pictures."

"It is a queer case," commented Ruth. "I don't know what to do to help
you. Perhaps it would be a good thing to speak to Mr. Pertell about it.
Often when children have been kidnapped, you know, their pictures are
flashed on the screen in hundreds of cities, and sometimes persons in
the audiences recognize them. That might be done with you, Estelle."

"No, I wouldn't dream of doing that. Perhaps something may turn up some
day that will tell me who I really am. And perhaps I shall be sorry for
having learned."

"No, you will not!" declared Alice. "You come of good people--one can
easily tell that."

"Thank you, dear. And now I have inflicted enough of my troubles on you.
Let's talk about something pleasant."

"You haven't burdened us with your troubles, Estelle dear," insisted
Ruth. "It is a strange story, and we are interested in the outcome."

"Indeed we are," said Alice. "We want very much to help you."

"That's good of you. But I don't see what you can do. I'm just a sort of
Topsy, and Topsy I'll remain. Now please don't say anything about what I
have told you to any one--not even to your father--unless I give you
permission. I don't want to be the object of curiosity, as well as of
suspicion."

"Suspicion!" cried Alice.

"Yes, about Miss Dixon's ring."

"Oh! no one in the world believes you took that--not even Miss Dixon
herself. I believe she has found the old paste diamond, and is too mean
to admit it!" cried impulsive Alice.

"You mustn't say such things!" objected her sister.

"Well, neither must she, then. Oh, Estelle! Wouldn't it be great if you
should prove to be the daughter of a millionaire!"

"Too great, my dear. Don't let's think about it. But I feel better for
having unburdened some of my troubles on you. And if you will still be
as nice to me as you always have been----"

"Why shouldn't we be?" asked Ruth.

"Oh, I don't know, but I thought----"

"Silly!" cried Alice, as she threw her arms about the strange girl and
kissed her.

Suddenly, from a distant hill, came a dull, booming sound, that, low as
it was, seemed to make the very ground tremble.

"What's that?" cried Alice.

"Thunder," suggested Ruth.

"It sounded more like an explosion," asserted Estelle.

"There it goes again!" exclaimed Alice.

"Look!" cried her sister.

She pointed through the open window, and as the girls peered out they
saw the top of the hill fly upward in a shower of dirt and stones.

Once more the deep boom sounded.

"It's a big gun!" cried Alice. "I remember, now. Mr. Pertell said he
wanted pictures of a siege of a fort, and he sent for a big gun to get
explosive effects. Come on over!"

"And be blown to pieces?" objected Ruth. "Don't dare go, Alice DeVere!"

"Oh, come on! There's no danger. Russ is going to make the films. I
guess they're just trying it now. It's too late to make good pictures.
Come on."

"I'll go," offered Estelle. "I don't mind the noise."

Ruth declined to go, so the other two girls set off. On the porch they
met Russ and Paul, who confirmed their guess that it was a big siege gun
which Mr. Pertell had sent to New York to get, so he might show the
effect of explosive shells.

"I'm going to film some to-morrow," Russ said.

"Be careful," urged Alice. "Don't get blown up!"

"I'm no more anxious for that than any one," laughed Russ, and together
they set off toward the place where the big gun was being tried out.




CHAPTER XX

A WRONG SHOT


The big gun which Mr. Pertell had secured to make more realistic the war
play he was preparing for the films, was an old fashioned siege rifle,
made toward the close of the Civil conflict. It had not been used more
than a few times, and then it had been stored away in some arsenal. The
director, hearing of it, had secured it to fire at a certain hill on Oak
Farm.

This hill would, in the motion pictures, form a stronghold of the
Southern forces and it would be demolished by shells from the large
cannon, and then would follow a charge on the part of the Union
soldiers.

Real shells, with large explosive charges in them, would be used, but it
is needless to say that when the shots were fired at the hill the
players taking the parts of the Southerners would be at a safe distance.

"They're just trying it out now," observed Russ, who with Paul, was
walking over the fields with Alice and Estelle. "Mr. Pertell wants to
get the range, and decide on the best places from which to make the
pictures. I think we'll film some to-morrow if it's a good day."

"What's the matter with your eyes, Estelle?" asked Paul, as he looked at
her. "Were you working in the studio to-day? I know those lights always
affect my sight."

"Why, no, I wasn't in the studio," and then Estelle realized why her
eyes were so inflamed--it was from crying. She gave Alice a meaning
glance, as though to enjoin silence, but she need have had no fears.
Alice would not betray the secret.

The big gun had been mounted on a level piece of land, not far from the
hill, and on this plain had been thrown up earthworks behind which the
Union forces would take their stand in an effort to reduce the
Confederate stronghold.

"They're going to fire!" cried Estelle as they came within sight of the
gun, and saw, by the activities of the men about it, that a shot was
about to be delivered.

Alice covered her ears with her hands, and Russ and Paul stood on their
tiptoes and opened their mouths wide.

"What in the world are they doing that for?" asked Estelle.

"I can't hear a word you say!" called Alice, making her voice loud, to
overcome her own hearing handicap.

"There she goes!" cried Russ.

The earth trembled as flames and smoke belched from the muzzle of the
cannon, and the girls screamed.

Something black was seen for an instant in the air amid the swirl of
smoke, and then another portion of the hill was seen to lift itself up
into the air and dirt and stones were scattered about.

"A good shot!" observed Russ, letting himself down off his tiptoes.
"That would make a dandy scene for the film."

"That's right," agreed Paul, also letting himself down and closing his
opened mouth.

"Why did you do that?" asked Estelle, when the echoes of the firing had
died away. "Why did you stand on your toes, and open your mouths?"

"To lessen the shock to our ear drums," answered Paul. "It is the
concussion, that is, the rushing back of air into the vacuum caused by
the shot, that does the damage. By opening your mouth you equalize the
air pressure on the inside and the outside of your ear drums, just as
you do when you go through a river tunnel. When there is a partial
vacuum outside your ear, the air inside you presses the drum outward,
and by opening your mouth--or by swallowing you make the pressure
equal. Sometimes the pressure outside is greater than the pressure
inside, and you must also equalize that before you can be comfortable."

"But that wasn't why you stood on your toes," Alice said.

"No; we did that to have less surface of our bodies on the ground so the
vibration would be less. If one could leap up off the earth at the exact
moment a shot was fired it would be much better, but it is hard to jump
at the right instant, and standing on one's toes is nearly as good. Then
you present only a comparatively small point which the vibrations of the
earth, caused by the explosion of the gun, can act upon."

"That's a good thing to remember," Estelle said. "Are they going to fire
again?"

"It looks so," observed Russ. "But if they knock away too much of the
hill there won't be any left for the pictures to-morrow."

"I believe they want to make the top of the hill flat," said Paul. "They
are going to have some sort of hand-to-hand fight on it after the
Unionists capture it," he went on. "I heard Mr. Pertell speaking of it."

"There goes another!" cried Alice, as she saw the same preparations as
before and one man standing near the gun to pull the lanyard, which, by
means of a friction tube, exploded the charge.

Once more the projectile shot out and, burying itself in the soft dirt
of the hill, threw it up in a shower.

"That'll save me a lot of work!" exclaimed a voice behind the young
people, and, turning, they saw Sandy Apgar smiling at them. "That's a
new way of plowing," he went on. "It sure does stir up the soil."

"Won't it spoil your hill?" asked Alice.

"Not so's you could notice it. That hill isn't wuth much as it stands.
It's too steep to plow, and only a goat could find a foothold on it to
graze. So if you moving picture folks level it for me I may be able to
raise some crops on it. Shoot as much as you like. You can't hurt that
hill!"

The men at the gun signaled that they were going to fire no more that
day, and then, as it was safe, the young folks made a trip to see the
extent of damage caused by the shells.

Great furrows were torn in the earth and the stones, and the top of the
hill, that had been rounding, was now quite flat, though far from being
smooth.

The next day had been set for filming the scenes with the big gun in
them. Contrary to expectations, no pictures could be taken, as the
throwing up of the earthworks had not been finished. But a number of men
from both "armies" were set to work, and as it afforded good practice
for the militia they were called on to dig trenches, throw up ridges of
earth, and go through other needful military tactics.

The girls had no part in the scenes with the big gun, except that, later
on, they were to act as nurses in the hospital tent.

On top of the hill a force of Confederates would be stationed, and they
were to reply to the fire of the big gun. Of course, when the
projectiles struck the hill the soldiers would be a safe distance away,
but by means of trick photography scenes would be shown just as if they
were sustaining a severe bombardment.

"Is everything ready?" asked Mr. Pertell, a few days after the setting
up of the big gun, during which interval a sort of fort had been
constructed on the hill and a redoubt thrown up.

"I think so," answered Russ. "We couldn't have a better day, as far as
sunshine is concerned. I'm ready to film whenever you are."

"I'll give the word in a minute. Paul, you're in charge of a detachment
of Union soldiers that storms the hill as soon as the big gun has
silenced the battery there."

"Very well, sir."

The big gun rattled out its booming challenge and was replied to by
volleys from the rifles of the Confederates on the hill and by their
field artillery, which they hurriedly brought up.

Shot after shot was fired, and one after another the Confederate cannon
were disabled. They were blown up by small charges of powder put under
them, set off by fuses lighted by the Confederates themselves, but this
did not show in the picture, and it looked as though the Southern
battery was blown up by shots from the big gun.

"All ready now, Paul! Lead your men!" yelled the director, who was
standing near Russ and his camera. "Rush right up the hill. Stop firing
here!" he called to those in charge of the big gun.

But something went wrong, or some one misunderstood. As Paul was
charging up the hill at the head of his little band, Russ, turning his
head for an instant, saw a man about to pull the lanyard of the big gun.

"Don't shoot! Don't shoot!" he yelled. "It's aimed right at Paul and his
fellows!"

But Russ was too late. The man pulled the cord. There was a deafening
roar, a cloud of smoke, a sheet of fire, and a black projectile was sent
hurtling on its way against the hill, up the side of which Paul was
climbing with his soldiers.




CHAPTER XXI

THE BIG SCENE


Nothing could be done! No power on earth could stop that projectile now
until it had spent itself, or until it had struck something and
exploded.

Horror-stricken, those near the big gun looked across the intervening
space. How many would survive what was to follow?

The man who had pulled the lanyard sank to the ground, covering his face
with his hands.

For a brief instant Paul, leading his men, looked back at the sound of
the unexpected shot. He had been told that no more were to be fired.
Doubtless, this was an extra one to make the pictures more realistic.
But when he saw, in a flash, something black and menacing leaping
through the air toward him and his men, instinctively he cried:

"Duck, everybody! Duck!"

He fell forward on his face and those of his men who heard and
understood did likewise.

Ruth, Alice and Estelle, who were watching the scene from a distant
knoll, hardly understood what it was all about. They had thought no more
shots would be fired when Paul began his charge, but one had boomed out,
and surely that was a projectile winging its way toward the partly
demolished hill.

"That is carrying realism a little too far," said Ruth. "I hope----"

"Paul has fallen!" cried Alice. "Oh--something has happened!"

One must realize that all this took place at the same time. The firing
of the shot, the realization that it was a mistake, Paul's flash of the
oncoming projectile, his command to his men and the vision had by the
girls. All in an instant, for a shot from a big gun does not leave much
margin of time between starting and arriving even when fired with only a
small charge of powder for moving picture purposes.

And, so quickly had it happened that Russ had not stopped turning the
crank of his camera, nor had an assistant on the hillside, where he had
been stationed to film Paul and his soldiers.

And then the projectile struck. Into the soft dirt of the hillside it
buried its head, and then, as the explosion came, up went a shower of
earth and stones. And ever afterward the gunner who inserted that
charge blessed himself and an ever-watchful Providence that he had put
in but half a charge, the last of the powder.

For it was this half-charge that saved Paul and his men. The projectile
struck in the hill a hundred feet below where Paul was leading his force
up the slope, and though they were well-nigh buried beneath a rain of
sand and gravel, they were not otherwise hurt--scratches and bruises
being their portion.

"What are they trying to do, kill us?" cried a man, staggering to his
feet, blood streaming from a cut on his cheek.

"This is too much like real war for me!" yelled another throwing down
his gun. "I'm going to quit!"

"No you don't!" shouted Paul. "Come on. It was a mistake. They won't
fire any more. It will make a great scene on the film. Come on!"

He gave one look back toward the Union battery and saw Mr. Pertell
fluttering a white flag which meant safety. Waving his sword above his
head, Paul yelled again:

"Come on! Come on! It's all right! Up the hill with you! That shot was
only to put a little pep in you!"

"Pep! More like sand! I got a mouthful!" muttered a sergeant.

"Get every inch of that. It's the best scene we've had yet, though it
was a close call!" telephoned Mr. Pertell to the operator on the side of
the hill. "Film every inch of it!"

"All right! I'm getting it," answered the camera man and he went on
grinding away at his crank.

The explosion of the shell had, for the moment, stopped the advance of
Paul and his men up the hill, but this momentary halt only made it look
more realistic--as though they really feared they were in danger, as
indeed they had been. Now the director called:

"It's all right, Paul! Go ahead! Keep on just as if that was part of the
show."

"It was a lively part all right!" and Paul laughed grimly. "Come on,
boys!"

And the charge was resumed.

Back of the dismantled battery, whence they had presumably been driven
by the fire from the big gun, the Confederates were massed. They were
waiting for Paul's charge, and they, too, had been a little surprised by
the unexpected firing of the shell.

But now, in response to a signal on the field telephone, they prepared
to resist the assault.

"Come on, boys! Beat the Yankees back!" was the battle cry that would be
flashed on the screen.

Then came the fierce struggle, and it was nearly as fierce as it was
indicated in the pictures. Real blows were given, and more than one man
went down harder than he had expected to. There were duels with clubbed
rifles, and fencing combats with swords, though, of course, the
participants took care not to cut one another.

In spite of this, several received minor hurts. But this result only
added to the effectiveness of the scene, though it was painful. But in
providing realism for motion pictures more than one conscientious player
has been injured, and not a few have lost their lives. It is devotion of
no small sort to their profession.

Back and forth surged the fight, sometimes Paul's men giving way, and
again driving the Confederates back from the crest of the hill. Small
detachments here and there fired volleys of blank cartridges from their
rifles, but there was not as much of this for the close-up pictures as
there had been for the larger battle scenes. For while smoke blowing
over a big field on which hundreds of men and horses are massed makes a
picture effective, if seen at too close range it hides the details of
the fighting.

And Mr. Pertell wanted the details to come out in this close-up scene.

Back and forth surged the fight until it had run through a certain
length of film. Then the orders came that the Confederates were to give
up and retreat. Before this, however, a number of them had been killed,
as had almost as many Union soldiers.

Then came a spirited scene. Paul, leading his men, leaped up on the
earthworks of the Confederate battery, cut down the Southern flag--the
stars and bars. In its place he hoisted the stars and stripes, and with
a wild yell that made the fight seem almost real, he and his men
occupied the heights.

"Well done!" cried Mr. Pertell, enthusiastically, when he came over from
the ramparts of the big gun. "Are you sure none of you was hurt when
that shell exploded?"

"None of us," answered Paul. "It fell short, luckily, and the dirt was
soft. No big rocks were tossed up, fortunately, and we came out of it
very nicely."

"Glad to hear it. I've discharged the man who fired the gun."

"That's too bad!"

"Well, I hired him over again--but to do something else less dangerous.
I can't afford to take chances with big cannon. But I think the scene
went off very well. That stopping and the bursting of the shell made it
look very real."

"That's good," Paul said, wiping some of the dirt and blood off his
face, for he had been scratched by the point of some one's bayonet.

That ended this particular scene for the day, and the players could take
a much-needed rest. Plenty of powder had been burned, and the air was
rank and heavy with the fumes.

"Are you sure you're all right, Paul?" asked Alice, when he came up to
the farmhouse later in the day.

"Well, I think I'd be better if you would feel my pulse," he said,
winking at Russ. "And you don't need to be in a hurry to let go my hand.
I sha'n't need it right away."

"Silly!" exclaimed Alice, as she turned, blushing, away.

"It must have been a shock to you," said Ruth.

"It was. But it was over so quickly I didn't have time to be shocked
long. Now, let's talk about something nice. Come on in to the town, and
I'll buy you all ice-cream."

"That will be nice!" laughed Estelle.

It was several days later that Mr. Pertell, coming to where the moving
picture girls and their friends were seated on the porch, said:

"The big scene is for to-morrow. In the hospital. This is where you are
looking after the wounded officer, Ruth, and Alice, on pretense of
being a nurse seeking to give aid, comes in to get the papers. I want
this very carefully done, as it is one of the climaxes of the whole
play. So we'll have some rehearsals in the morning."

"Am I to do that riding act?" asked Estelle.

"Yes, you'll do the horse stunt as usual. There's to be a cavalry
charge, Miss Brown, so don't get in their way and be run down."

"I'll try not to," she answered.




CHAPTER XXII

ALICE DOES WELL


Long rows of wounded men lay stretched out on white cots in the
hospital. Some wore bandages over their heads all but concealing their
eyes. Others were so entwined with white wrappings that it was hard to
say whether they were men or oriental women. Still others raised
themselves on their elbows, spasms of pain corrugating their brows,
while red cross nurses held to their lips cooling drinks.

Here at the bedside of one stood a grave surgeon, slowly shaking his
head as he came to the melancholy conclusion that a further operation
was useless. Over there they were carrying out a motionless form on a
stretcher, a sheet mercifully draped over what was left. At the entrance
to the hospital other bearers were carrying in those who came from the
scene of the distant firing.

The boom of big guns shook the frail shack that had been turned into a
hospital. Now and then, as the wind blew in fitful gusts, there was
borne on it the acrid smell of powder. And again, in some dark corner of
that building of suffering, there could be seen through the cracks, left
by hasty builders, the flash of fire that preceded the booming crash of
the cannon.

A sad-faced woman in black moved slowly down the line of cots led by a
sympathetic nurse. She came to one bed, stopped as though in doubt,
passed her hand over her face as if she did not want to admit that what
she saw she did see, and then she fell on her knees in a passion of
weeping, while the surgeons turned away their heads. She had found what
she had sought.

From the farther door there entered a man, limping on crutches
improvised from the limbs of a tree. Stained bandages were about one arm
and another leg. His head, too, was wrapped so that only half his face
showed. A hurrying orderly met him.

"You can't come in here!" he cried.

"Why not, I'd like to know. Ain't this the horspital?"

"Of course it is."

"Then why can't I come in here. I'm hurt, and hurt bad, pardner. Shot
through leg and arm, and part of my jaw gone. Why can't I come in?"

"'Cause you can't. Didn't we just carry you out for dead? What'll the
audience think if they see you walking again? Git on out of here!"

"I will not! I've wrapped this bandage around my head on purpose so they
won't know me. Let me come in, will you? That's real lemonade them
pretty nurses is givin' out to drink, and I'm as dry as a fish. I've
been firin' one of them guns until I've swallowed enough smoke to play
an animated cannon ball. Let me in the horspital."

"Yes, let him in!" called Mr. Pertell through his megaphone. He was at
the far end of the shack that had been hastily erected on Oak Farm as a
hospital, for the last big scenes of the war play, "A Girl in Blue and A
Girl in Gray."

"All right, just as you say," answered the orderly. "Come on in, Bill.
Are you going to die this time?"

"I am not! I'm going to be one of them converts, and get chicken
sandwiches and jelly."

"You mean convalescent."

"Um. That's it! Lead me to me bed, will you, for I'm a sadly wounded old
soldier--that's what I am."

Amid laughter he was led to a cot, where a smiling nurse tucked him in
between the yellow sheets. For, as has been said, yellow takes the place
of white in inside scenes.

And this was an inside scene, powerful electric lights dispelling all
shadows so the cameras could film every motion and expression.

"Now remember!" called Mr. Pertell when the "wounded man," one of the
extra players, had been comfortably put to bed, "remember no smiling or
laughing when we begin to make the picture. This is supposed to be
serious."

The rehearsal went on and finally the director announced that he was
satisfied. Then the scenes were enacted over again, but with more
tenseness and with a knowledge that every motion was being filmed with
startling exactness.

"Now, Ruth, you come on!" called Mr. Pertell. "We've made a little
change from the original scenario. You're to relieve Miss Dixon, who has
been on this case. He's one of the Northern officers, you remember, and
he has with him papers that the Confederacy would do much to get.

"They are under the officer's pillow, you know. He is afraid to let them
out of his possession. You must humor him, though you know that the
papers will soon have to be taken away as he is to be operated on. It is
here that Alice, as the spy, gets her chance. She pretends to be one of
the nurses of this hospital, dons the uniform, and comes in here to get
the papers. Are you ready?"

"Yes," answered Ruth.

Then the big hospital scene began.

Ruth, in her garb of a nurse, took her place at the side of the injured
officer's cot. She felt his pulse, took his temperature and administered
some medicine. Then the injured man, who was Mr. DeVere himself, sank
back on his pillows. His hand went under the mass of feathers and
brought out a packet of papers. At this point a close-up view was taken,
showing on the screen the papers in magnified shape, so that the
audience could note that they were Civil War documents. It was these
that the officer was afraid would fall into the hands of the
Confederates, so he kept them ever near him.

Ruth made as if to remove them when he had placed them under the pillow
again, but he awoke with a start and prevented her. This was to show
that it was necessary for some one to take them while the operation was
being performed.

Then the scene changed to show Alice preparing for her work as a spy.
The camera was taken to another part of the hospital, Ruth and her
father having a respite, though they maintained their positions.

"Did I do all right, Daddy?" asked Ruth.

"Very well, indeed. You are getting to be a good actress. I wish you
were on the speaking stage."

"I like this ever so much better. I never could speak before a whole
crowd."

Alice was shown making her way into the hospital, a previous scene
having depicted her as promising the Confederate officer in whose employ
as a spy she was, that she would get the papers. She entered the
hospital, pretending to be in search of a missing relative. Then,
watching her chance, she prepared a sleeping powder for a tired and
half-sleeping nurse off duty and prepared to take her uniform.

Alice played her part well. The sleeping nurse aroused, took the drugged
drink, and went more soundly to sleep than ever. Then Alice was shown in
the act of taking off the uniform. Another scene showed her walking
boldly into the ward room to relieve Ruth.

There was a little scene between the two sisters, and Ruth registered
that Alice must be very careful not to alarm or shock the wounded man
who was soon to undergo the operation.

Alice acquiesced, and then sat down beside the cot. Slowly and
carefully, like some pickpocket, she inserted her fingers under the
pillow. Amid a tenseness that affected even the actors working with her,
Alice took out the papers, inch by inch, and began to move away with
them.

It was at this point that she was to be discovered by Paul, in the next
bed. He had, in a previous scene, supposed to have taken place several
months before, saved Alice's life, and they had fallen in love, Alice
promising to wed him after the war. He supposed her to be a true
Northern girl, and now he discovered that she was a Southern spy.

There was a strong scene here. Paul leaped from his bed, and tried to
get the papers away from Alice. She, horror-stricken at being discovered
as a spy by her lover, is torn between affection for him and duty to the
South. She throws him from her, as he is weakened by illness, and is
about to escape with the papers, when she fears Paul is dying and she is
stricken with remorse. She decides to give up her task for the sake of
her lover.

Slowly and softly, without awakening the old officer, she puts the
papers back under his pillow and then, stooping over Paul, who has
fainted from loss of blood, she kisses his forehead and goes out in a
"fadeaway."

"Good! Great! Couldn't be better!" cried Mr. Pertell, as Alice came out
of range of the camera. "That was better than I dared to hope. This will
make a big hit!"




CHAPTER XXIII

A BAD FALL


"Have you made up your mind yet, Estelle?"

"No, Ruth! I haven't. I don't know what to do."

The two girls were in Estelle's room. Miss Brown was putting some
protective padding under her outer garments, for in a little while she
was to take part in a desperate ride--one of the last scenes in the big
war play--a ride that had a part in a cavalry charge that was to be made
by the desperate Confederates on the hosts of Unionists, who were
closing in on their enemies. It was to be the last battle--a final stand
of the Southern States, and they were to lose.

But Estelle was to make a desperate ride to try to save the day. This
time she was to pose as a daughter of the South. The ride would
necessarily be a reckless one, and Estelle felt that she might fall; so
she was preparing for it.

"I don't know what to do," she went on to Ruth, who was helping her.
"Sometimes I feel like doing as you and your sister suggest, and let
your father into the secret--and Mr. Pertell too--and have them try what
they can do to discover who I am.

"Then again, as I think it over, I'm afraid. Suppose I should turn out
to be some one altogether horrid?"

"You couldn't, my dear, not if you tried. But if you don't want my
father to know, and would rather work out this mystery yourself, why, I
won't say another word."

"I want to think about it a little more," Estelle said.

They had been talking about her strange case, and the possible outcome
of it. Alice had suggested that a motion picture story be written around
it.

"It could be called 'Who is Estelle Brown?'" Alice said, "and it could
be a serial. You could pose in it, Estelle, and make a lot of money.
And, not only that, but you'd find out who your relatives were, I'm
sure."

"Oh, I couldn't do it!" Estelle had cried. "I'd like the money, of
course. I never was so happy as when I found I had a purse full when I
was on that Cleveland boat! But I could not capitalize my misfortune
that way."

"No, I was only joking," said Alice. And so the matter had gone on. Now
Ruth had broached the subject again, and Estelle was still undecided.

"Wait until after this big ride of mine," she said. "Then I'll make up
my mind. I really do want to know who I am, and I think, after this
engagement, if I don't find out before, I'll go to Boston again. I'm
sure my people are from that vicinity."

So it was left.

From outside came the stirring notes of a bugle. At the sound of it Ruth
and Estelle started.

"That's the signal," said the latter. "I must hurry."

"I'll help you," offered Ruth, and she assisted in the tying of the last
strings, and the snapping of the final fastenings of the suit of
protective padding the rider wore.

"You don't take part in the actual charge, do you?" asked Alice, who
came in at this point.

"Well, I have to ride ahead of the Union forces for a way," Estelle
answered. "But I'm not afraid. Petro will carry me safely, as he has
done before."

The girls went down and out into the yard. Off on the distant meadow of
Oak Farm, which had been turned into a battlefield for the time being,
were two hostile armies. The two regiments of cavalry were to meet in a
final clash that was to end the war. There was to be the firing of many
rifles and cannon. There were to be charges and countercharges. Men
would fall from their horses shot dead. Certain horses, trained for the
work, would stumble and fall, going down with those who rode them, the
men having learned how to roll out of the way without getting a broken
arm or leg. In spite of their training and practice, nearly all expected
to be scratched and bruised. However, it was all part of the game and in
the day's work.

"All ready now!" called Mr. Pertell. "We're going to have the first
skirmish, and, after that, Miss Brown, you are to do your ride. Are you
ready?"

"Yes," Estelle told the director.

The signal was given through the field telephone and then, with his
ever-present megaphone, the director began to issue his orders.

The rifles cracked, the big guns rumbled and roared, smoke blew across
the battlefield and horses snorted and pawed at the ground impatient to
be off and in the charge. To them it was real, even though their masters
knew it was only for the movies.

Bugles tooted their inspiring calls, and the officers, who knew the
significance of the cadence of notes, issued their orders accordingly.

"Deploy to the left!" came the command to a squad of Union cavalry, and
the men trotted off, to try a flank movement. Then came the firing of a
Confederate battery in a desperate attempt to scatter the Union forces.

All the camera men in the employ of the Comet Film Company were engaged
this day, and Russ was at his wits' end to keep each machine loaded with
film, and to see that his own was working properly.

Pop Snooks had never before been called on to provide so many "props" as
he was for this occasion, but he thoroughly enjoyed the work, and when,
at the last minute, he had to make a rustic bridge whereon two lovers
had a farewell before the soldier rode off to battle, the veteran
property man improvised one out of bean poles and fence rails that made
a most artistic picture.

"They'll have to get up the day before breakfast to beat Pop Snooks!"
exclaimed Russ, admiringly.

All was now ready for the big cavalry charge.

"All ready!" came the order from Mr. Pertell. "Cameras!"

And the cranks began to work, reeling off the sensitive film.

The two bodies of cavalry rushed toward one another, hoofs thundering,
carbines cracking, sabres flashing in the sun, white puffs of smoke
showing where the cannon were firing.

"Now Miss Brown!" yelled the director, above the riot of noise. "This is
where you make the ride of your life!"

"All right!" answered the brave girl, and, giving rein to her horse, she
dashed off ahead of a detachment of cavalry that was to try to intercept
her.

On and on rode Estelle. Ruth and Alice, who had finished their part in
this scene, stood on a little hill, watching her.

On and on dashed Estelle, doing her part well, and foot after foot of
the film registered her action. She was almost at the end now. She
reached the Confederate ranks, gave over the message she had carried
through such danger, and then, turning her horse, dashed away.

How it happened no one could tell. But suddenly Petro stumbled, and
though Estelle tried to keep him on his feet she could not.

"Oh--oh!" gasped Ruth. "Look!" and then she turned her head away so as
not to see.

Alice had a flash of Estelle flying over the head of her falling horse,
and then, unable to stop, the rushing soldiers on their horses rode over
the very place where Estelle had fallen.




CHAPTER XXIV

A DENIAL OF IDENTITY


Confused shouts, cries, and orders echoed over the field, Mr. Pertell,
dropping his megaphone, rushed toward the scene of the accident, calling
on Russ to follow and yelling back an order to have the stretcher men
and the doctor follow him.

Dr. Wherry was even then waiting in readiness, for it had been feared
that this big scene might result painfully, if not dangerously, for more
than one. Some men had also been detailed as stretcher bearers and were
in waiting.

"Shall we film this?" asked one of Russ's helpers, as the former dashed
past on his way to help Estelle.

"No. Don't take that accident. It won't fit in with the rest of the
film. It's all right up to that point, though. We can make a retake of
the last few feet if we have to."

Even in this time of danger and suspense it was necessary to think of
the play. That must go on, no matter what happened to the players.

"Go on with the cavalry charge--farther over!" directed Mr. Pertell,
when he arrived on the scene and found a group of men about the fallen
girl. "You can't do any good here. We'll look after her. I can't delay
any longer on this scene. Go on with the charge, and carry out the
program as it was outlined to you. Russ, you look after the camera men."

"What about Estelle?"

"Dr. Wherry and I will see to her."

The girl's golden hair was tumbled about her head, having come loose and
fallen from under her hat in her fall. She lay in a senseless heap at
one side of her horse. The animal had not gotten up, and at first it was
thought he had been killed. But it developed that Estelle had trained
him to play "dead" after a fall of this kind, and the intelligent
creature must have thought this was one of those occasions.

"Easy with her, boys," cautioned the director, as the stretcher men
tenderly picked up the limp form. "She may have some broken bones."

They placed her carefully on the stretcher and bore her to the hospital.
Mrs. Maguire was ready to assist the trained nurse, who was kept ready
for just such emergencies.

"The poor little dear!" exclaimed the motherly Irish woman. "Poor little
dear!"

Meanwhile, the cavalry charge went on. Estelle had done her part in
this. Was it the last part she was to play?

Ruth and Alice asked themselves this as they hurried toward the
hospital.

"Oh, if she should be killed!" gasped Ruth.

"Wouldn't it be dreadful? And no one to tell who she really is," added
Alice. "We must go to her."

"Yes, as soon as they will let us see her," agreed Ruth.

Dr. Wherry and the trained nurse were busy over the injured girl. A
quick examination disclosed no broken bones, but it could not yet be
told whether or not there were internal injuries. They could only wait
for her to recover consciousness and hope for the best. All that could
be done was done.

"Plucky little girl!" murmured Mr. Pertell, when told that Estelle was
resting easily, but was still insensible. "She must have seen that she
was going to have a bad fall, but she kept on and saved the film for us.
We won't have to retake her scene at all--merely cut out the accident.
Do your best for her, Dr. Wherry."

"I will, you may be sure."

Ruth and Alice were told that they could see Estelle as soon as she
recovered consciousness, and it was safe for visitors to be admitted.
And several hours after the accident the nurse, Miss Lyon, came to
summon them from their room, where they were waiting.

"She has opened her eyes," Miss Lyon said.

"Did she ask for us?" Alice asked.

"I can't say that she did. She seems dazed yet. Sometimes in falls like
this, where the head is injured, it is days before the patient realizes
what has happened."

"Is her head injured?" Ruth inquired.

"Yes, she seems to have received a hard blow on it. Whether there is a
fracture or a concussion Dr. Wherry had not yet determined. It will take
a little time to decide. Meanwhile, you may see her, just for a moment."

Alice and Ruth softly entered the room where Estelle lay on a white bed.
Her face was pale, but her eyes were bright. There was a subtle odor of
disinfectants, of opiates and of other drugs in the room--a veritable
hospital atmosphere.

"Don't startle her," cautioned the nurse, motioning for silence.

"We'll be careful," promised Alice, in a whisper.

The two sisters approached the bed. Estelle looked at them but, strange
to say, there was no look of recognition in her eyes. Ruth and Alice
might have been two strangers for all the notice Estelle took of them.

"She--she doesn't know us," whispered Ruth.

"She will, as soon as you speak," said Miss Lyon. "Just talk to her in a
low voice, but naturally. She'll know you then, I'm sure."

"How--how are you feeling?" asked Ruth, in a whisper.

There was no response--no light of recognition in the eyes.

"A little louder and call her by name," suggested the nurse.

"You try, Alice," Ruth whispered.

Her sister stepped to the bedside.

"Estelle, don't you know me?" Alice asked.

The eyes turned in the direction of the voice.

"Were you speaking to me?" came the question, and both Ruth and Alice
started at the changed tones of their friend.

"Yes, to you," Alice answered.

"I--I _don't_ know you," was the gentle response.

"Don't you know me--Alice DeVere? And this is my sister, Ruth. Don't you
know us, Estelle?"

"Is your name Estelle?" came the query.

"No, that is _your_ name," and Alice smiled, though a cold hand seemed
to be clutching at her heart. "That is your name--you are Estelle. Don't
you remember?"

"Estelle what? Who is Estelle?"

"You are. You are Estelle Brown! Don't you know your own name?"

The golden head on the white pillow was slowly moved from side to side.
The bright eyes showed no sign of recognition. Then came the gentle
voice:

"I am not Estelle Brown. I don't know her. What do you mean? I don't
know any of you. Why am I here? What has happened? I wish you would take
me home at once. I live at the Palace."

"What--what does she mean?" gasped Ruth, looking in alarm at the nurse.

"I don't know. Perhaps she is delirious and imagines she is playing in
the moving pictures. Was there a palace scene?"

"Not since she joined the company. But why does she deny her identity?"

"I can not say. Sometimes after an injury like this happens, people say
queer things. We had better not disturb her further. I'll call Dr.
Wherry."

Alice made one more effort to bring recollection to Estelle.

"Don't you know me, dear?" she asked softly. "I am Alice--your friend
Alice. This is Ruth, and you are Estelle Brown, from Boston, you know."

"Boston? I was never in Boston. And I am not Estelle Brown. You must be
mistaken."

Her eyes roved around the hospital room, and a look of pain and fright
dimmed them. Then, seeming to fear that she had been unkind, she said
gently to Alice:

"I am sorry I do not know you, for you are trying to help me, I am sure.
But I never heard the name Estelle Brown. I am not she--that is certain.
If you would only take me home! My people will be worried. We live at
the Palace and----"

She tried to raise herself up in bed. A look of pain came over her face,
and she fell back with closed eyes.

"She has fainted!" cried Miss Lyon. "I must get Dr. Wherry at once!
Don't disturb her!"

She hastened off, while Ruth and Alice, not knowing what to think, went
softly from the room.




CHAPTER XXV

REUNION


"Nothing but a passing fancy," said Dr. Wherry, later in the day, when
Ruth and Alice questioned him about Estelle. "When a person has received
a hard blow on the head, as Estelle has, the memory is often confused.
She will be all right in a day or so. Rest and quiet are what she
needs."

"Then she is in no immediate danger?" asked Mr. Pertell.

"None whatever, physically. She came out of that fall very well, indeed.
The blow on her head stunned her, but the effects of that will pass
away. She has no internal injuries that I can discover."

The last scenes of the war play were taken. The Confederates, after
their final desperate stand were driven back, surrounded and captured.
The "war" ended.

The regiments of cavalry took their departure. The extra players were
paid off and left. A few simple scenes were yet to be taken about Oak
Farm, but the big work was over, and every one was glad, for the task
had been no easy one.

"Does Estelle yet admit her identity?" asked Ruth of Dr. Wherry, two
days after the accident.

The physician scratched his head in perplexity.

"No, I am sorry to say she doesn't," he answered. "She does not seem to
recognize that name. I wish you and your sister would come in and speak
to her again. It may be she will recognize you this time. A little shock
may bring her to herself. I have seen it happen in cases like this."

Ruth and Alice again went to the hospital. Estelle was still in bed, but
she seemed to be better. But, as before, there was no sign of
recognition in the bright eyes that gazed at the two moving picture
girls.

"Don't you know me--us?" asked Alice, gently.

"Yes. You were here before, soon after I was brought here," was the
answer.

"Oh, Estelle! don't you know us!" cried Ruth, in horror.

"Whom are you calling Estelle?"

"Why, you. That is your name."

"I am not she. You must be mistaken! Oh, I wish they would take me home.
I want father--mother--I want Auntie Amma. Oh, why don't they come to
me?"

Ruth and Alice looked at one another. What did it mean? This babbling of
strange names? Was it possible that they were on the track of
discovering the identity of the girl who now denied the name she had
given?

"Who is your father?" asked Ruth.

"And who is Auntie Amma?" inquired Alice.

"Why, don't you know? They live with me at the Palace. And my doll. Why
don't you bring my doll?"

"She is delirious again," whispered the nurse. "You had better go.
Evidently, she thinks she is a child again. Her doll!"

"I want my doll! Why don't you bring me my doll?" persisted the stricken
girl.

"What doll do you want?" asked Alice.

"My own doll," was the reply. "My dear doll that I always have in bed
with me when I am ill; my doll Estelle Brown!"

"Estelle Brown!" cried Ruth, in sudden excitement. "Is that the name of
your doll?"

"Yes! Yes! Bring her to me, please!"

"Who gave you that doll?" asked Ruth, and she waited anxiously for the
answer.

"My doll--my doll Estelle Brown. Why, my daddy gave her to me, of
course. My father!"

"And what was your father's name?" asked Ruth in a tense voice.

She and Alice and the nurse leaned forward in eager expectation. They
all recognized that a crisis was at hand. Would the stricken girl give
an answer that would be a clue to her identity--the identity she had
denied? Or would her words trail off into the meaningless babble of the
afflicted?

"What is your father's name?" Ruth repeated.

The girl in the bed raised herself to a sitting position. She looked at
the DeVere sisters--at the trained nurse. In her eyes now there was not
so much brightness as there was weariness and pain.

And also there was more of the light of understanding. She looked from
one to the other. Her lips moved, but no sound came from them. It was a
tense moment. Would she be able to answer? Would the obviously injured
brain be able to sift out the right reply from the mass of words that
hitherto had been meaningless?

"What is your father's name?" repeated Ruth in calm, even tones. "Your
father who gave you the doll, Estelle Brown? Who is he?"

Like a flash of lightning from the clear sky came the answer.

"Why, he is Daddy Passamore, of course!"

"Passamore!" gasped Alice. "Passamore?"

"Is your name Passamore?" whispered Ruth.

"Yes, I am Mildred Passamore. My father is Jared Passamore of San
Francisco. I don't know why I am here, except that I was hurt in the
railroad accident. If you will telegraph to my father, at the Palace
Hotel, San Francisco, he will come and get me. And please tell him to
bring my doll, Estelle Brown.

"I know it seems silly for a big girl like me to have a doll," went on
the injured one. "But ever since I was a child I have had Estelle with
me when I was ill. I am ill now, but I feel better than I did. So
telegraph to Daddy Passamore to bring Estelle Brown with him when he
comes for me. And tell him I was not badly hurt in the wreck."

And with that, before the wondering eyes of the nurse, of Alice and of
Ruth, Estelle Brown--no--Mildred Passamore, turned over and calmly went
to sleep!

For an instant those in the hospital room neither moved nor spoke. Then
Alice cried:

"That solves it! That ends the mystery! I'll go and get the paper."

"What paper?" asked Ruth.

"Don't you remember? The old paper that I wrapped my scout shoes in when
we were packing to come to Oak Farm. The one that father saved because
it had a theatrical notice of him in it.

"It was that four-year-old paper which contained an account of the
strange disappearance of the wealthy San Francisco girl, Mildred
Passamore. Don't you remember? There was a reward of ten thousand
dollars offered for her discovery."

"Oh, I do remember!" gasped Ruth. "And this is she!"

"Must be!" declared Alice. "She says that's her name. And from what she
told us she can, as Estelle Brown, think back only about four years. She
must have received some injury that took away her memory. Now she is
herself again.

"Ruth, I believe we have found the missing Mildred Passamore! We must
tell daddy at once, and Mr. Pertell. Then we must telegraph Mr.
Passamore. I'll get his address from the old paper. But the Palace
Hotel, San Francisco, will reach him, I presume. Oh, isn't it all
wonderful!"

"It certainly is," agreed Ruth.

They gave one glance at the sleeping girl--Mildred or Estelle--and then
went out, while Miss Lyon summoned Dr. Wherry to acquaint him with the
strange turn of the case.

"Mildred Passamore found! How wonderful!" exclaimed Mr. DeVere, when his
daughters told him what had happened. "But we must make sure. It would
be a sad affair if we sent word to the father, and it turned out that
this girl was not his daughter. We must make sure."

Alice got out the old paper. It contained a description of the missing
Mildred Passamore, and in another newspaper dated a few days before the
one Alice had used as a wrapper for her shoes (another paper which Mr.
DeVere had saved because of a notice in it) was a picture of the girl.

"It is she! Our girl--the one we knew as Estelle Brown--is Mildred
Passamore!" cried Alice as she looked at the picture in the paper.

"There is no doubt of it," agreed Ruth, and Mr. DeVere affirmed his
daughters' opinions.

Mr. Pertell was told of the occurrence, and, being a good judge of
pictures and persons, he decided there was no doubt as to the identity.

"We will telegraph to Mr. Passamore at once," decided the director.

The crisis--for such it was in the case of the injured girl--seemed to
mark a turn for the better. She slept nearly forty-eight hours,
awakening only to take a little nourishment. Then she slept again. She
did not again mention any names, nor, in fact, anything else. Her
friends could only wait for the arrival of Mr. Passamore to have him
make sure of the identity.

He had sent a message in answer to the one from Mr. Pertell saying that
he and his wife were hastening across the continent in a special train.

"That means he hasn't found his daughter up to this time," said the
manager, "and there is every chance that this girl is she."

Three days after her startling announcement Estelle or Mildred, as she
was variously called, was much better. She sat up and seemed to be in
her right mind.

"I don't in the least know what it is all about, nor how I came here,"
she said, smiling. "The last I remember is being in a railroad train on
my way from San Francisco to visit relatives in Seattle. There was a
crash, and the next I knew I found myself in bed here. I presume you
brought me here from the train wreck."

"Yes, you were brought here after the--the--ah, accident," said Mr.
Pertell, lamely.

"The nurse tells me you are a moving picture company," went on Mildred.
"I shall be interested to see how you act. I always had a half-formed
desire to be a moving picture actress, but I know Daddy Passamore would
never consent to it."

"And she's been in the films for three years or more, and doesn't
remember a thing about it!" murmured Alice. "Good-night!"

"Alice!" rebuked her sister. But Alice, for once, did not care for
Ruth's rebuke. Her astonishment was too great. And it was a queer case.

"We must be very careful!" said Dr. Wherry when, after a swift ride
across the continent, Mr. Passamore and his wife reached Oak Farm. "We
must not startle the patient."

"Oh, but I want to see my little girl!" cried the mother, with tears in
her eyes. "My little girl whom I thought gone for ever!"

"I hope this will prove to be she," said Mr. DeVere.

"I'm sure it will!" cried the father. "No one but Mildred would remember
her old doll--Estelle Brown!" and he held up a battered toy.

Softly, the parents entered the room. The girl on the bed heard some one
come in, and sat up. There was a look of joy and happiness on her face;
and yet it was not such as would come after a separation of four years.
It was as if she had only separated from her loved ones a few hours
before.

"Oh, Daddy! Momsey!" she cried. "I did so want you! And did you bring
Estelle Brown?"

"My little girl! My own little lost girl!" cried Mrs. Passamore. "Oh,
after all these years--when we had given you up for dead!"

"After all these years? Why, Momsey, I left you only two days ago to go
to Seattle. There must have been a wreck or something; for I heard a
dreadful crash, and then I awakened here with these nice moving picture
folk. They were on the same train, I guess."

Dr. Wherry made the parents a signal not to tell the secret just yet.

"And did you bring Estelle?" asked Mildred.

"Yes, here is your doll!" and as Mr. Passamore handed it to his daughter
he and his wife exchanged tearful glances of joy. The lost had been
found.

It was a scene of rejoicing at Oak Farm, and the moving picture girls
came in for a big share of praise. For had it not been for the fact that
Alice had seen the paper containing the account of the missing girl and
saved it, the identity of Mildred might not have been disclosed for some
time.

Finally, she was told what had happened; that for four years she had
been another person--Estelle Brown--a name she had taken after the
awakening following the railroad accident because of some kink in the
brain that retained the memory of the doll.

"Then Lieutenant Varley was right, he must have seen you in Portland,"
said Alice, when explanations were being made.

"He must have," admitted Mildred. "But I don't understand how it
happened."

Later on it was all made clear.

Mildred Passamore, the daughter of a wealthy family, living temporarily
at the Palace Hotel, in San Francisco, had started on a trip to visit
relatives in Seattle. She was well supplied with money.

The train Mildred was on was wrecked near Portland, Oregon, and the girl
received a blow on her head that caused her to lose her sense of
identity completely. She did not seem to be hurt, and she was not in
need of medical aid. Without assistance, she got on the relief train
that took the injured in to Portland, and there it was that Lieutenant
Varley saw her in the station.

Through some vagary of her brain, Mildred imagined she wanted to go to
New York, and, as she had plenty of money, she bought a ticket for that
city, the one to Seattle having been lost. Lieutenant Varley had helped
her and, though he suspected something was wrong with the young lady the
impression with him was not very strong until it was too late to be of
assistance to her.

So, her identity completely lost, Mildred started on her trip across the
continent. What happened on that journey she never could recollect
clearly. That she got on the Great Lakes and then went to Boston was
established. The reason for that was that, as a child, she had lived
there. This accounted for the toilet set her mother had given her, and
for the recollection of the monument and the historic places.

Why she was attracted to moving pictures could only be guessed at, but
she "broke in," and "made good." Her ability to ride was easily
explained. Her father owned a big stock farm, and Mildred had ridden
since a child. But all this, as well as other remembrances of her
younger days, was lost after the injury to her head in the railroad
accident. She retained but one strongly marked memory--the name of her
doll, the name which she took for her own.

So, as a new personage, she came to Oak Farm, unable to think back more
than four years, and totally without suspicion that she was the missing
Mildred Passamore. That she was not recognized as the missing girl was
not strange, since the search in the East had not been prosecuted as
vigorously as it had been in the West.

Mr. and Mrs. Passamore, hearing that the train on which their daughter
was traveling had been wrecked, hastened to Portland, but there they
could find no trace of Mildred. Lieutenant Varley, who might have given
a clue, had sailed for Europe the day after his meeting with Mildred.
Then began the search which lasted four years, and had now come to an
end at Oak Farm.

"And to think that I have been two persons all this while!" exclaimed
Mildred, when explanations had been made, and she was on the road to
recovery. "But what made my memory come back?"

"The same thing that took it from you," explained Dr. Wherry. "It was
the blow you received on the head when you fell from your horse. There
had been a pressure on your brain, from the railroad crash, and the fall
from your horse relieved it, so you came to yourself."

"Oh, I wonder if I could have taken Miss Dixon's ring in my second
personality?" asked Mildred one day, when various happenings were being
explained to her.

"No, you didn't!" exclaimed Alice. "It was found down under the carpet,
back of her bureau. A maid discovered it there when cleaning. And that
snip of a Miss Dixon left without apologizing to you."

"Oh, it doesn't matter, since I am not Estelle Brown, and my doll
doesn't care what they say about her!" laughed Mildred. Miss Dixon and
her friend had left Oak Farm to go back to New York, for their part in
the pictures was finished for the time being.

"And to think that I really became a movie actress, after all!" laughed
Estelle. "I think I shall continue in it, Daddy! It must be fun, though
I don't recollect anything about it."

"No you sha'n't!" laughed Mr. Passamore. "Your mother and I want you at
home for a while."

There is little more to tell.

Mildred Passamore rapidly recovered her health and strength. Her part in
the pictures was finished and though he did not exactly relish the
appearance on the screen of his daughter in battle scenes, the
millionaire, realizing what his refusal would mean to Mr. Pertell, made
no objections. Besides, it was Estelle Brown who was filmed, not Miss
Passamore.

"Well, what is next on the program?" asked Alice of the director one
day, after several other war plays had been made and when they were
about to leave Oak Farm, to go back to New York.

"Oh, I think I'm going to get out a big film entitled 'Life in the
Slums.' You and Ruth will play the star parts."

"No!" laughed Alice. "Not since we became millionaires. You will have to
cast us for rich girls. Mr. Passamore gave us the ten thousand dollars
reward, you know."

"All right!" laughed the director, "then I'll bill you as the rich-poor
girls."

Before going back to San Francisco with Mildred, Mr. Passamore had
insisted that Ruth and Alice take the reward, as it was through their
agency that he received word of his daughter's whereabouts. But Ruth and
Alice insisted on sharing their good fortune with their friends in the
company, so all benefited from it.

The day came for the moving picture players to leave Oak Farm.

"Good-bye, Sandy!" called Alice to the young farmer. "I suppose you're
glad to see the last of us!"

"Well, not exactly, no'm! Still, I'll be glad not to see houses and
barns that have only fronts to 'em, and there won't be no more mistakes
made trying to haul up water from a well that's only made of painted
muslin. I'll try an' get back to real life for a change!"

The big war play was over. It was a big success when shown on the
screen, and the pictures of Ruth, Alice and Mildred--or Estelle Brown,
as she was billed--came out well. The fight where Paul and his men were
nearly blown up was most realistic.

"You girls are not going to retire, just because you have a little
money, are you?" asked Russ of Ruth, one day, when they were back in New
York.

"Indeed, we're not!" cried Alice. "And I wouldn't be surprised if
Mildred joined us. I had a letter from her the other day, and, after
seeing herself on the screen, she says she is crazy to do it all over
again. Give up the movies? Never!"

And it remains for time to show what further fame the Moving Picture
Girls won in the silent drama. For the present, we will say farewell.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Notes:

   Obvious punctuation errors corrected.

   Page 27, "proping" changed to "propping". (propping it up)

   Page 34, "himmel" changed to "Himmel". (Ach Himmel! Ach!)

   Page 93, "bruskly" changed to "brusquely". (Miss Dixon brusquely)

   Page 94, "Devere" changed to "DeVere". (In fact, Mr. DeVere)

   Page 95, "property" changed to "proper". (the proper Civil)



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS IN WAR
PLAYS***


******* This file should be named 20348-8.txt or 20348-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/3/4/20348



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

