Project Gutenberg's Wonderwings and other Fairy Stories, by Edith Howes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Wonderwings and other Fairy Stories

Author: Edith Howes

Illustrator: Alicea Polson

Release Date: January 15, 2007 [EBook #20366]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WONDERWINGS ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Janet Blenkinship
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net








Wonderwings and other Fairy Stories

by

EDITH HOWES

Author of "The Sun's Babies," "Fairy Rings," "Stewart Island," "Where
the Bell Birds Chime," "Marlborough Sounds," etc.


Illustrated by Alicea Polson


Whitcombe & Tombs Limited Auckland, Christchurch, Dunedin and
Wellington, N.Z. Melbourne and London.


       *       *       *       *       *


  CONTENTS


                                     Page
  Wonderwings                          7

  The Magic Mirror                    17

  Fairy Tenderheart                   31




[Illustration: "Come then," said Wonderwings. She took the little
fairy's hand and up they rose into the clear air.]




Wonderwings


Poppypink sat up in bed and yawned. "Why is everybody getting up so
early?" she asked. "Is it a holiday?"

The older fairies were dressing themselves and brushing their long fine
hair. "Wonderwings is coming to see us," they said. "Jump up, little
Poppypink."

"Who is Wonderwings?" she asked.

"You will see when you are dressed. Hurry, or you will miss her."

[Illustration: "The older fairies were dressing themselves and combing
their long fine hair."]

"Oh dear! I am so sleepy," said Poppypink, and she yawned again. "I
don't care about Wonderwings." She snuggled down into the bedclothes
again, and went to sleep.

Presently she was awakened by the sound of the sweetest singing she had
ever heard, and a flash of brilliant colour went past her window pane of
crystal set in pearl.

"That must be Wonderwings," she said. "Oh, I must see her. I hope I am
not too late."

She sprang from bed and dressed so hurriedly that I am afraid her hair
did not receive its due amount of brushing. Then she ran out into the
garden.

The older fairies stood all in a group, saying loudly "I will go," and
"I will go." And before them, scarcely touching the ground with the tip
of her foot, stood poised a glorious fairy, taller than any other there.
She was altogether beautiful; and her wings--as soon as Poppypink saw
them she knew why the visitor had been called Wonderwings. For they
reached high above her head and almost to the ground, and they glowed
with so many colours that it seemed as if a million jewels had been Hung
upon them and had stuck, growing into a million flashing stars that
made a million little rainbows with every sway and movement of her body.

"How lovely! Oh, how lovely!" cried Poppypink. She crept nearer to the
beautiful fairy and sat among the daisies at her feet. "See," she cried.
"My wings are small and colourless. Tell me how I may grow wings like
yours." Just as little girls adore beautiful hair, so do little fairies
adore beautiful wings.

Wonderwings smiled down at her. "Such wings as mine are only to be won
in sadder lands than these," she said. "If you would have them you must
leave your fairyland and come where humans live, and where hunger and
sorrow and death trample the city streets."

"I will come!" cried Poppypink. "I will come!"

"Come then," said Wonderwings. She took the little fairy's hand, and up
they all rose into the clear air, flying far and far away till they left
their fairyland behind and came at last to the sadder lands where humans
lived. There Wonderwings showed them where hunger and sorrow and death
trampled the city streets, and the band of fairies flew lower and lower
to look.

"The children tumble and fight in the dirty lanes, and cry for bread,"
cried Poppypink. "The little ones, I cannot bear to hear them sob."

"Perhaps you can help them," said Wonderwings.

"I am only a little fairy. What can I do?" asked Poppypink. "I have no
bread to give them."

She flew a little lower, to gaze at them more nearly. "What can I do?"
she asked again.

No answer came. She looked around, and found herself alone. Wonderwings
and the older fairies had in a moment gone from sight.

Below, a crippled child sat among rags in a dark corner of a dreary
room, and tears ran down her cheeks. "The sunshine, the pretty yellow
sunshine!" she wailed. "If only I could run and play in the pretty
sunshine!"

"Here is something I can do," thought Poppypink. She gathered armfuls of
the golden sunbeams, and flying with them through the glass as only a
fairy can fly, herself unseen, she heaped them over the twisted hands
and pale thin face of the child, and left her playing with them and
smiling happily.

[Illustration: Poppypink laughed with joy. "I am so glad, so very glad!"
she said. "I had forgotten all about my wings."]

Lower she flew to help the little ones who cried about the gutters. She
led the starving and shelterless to comfort, the toddlers to safety; she
brought a flower to the hopeless, ease to sick ones racked with pain; at
night she flew with glittering dreams from room to room, so that even
sad-eyed feeble babies laughed for pleasure in their sleep. Day after
day, night after night she toiled, for weeks and months and years. There
was so much to do! The time passed like a moment. So busy was she that
she had forgotten all about her wings.

One day there came a flash of colour in the air beside her, and
Wonderwings and all the older fairies stood around her. "Dear
Poppypink," cried one, "how your wings have grown! And how beautiful
they are! They are so tall that they reach above your head and almost to
the ground, and they glow with so many colours that it seems as if a
million jewels had been flung upon them and had stuck, growing into a
million flashing stars that make a million little rainbows with every
sway and movement of your body."

Poppypink laughed with joy. "I am so glad, so very glad!" she said. "I
had forgotten all about my wings."

"Yet they have grown with use," said Wonderwings; "and for every deed of
kindness done a star has sprung, to shine in beauty there for evermore."

[Illustration]

[Illustration: The Queen-mother looked over the garden wall. There an
old woman hobbled, muttering to herself.]




The Magic Mirror


There was once a wise old king in a far-off land who said to himself, "I
have a daughter as well as a son; why should she not have a kingdom too?
I will see to it at once."

He called the chief map-maker to him, and said: "Make a map of my
kingdom and divide it by a line so evenly that each part shall be
exactly half. There must not be one hair's breadth more on the east of
the line than on the west."

The chief map-maker worked hard, and soon had the map ready, and it was
divided so evenly that there was not a hair's breadth more on the east
of the line than on the west. Then the king made a law that when he died
the Prince should rule over all the country on one side of the line, and
the Princess should rule over all the country on the other side. The
Prince's land he called Eastroyal, and the Princess's land he called
Westroyal, and from that day to this there have always been kings over
Eastroyal and queens over Westroyal.

But it was soon noticed that in Eastroyal the people became discontented
and quarrelsome and poor, and were always finding fault with the
government; whereas in the west country over the border they were so
happy and kindly that they praised each queen from the beginning of her
reign to the end. Nobody knew why there should be so great a difference,
but a great difference there was. Things grew worse and worse in
Eastroyal, until at last the people rose and turned the reigning king
off his throne and set his little son in his place. "Perhaps we shall be
better satisfied now!" they said.

The new king's mother walked alone, deep in thought; and she was very
troubled. "How can I teach my little son to please his people better
than his father did?" she wondered. "It would break my heart if he too
angered them and lost his crown, yet already he is showing a haughty
temper in his treatment of his lords, and I know not what to do."

"I know! I know!" said a voice.

The Queen-mother was much startled; though she had not spoken aloud, the
words seemed an answer to her thought. She looked over the low wall of
the garden into the road. There an old woman hobbled, leaning on a
stick, and muttering to herself. She was poor and ragged, and bent with
age. "I know, I know!" she said again.

"What do you know?" asked the Queen-mother gently.

The old woman looked up at her. "Go to Westroyal," she said; and she
hobbled away.

"Ah, a witch!" thought the Queen-mother; "and she is right. The Queens
of the West have undoubtedly some secret means of making their people
love them. I will find out what it is."

She prepared for a visit to Westroyal, and arrived a few days later at
the palace of the reigning queen. Here she was welcomed and feasted and
treated right lovingly, but though she kept her eyes and her ears as
wide open as it was possible for eyes and ears to be, she could not
discover the secret. She grew sad with disappointment.

The young queen saw that she was sorrowful. "You are not happy here.
What is the matter?" she asked. "What can I do to make you glad?"

The Queen-mother held out her hands imploringly. "Only give me your
secret," she begged. "Tell me how you gain the love of your people and
keep it through all the years. Tell me so that I may teach my young son
how to hold his throne?"

"Is that all?" exclaimed the Queen. "Come, I will show you."

[Illustration: "She led the way to her own lovely sleeping-chamber."]

She led the way to her own lovely sleeping-chamber, hung with rose silk
and panelled with polished silver and amethyst, and she pointed to a
great mirror set strongly into the wall. "Look within!" she said.

Wonderingly, the Queen-mother obeyed. On the surface of the mirror the
faces and forms of herself and the young queen were reflected; but
after a few moments, as she gazed, these faded away, and in their places
came a picture of a mine, with blackened toilers filling tracks with
coal. That, too, faded, and a golden cornfield showed upon the polished
glass; under the hot summer sun the busy reapers moved, wiping the sweat
from their brows when they stopped a moment to rest. A third picture was
of weavers making cloth. A cottage home came next, and a lordly mansion
of the rich, and a homeless child seeking shelter under a city bridge.
So scene followed scene, beautiful, or sad, or sordid, sometimes wild
and violent, and sometimes gay and peaceful, showing in the main a
people happy and content.

"What is it?" asked the amazed Queen-mother at last. "How come these
pictures here?"

"They are the life of my state reflected on this magic mirror for my
help," replied the Queen. "Long ago, when the first queen came to rule
the new kingdom of Westroyal, the fairies brought this mirror and set it
in the wall as here you see it. Faithfully ever since it has reflected
the daily happenings through-out the land, the people's toil and
pleasures, their dangers and their comforts and rewards. So each queen
has known her country. Your son, looking in his mirror, sees but
himself; I see the sufferings of my people and know what things they
need, and so plainly are these pictures set before me that I cannot rest
till I have used my power to give relief."

"Oh!" cried the Queen-mother, "now I see why you are loved. How can I
get such a mirror for my son?"

"That I know not," replied the Queen.

Then the Queen-mother returned sad at heart to the kingdom of her son,
pondering on what she had seen.

Once again she walked in her garden alone. "How shall I get such a
mirror?" she wondered. "What should I do?"

As once before, a voice replied "I know! I know!"

The Queen-mother looked over the garden wall. Hobbling along the road
was the old woman who had bade her go to Westroyal. "You who helped me
before, help me again!" cried the Queen-mother. "I have obeyed you. How
now shall I get a magic mirror for my son?"

The old woman looked up at her. "Go to the Deeps," she said, and she
hobbled off.

Now this was a dreadful command to the Queen-mother, for the Deeps was a
horrible black pool in the roughest and most dangerous part of the
country. It was said to be formed of the country's tears and to be also
bottomless, and to be haunted by beings of strange shape. There were
stories of their mysterious power and evil ways. Yet go she must, if
going meant the gaining of a magic mirror for her son. And she must go
alone, for only so could any seeker find the pathway to the pool, so it
was said.

"I will go at once, before my courage fails," she said, and she left her
sheltered garden and set off across the land.

She had many weary miles to travel, past villages and towns and fields,
and she was footsore and faint when at last she reached the winding
track that led between the darkening hills. Yet on she went, following
the murmur of a tiny stream that dropped through thick-set bushes into a
shadowed valley. On she went still, and now the darkness came, and she
had lost her way. She stumbled over fallen logs, pushed with bleeding
hands and torn clothes through bramble wildernesses, and found at last
her way again to the narrow track beside the little stream that murmured
in the dark.

On she went, and down. The stream suddenly widened into a round
blackness open to the sky, but walled in by jagged rocks. It was the
pool. Utterly spent through weariness and fear, she sank down among the
rocks to rest, and waited there for what might come to her.

Strange rustlings sounded round the rocks, strange forms loomed close
beside her, strange voices asked her: "What are you? Why come you to our
haunts?" Though her heart was sick with dread she answered boldly in a
firm clear voice. "Give me a magic mirror for my son, that he may learn
to rule."

There was a flash, and the pool and all the rocks were lit by a light
brighter and softer than that of moon or stars. All round her stood the
beings who had loomed so strangely in the darkness. They were fairies,
exquisite in shape and fineness, robed in flowing gossamer of many
colours. They smiled at her, and touched her with their gentle hands,
and immediately she was well. "Your love has brought you nobly through
much fear and hurt," they said. "You shall have your due reward. Look
into the Deeps."

[Illustration: She rose into the air a shining queen of fairies, holding
in her hands a tiny gleaming mirror.]

One took her hand and led her to the edge, and the Queen-mother,
fearless and smiling now, looked down into the fathomless water of the
pool. As she gazed, ripples came upon its surface. They broke away into
shining cascades of diamonds and pearls, and between them appeared the
face and shoulders of the old woman of the road. "I have your magic
mirror," she cried. "It is formed of the lowest teardrops of the Deeps."

She sprang out and trod the water to the shore, and as she went her rags
fell from her and she rose into the air a shining queen of fairies, more
beautiful than any other there, holding in her hand a tiny gleaming
mirror. "Come," she said, "let us set it in its place."

She touched the Queen-mother's hand, and in a flash they were all at the
palace, within the young king's sleeping chamber of turquoise and gold.
There as he lay asleep the fairies set the mirror in its place with
magic words, and as it touched the wall it lengthened out and widened
till it stood as large as that of the young queen across the border
line. Over the polished glass began to float the pictures of the
country's life. "How can I show my gratitude?" the Queen-mother asked;
but the fairies were gone.

Next morning when the little king awoke he ran to see the fine new
mirror in his room. He gazed and gazed upon the strange entrancing
pictures that came on it, and every day he spent long hours at the
mirror. And as he learned to recognise the hardships and the sufferings
of his people his heart grew hot to give relief, and he was no more
haughty, but used his power to ease their woes. So in Eastroyal as in
Westroyal there was content, and the people loved their king and praised
him through all his days until the end. And all the kings who followed
after him ruled wisely and were loved.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: "Look closely at my flowers," she said, "and tell me
which you think most beautiful."]




Fairy Tenderheart.


Little Fairy Tenderheart was weeping. She sat on a ledge that overlooked
the world, and her tears fell fast. In twos and threes her sisters flew
from Fairyland to put their arms about her, but none could comfort her.
"Come, dance and sing with us and forget your grief," they said. She
shook her head. "The terrible fighting!" she said. "See where far below
men rage, killing each other. Rivers run red with blood, and the sorrow
of weeping women rises through the air to where I sit. How can I dance
and sing?"

"It is the world at war," said an older fairy sadly. "I too have wept in
earlier days when men have fought. But our tears are wasted, little
sister. Come away."

Fairy Tenderheart looked eagerly at her. "You who have watched the world
so many years," she said, "tell me why such dreadful deeds are done down
there."

The older fairy bent her eyes on the blackened plains of earth. "I
cannot tell you that," she slowly said. "We watch and pity, but we
cannot know what works in the hearts of men that they should gather in
their millions to destroy their brothers and themselves. No other
creature turns on its own kind and kills so terribly as man."

[Illustration: In twos and threes her sisters flew from Fairyland to put
their arms about her, but none could comfort her.]

"What can we do? It must be stopped. What can we do?"

"We can do nothing, little sister. See where the women of the world
stretch out their hands, imploring men to live in peace. They beg the
lives of fathers, husbands, sons; they point to ruined homes and
desolated lands. 'War wrecks our lives!' they cry. Yet even for those
they love men will not give up battle. What, then, can fairies do? Tears
are useless. Come away."

"I must stay here. I must think of something I can do," said Fairy
Tenderheart; and she would not go.

Her tears had stopped. She searched with anxious eyes across the world
to find some means of helping men to better things, but no way could she
find. And still the fighters shot and stabbed, and the dying and the
dead lay piled upon the fields.

Another fairy flew to her. "Come away, little sister!" she said. "I
cannot bear to see you sorrowing. Come, or you will forget the merry
ways of Fairyland and grow like the Oldest Fairy of All, who spends her
life brooding over this dreary earth."

Fairy Tenderheart sprang up. "Where is she? Tell me where to find her.
Why did I not know of her before? I will go to her that we may be
companions in our sorrow. Perhaps together we may find a way to help."

"Ah, do not go. Listen! She is so old that she has watched the world
since the beginning of wars, yet, as you see, she has found no way of
stopping them. How then can you?"

"I must go."

"She left our joyful Fairyland for a Magic Garden, and whoever enters
that Garden can never come back to us. There she dwells for ever alone,
at work or in thought, or preparing for her mysterious journeys to the
earth. Do not go, or you too will be cut off from our life of dance and
song, never to return."

"I will go. Tell me the way."

The fairy flew off. "I will not tell you," she said. "You shall not go."

"I will go," said Fairy Tenderheart again. With steadfast steps she
searched through Fairyland until she found a narrow track that led
between the winding mountains and far out across wide, shimmering
plains. This track she followed till she came upon the Magic Garden.

The Oldest Fairy of All sat thinking among her flowers, and her eyes
were filled with peace. She looked at Fairy Tenderheart standing at the
gate. "Who enters here can never return to Fairyland," she said, and her
voice was sweeter than the songs of birds.

Fairy Tenderheart pushed open the gate and stepped within the Garden.
"Who enters here finds joy," said the Oldest Fairy of All, and a crown
of happiness sat on her hair.

"You come to work?" she asked.

"I come to learn what I may do to help the suffering earth," said Fairy
Tenderheart. "Its cries of agony have beaten on my heart until there was
no rest for me in Fairyland. Is there no way to make war cease? I come
to you for wisdom."

The Oldest Fairy of All rose up and smiled, and her face was brighter
than the moon and stars. "Look closely at my flowers," she said, "and
tell me which you think most beautiful."

The flowers bloomed on every side, in every lovely hue--crimson and gold
and orange, blue and purple and pink and softest lavender. All were
scented, and all were beautiful; but there was one plant that pleased
the little fairy more than any other. It grew no taller than the rest,
made no great show of colour, yet through its stems and leaves there
shone a radiance as if a light hid in them. Its flowers were clear as
crystal--one could see quite through them--but the sunlight falling on
them was broken into glowing colours, so that every blossom was a little
bunch of flashing rainbows. And where the flowers had closed and grown
to fruit they hung golden as the sun and fragrant with a scent that
stole upon the wind and made the heart heat high with happiness.

"This is the most beautiful," said Fairy Tenderheart.

"You have chosen well," said the Oldest Fairy of All. "You are fitted to
help me in my work. That is the Plant of Knowledge; its crystal
blossoms are called the Flowers of Understanding, and its fruit is Love.
By it alone can war be made to cease."

She pointed far below. "I have planted it upon the earth in many spots,"
she said. "Here and there it has flourished and spread, and its fruit
has sweetened all the air. But, alas!" her eyes grew sad, "too often it
has been trampled under foot and killed, and war has broken out afresh.
If only men would care for it and let it grow the world would soon be
wrapped in peace."

"Can we not plant more and more until it spreads across the world in
spite of all neglect?" asked Fairy Tenderheart.

The Oldest Fairy shook her head. "I have done my best," she said; "but
while men tramp it down it cannot spread across the world. Even when it
has grown well it cannot do the good it ought to do: a nation which has
eaten of its Fruit of Love and has learned to scorn the littleness of
war is yet forced by that same Love to fight, that it may rescue a weak
and helpless country from the greedy clutches of those who have refused
to let my dear plant bloom. In the end it shall spread, no doubt, and
my work shall be complete; but the time is long, the time is long."

She mused, and Fairy Tenderheart gazed thoughtfully upon the earth.
Presently she raised her eyes, and they were bright with hope.

[Illustration: "In the children's gardens ... they planted the seeds."]

"See where a group of children gathers round your precious plant!" she
said. "How eagerly they stretch their hands towards it, and how they
look into its flashing flowers. They will never tread it in the mud, for
they have seen its splendour. Let me take seeds to all the children's
gardens in the world. The Children! They will welcome your Plant of
Knowledge with its Flowers of Understanding, and when they have tasted
its Fruit of Love they will grow up scorning war, and the world will
live in peace."

The Oldest Fairy laughed with joy. "Oh, little sister, you have come to
help indeed!" she said. "You are right. The Children! It is to them we
must take our plant. Come, let us gather seeds and start at once."

They gathered the golden seeds and carried them swiftly down. In the
children's gardens across the world they planted them, and everywhere
the children ran to gaze at the wonder of the springing plants, and to
watch the flowers unclose. And when through later days they ate and ate
again of the fragrant golden fruit, Love filled their veins and they
became a new race, scorning the littleness of war. And the world was
wrapped in peace.

[Illustration]


       *       *       *       *       *


  The Willie Winkie
  Zoo Books


  Six entrancing Booklets for children.

  Written by Mrs. A. R. Osborn
  Author of "Almost Human."

  Pictured by Ida Rentoul Outhwaite

       *       *       *       *       *

  Exquisitely dainty and altogether charming.

       *       *       *       *       *

  27,000 copies already sold
  Price 2/- each

       *       *       *       *       *

  Teddy Bear's Birthday Party.
  The Naughty Baby Monkey.
  The Guinea Pig that wanted a Tail.
  Peter's Peach.
  Fuzzy, Wuzzy, and Buzzy.
  The Quarrel of the Baby Lions.

       *       *       *       *       *

  PRINTED BY
  WHITCOMBE & TOMBS LIMITED.





End of Project Gutenberg's Wonderwings and other Fairy Stories, by Edith Howes

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WONDERWINGS ***

***** This file should be named 20366.txt or 20366.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/3/6/20366/

Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Janet Blenkinship
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
