The Project Gutenberg eBook, Embroidery and Tapestry Weaving, by Grace
Christie


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Embroidery and Tapestry Weaving


Author: Grace Christie



Release Date: January 16, 2007  [eBook #20386]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMBROIDERY AND TAPESTRY WEAVING***


E-text prepared by Susan Skinner and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (https://www.pgdp.net/c/)



Note: The reader is strongly advised to use Project Gutenberg's
      HTML version of this book because it includes almost 200
      illustrations which cannot be incorporated in this text
      version.
      See 20386-h.htm or 20386-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/3/0/20386/20386-h/20386-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/3/0/20386/20386-h.zip)





    _"Flowers, Plants and Fishes, Birds, Beasts, Flyes, and Bees,
    Hils, Dales, Plaines, Pastures, Skies, Seas, Rivers, Trees,
    There's nothing neere at hand, or farthest sought,
    But with the needle may be shap'd and wrought."_

        --JOHN TAYLOR ("The Praise of the Needle").


The Artistic Crafts Series of Technical Handbooks
Edited by W. R. Lethaby

EMBROIDERY AND TAPESTRY WEAVING

A Practical Text-Book of
Design and Workmanship

by

MRS. ARCHIBALD H. CHRISTIE

With Drawings by the Author and Other Illustrations

Second Edition Revised
(A reprint of the First Edition, with various slight alterations in
text)

Third Edition Revised
(A reprint of the Second Edition)







Published by John Hogg
13 Paternoster Row
London 1912



[Illustration: _Frontispiece  See page 249._]



Printed by Ballantyne, Hanson & Co.
at the Ballantyne Press, Edinburgh




EDITOR'S PREFACE


Needlework, which is still practised traditionally in every house, was
once a splendid art, an art in which English workers were especially
famous, so that, early in the XIIIth century, vestments embroidered in
England were eagerly accepted in Rome, and the kind of work wrought here
was known over Europe as "English Work." Embroideries _façon
d'Angleterre_ often occupy the first place in foreign inventories.

At Durham are preserved some beautiful fragments of embroidery worked in
the Xth century, and many examples, belonging to the great period of the
XIIIth and XIVth centuries, are preserved at the South Kensington
Museum, which is particularly rich in specimens of this art. In order to
judge of what were then its possibilities it is worth while to go and
see there three notable copes, the blue cope, the Sion cope, and the
rose-colour Jesse-tree cope, the last two of which are certainly
English, and the former probably so. The Sion cope bears a remnant of an
inscription which has unfortunately been cut down and otherwise injured,
so that all that I have been able to read is as follows: DAVN PERS : DE
: V ...; probably the name of the donor.

In the XIIIth century the craft of embroidery was practised both by men
and women.

That great art patron, Henry the Third, chiefly employed for his
embroideries, says Mr. Hudson Turner, "a certain Mabel of Bury St.
Edmund's, whose skill as an embroideress seems to have been remarkable,
and many interesting records of her curious performances might be
collected." And I have found a record of an embroidered chasuble made
for the king by "Mabilia" of St. Edmund's in 1242. The most splendid
piece of embroidery produced for this king must have been the altar
frontal of Westminster Abbey, completed about 1269. It was silk,
garnished with pearls, jewels, and translucent enamels. Four
embroideresses worked on it for three years and three-quarters, and it
seems to have cost a sum equal to about £3000 of our money.

"The London Broderers" did not receive a formal charter of incorporation
until 1561, but they must have been a properly organised craft centuries
before. In 2 Henry IV. it was reported to Parliament that divers persons
of the "Craft of Brauderie" made unfit work of inferior materials,
evading the search of "the Wardens of Brauderie" in the said City of
London.

In Paris, in the year 1295, there were ninety-three embroiderers and
embroideresses registered as belonging to the trade. The term of
apprenticeship to the craft was for eight years, and no employer might
take more than one apprentice at a time. In the XVIth century the Guild
was at the height of its power, and embroideries were so much in demand
that the Jardin des Plantes in Paris was established to furnish
flower-subjects for embroidery design. It was founded by the gardener,
Jean Robin, and by Pierre Vallet, "brodeur" to Henry IV. In the XVIIIth
century the company numbered 250 past-masters.

To this craft the present volume forms, I believe, an admirable
introduction and text-book, not only on the side of workmanship, but
also on that difficult subject, "design"--difficult, that is, from its
having been so much discussed in books, yet entirely simple when
approached, as here, as a necessary part of workmanship. It is fortunate
that we have not as yet learned to bother our cooks as to which part of
their work is designing and which is merely mechanical. Of course the
highest things of design, as well as of workmanship, come only after
long practice and to the specially gifted, but none the less every human
creature must in some sort be a designer, and it has caused immense harm
to raise a cloud of what Morris called "sham technical twaddle" between
the worker and what should be the spontaneous inspiration of his work.
What such combination has produced in past times, may perhaps best be
understood by some reading in old church inventories of the simply
infinite store of magnificent embroidered vestments which once adorned
our churches. In an inventory of Westminster Abbey I find mentioned
such patterns as roses and birds, fleur-de-luces and lybardes, angels on
branches of gold, roses and ships, eagles and angels of gold, castles
and lions, white harts, swans, dogs, and antelopes.

W. R. LETHABY.

_September 1906._




AUTHOR'S PREFACE


In the following pages the practical sides of Embroidery and Tapestry
Weaving are discussed, their historical development being only
incidentally touched upon.

The drawings illustrating design and the practical application of
stitches have been taken almost without exception from actual Embroidery
or Tapestry; the exceptions, where it has been impossible to consult
originals, from photographic representations obtained from various
sources, among which the collection of M. Louis de Farcy should be
mentioned.

I have to thank Miss May Morris and Mrs. W. R. Lethaby for permission to
reproduce pieces of their work, and Miss Killick, Colonel J. E.
Butler-Bowdon, the Viscount Falkland, and the Reverend F. J. Brown of
Steeple Aston for permission to reproduce work in their possession. Also
I must thank the authorities of the Victoria and Albert Museum for help
in various ways, and Mr. J. H. Taylor, M.A. Oxf. and Cam., for his
kindness in reading the proofs.

GRACE CHRISTIE.

_Ewell,
September 1906._




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE
EDITOR'S PREFACE                                                      xi

AUTHOR'S PREFACE                                                    xvii


PART I

EMBROIDERY


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION                                                          27


CHAPTER II

TOOLS, APPLIANCES, AND MATERIALS

Needles--Scissors--Thimbles--Frames--Stand and Frame combined--Tambour
Frame--Cord-making Appliance--Requisites for Transferring
Patterns--Pricker--Knife--Spindle--Piercer--Materials suitable for
Embroidering upon--Threads of all Kinds--Stones, Beads, &c.           34


CHAPTER III

PATTERN DESIGNING

The Difficulties of Pattern Making--A Stock-in-Trade--Some Principles
upon which Patterns are Built Up--Spacing-Out--Nature and
Convention--Shading--Figure Work--Limitations--Colour                 51


CHAPTER IV

STITCHES

Introduction--Chain Stitch--Zigzag Chain--Chequered Chain--Twisted
Chain--Open Chain--Braid Stitch--Cable Chain--Knotted Chain--Split
Stitch                                                                75


CHAPTER V

STITCHES--(_continued_)

Satin Stitch--Long and Short Stitch--Stem Stitch--Overcast Stitch--Back
Stitch--Buttonhole Stitch--Tailor's Buttonhole--Fancy Buttonhole
Edgings--Flower in Open Buttonhole Stitch--Leaf in Close Buttonhole
Stitches--Petal in Solid Buttonholing                                 95


CHAPTER VI

STITCHES--(_continued_)

Knots and Knot Stitches--Herring-bone Stitch--Feather Stitch--Basket
Stitch--Fishbone Stitch--Cretan Stitch--Roumanian Stitch--Various
Insertion Stitches--Picots                                           118


CHAPTER VII

CANVAS WORK AND STITCHES

Introduction--Samplers--Petit Point Pictures--Cross Stitch--Tent
Stitch--Gobelin Stitch--Irish Stitch--Plait Stitch--Two-sided Italian
Stitch--Holbein Stitch--Rococo Stitch                                147


CHAPTER VIII

METHODS OF WORK

Couching--Braid Work--Laid Work--Applied Work--Inlaid Work--Patch Work
                                                                     164


CHAPTER IX

METHODS OF WORK--(_continued_)

Quilting--Raised Work--Darning--Open Fillings--Darned Netting        189


CHAPTER X

Methods of work--(_continued_)

Drawn Thread Work--Hem Stitching--Simple Border Patterns--Darned Thread
Patterns--Corners--Cut or Open Work--Various Methods of Refilling the
Open Spaces                                                          213


CHAPTER XI

EMBROIDERY WITH GOLD AND SILVER THREADS

Introduction--Materials--Precautions for the Prevention of
Tarnish--Ancient Method of Couching--Its various Good
Points--Description of Working Diagram--Working a Raised Bar--Examples
of Patterns Employed in Old Work--Illustrations upon Draped
Figures--Usual Method of Couching--Couching Patterns--Outline
Work--Raised Work--The Use of Purls, Bullions, &c.                   229


CHAPTER XII

LETTERING, HERALDRY, AND EMBLEMS

The Uses of Lettering--Marking--Monograms--Heraldry--Emblems         259


CHAPTER XIII

THE GARNITURE OF WORK

Finishing off--Making up--Edges--Use of Cord-making Appliance--Cord
Twisted by Hand--Knotted Cord--Fringes--Tassels--Knots               271


CHAPTER XIV

PRACTICAL DIRECTIONS

Transferring Patterns--Paste for Embroidery Purposes--Protection and
Preservation of Work--Washing Embroidery--Prevention and Cure of
Puckered Work--Points about the Thread--Dressing the Frame           292


PART II

TAPESTRY WEAVING


CHAPTER XV

INTRODUCTION                                                         307


CHAPTER XVI

NECESSARY APPLIANCES AND MATERIALS

The Loom--Mirror--Bobbins and Needles--The Comb--Embroidery Frame
treated as a Loom--Warp--Wools--Silk--Gold and Silver Thread         315


CHAPTER XVII

PREPARATIONS FOR WORK

Warping the Loom--Dressing the Coat-Stave--Tracing the Pattern upon the
Threads                                                              328


CHAPTER XVIII

THE TECHNIQUE OF WEAVING

Weaving--Commencing and Fastening Off--The Interlocking Stitch--Fine
Drawing--Shading--Added After-stitches                               339


NOTES ON THE COLLOTYPE PLATES                                        355

THE COLLOTYPE PLATES                                                 369

INDEX                                                                402




PART I--EMBROIDERY




CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION


In the practice of embroidery the needlewoman has an advantage not now
shared by workers in any other craft, in that the technical processes
are almost a matter of inherited skill. Every woman can sew, and it is
with little more than the needle and thread, which she habitually
employs, that the greatest masterpieces of the art have been stitched.
The art of embroidery, however, is not merely an affair of stitches;
they are but the means by which ideas can be expressed in intelligible
form, and memories of all kinds of things be pictured on stuffs.

To laboriously train the hand is scarcely worth while unless it is
capable of expressing something that is at least pretty. Nowadays much
embroidery is done with the evident intent of putting into it the
minimum expenditure of both thought and labour, and such work furnishes
but a poor ideal to fire the enthusiasm of the novice; happily, there
still exist many fine examples showing what splendid results may be
achieved; without some knowledge of this work we cannot obtain a just
idea of the possibilities of the art.

It is obvious that much advantage can be gained from studying the
accumulated experience of the past in addition to that current in our
own day. To do this intelligently, the history of embroidery must be
followed in order that the periods richest in the various kinds of work
may be ascertained. Museums afford useful hunting-grounds for the study
of past work; other sources are private collections, churches, costume
in pictures or on engraved brasses, and manuscript inventories such as
those of cathedral treasuries, which sometimes contain interesting
detailed descriptions of their embroidered vestments and hangings.

Blind copying of old work is not of much value; it is not possible or
desirable to imitate XIIIth century work now, but much can be learned
by examining fine examples in an appreciative and analytical spirit. In
what way the design has been built up can be discovered; the most
complicated result may often be resolved into quite elementary lines.
The student must find out wherein lie the attraction and interest, note
good schemes of colour, and learn about stitches and methods of work by
close examination of the embroidery, both front and back.

Every one knows what embroidery is, and a formal definition seems
unnecessary. As a matter of fact, it would be a difficult task to give
one, since weaving, lace-making, and embroidery are but subtle
variations of the same art.

This art may be of the highest or the most homely character, and the
latter is by no means to be despised. Simple unaffected work decorating
the things of every-day use can give a great deal of pleasure in its
way. This should surely be the accomplishment of every woman, for though
she may not have the skill to attain to the highest branches, it would
at least enable her to decorate her home with such things as the
counterpanes, curtains, and other objects that set such a personal
stamp upon the English domestic work of several centuries, and which
nowadays can hardly be found except stored up in museums.

It is advisable as a general rule that the design be both made and
carried out by the same person. From the worker's own point of view the
interest must be much greater when working out her own ideas than when
merely acting as amanuensis to another. The idea is more likely to be
expressed with spirit; further there is the possibility of adding to or
altering, and thereby improving, the work as it progresses. The designer
must in any case be well acquainted with stitches and materials, for
they play an important part in achieving good results. The individuality
of the worker should be evident in her work; indeed it generally is, for
even plain hems by two people bear quite different characters; the
degree of individuality present, varies with each one, but in any case
it will be much more marked if the design and stitching bear the stamp
of the same personality.

The difference between good and unsatisfactory results should be
carefully thought out, for it is often but a small matter. The best
kind of work is that which appeals to the intelligence as well as to the
eye, which is another way of saying there should be evidence of mind
upon the material. Work must be interesting in some way if it is to be
attractive; it had better almost be faulty and interesting than dull,
dry, and correct. It can interest by reminding us of pleasant things,
such as familiar flowers, shady woods, or green lawns; birds, beasts,
and so forth can be depicted in their characteristic attitudes, or a
story can be told; in fact, work can be made attractive in a hundred
different ways. It must not show signs of having wearied the worker in
the doing; variety and evidence of thought lavishly expended upon it
will prevent this, and enthusiasm will quicken it with life.

The selection of the object to work comes at an early stage, and is a
matter to be well considered, for it is a pity to spend time and labour
upon unsuitable objects when there are many excellent ones to choose
from. In thinking over what to work it should be realised that it takes
no longer to execute one rather important piece than several of a less
ambitious character, and that the former is generally more worth the
doing. Whether the subject is a suitable one for embroidery or not
sometimes depends upon the method chosen for carrying it out; for
instance, anything that has to endure hard wear must be treated in such
a way as to stand it well.

Dress is a fine subject for embroidery; but, for the decoration to be
satisfactory, the art of designing dress must be understood, and the
dress must also be well cut, or the embroidery will be quite wasted upon
it. What is termed "art dress," proverbially bad, well deserves its
reputation. There is a great difference in the quantity of work that may
be put into dress decoration; this may be simply an embroidered vest,
collar, and cuffs, or it may be actually an integral part of the
costume, which as a much bigger and more difficult undertaking is
correspondingly finer in effect when successfully carried out.

Amongst larger objects that well repay the labour of embroidery,
hangings of various kinds, quilts, screens, furniture coverings, altar
frontals, church vestments, may be mentioned; amongst smaller, are bags,
boxes, book-covers, gloves or mittens, bell-pulls, cushions, mirror
frames, all kinds of household linen, infants' robes, and so on, and for
church use such things as alms-bags, book-markers, stoles, pulpit and
lectern frontals. Then a panel may be worked with the deliberate
intention of framing it to hang on a wall. There is no reason why the
painter should have the monopoly of all the available wall space, for
decorative work is undoubtedly in place there; a piece of embroidered
work might well fill a panel over a mantel-piece. There is no need to
discuss what not to do, but, if the attraction to embroider a tea-cosy
is too strong to resist, it should surely be of washable materials.

Embroidery has distinct practical advantages over some other crafts
practised nowadays--no special studio need be devoted to its use, for
most work can be done in any well-lighted room, which indeed will be
rendered more attractive by the presence of an embroidery frame, for
this is in itself a characteristic and dainty piece of furniture. It
need but seldom interfere with one of our pleasant traditions, genial
converse with, and about, our neighbours, for it is a distinctly
sociable occupation. Work of this kind can be put down and taken up at
leisure; the necessary outlay in materials need not be extravagant, and
so on. Many other points might be thought of, but the claims of the art
do not demand any special pleading, for it is pleasant in the actual
working, and can produce an infinite variety of most interesting
results.




CHAPTER II

TOOLS, APPLIANCES, AND MATERIALS

  Needles--Scissors--Thimbles--Frames--Stand and Frame
  combined--Tambour Frame--Cord-making Appliance--Requisites for
  Transferring Patterns--Pricker--Knife--Spindle--Piercer--Suitable
  Materials for Embroidering upon--Threads of all Kinds--Stones,
  Beads, &c.


Good workmanship takes a prominent, though not the first, place.
Technical excellence in needlework, as in all other artistic crafts, is
a question of the worker's perseverance and her ability in the use of
tools. In embroidery these are few and simple, and are as follows:--

_Needles._--For most purposes needles known as long-eyed sharps are
used. Tapestry needles, similar to these, but with blunt points, are
useful for canvas work and darned netting. For gold work a special
needle can be procured with sharp point and long wide eye. A bent needle
makes a crooked stitch; but needles if made of good steel should not
bend; they break if used unfairly. The eye should be cleanly cut, or it
roughens the thread. The needle must be just stout enough to prepare for
the thread an easy passage through the material.

_Scissors._--Three pairs may be necessary; for ordinary work a small
pair with fine sharp points, for gold work small ones with strong points
similar to nail scissors, and for cutting-out purposes a large pair with
one rounded and one sharp point.

_Thimbles._--Steel ones are said to be most serviceable, silver are most
usual; but whatever the material they must be neatly made in order not
to wear the thread.

_Frames._--A common type of frame is shown at fig. 1. It is made in
various sizes; the one here represented measures 18 inches across. It
consists of four pieces of wood, two rollers for the top and base and
two side pieces. Each of the rollers has a piece of webbing securely
nailed along it, and its extremities are pierced with holes to receive
the side pieces. These are formed of two long wooden screws, fitted with
movable nuts, which adjust the width of the frame and the tautness of
the stretched work. The piece of material that is stretched between is
the link that keeps the frame together, for the screw ends fit just
loosely in the holes of the rollers. The side pieces are sometimes made
of flat laths of wood pierced with holes at regular intervals; in these
are inserted metal pins, by means of which the work is kept stretched.
Fig. 9 represents a frame of this type. If the frame is a very large one
it can have a strengthening bar fixed across the centre from roller to
roller.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

The frame is most convenient for work when fixed in a stand, although it
can be used leaning against a table or the back of a chair. A very large
frame would be supported upon trestles, but for ordinary purposes, a
stand, such as the one shown in fig. 2, is practical. It consists of two
upright wooden posts, a little over 2 feet in height, which are
connected near the base by a strengthening cross piece. Both this and
the uprights are adjustable; the centre part of the posts is arranged to
slide up and down, and can be fixed at any convenient height by the
insertion of a long metal pin; the width of the cross piece is regulated
in similar fashion, being made firm, by a screw, at the required width,
thus allowing various sized frames to be used in the same stand. The
frame is fixed in place by metal clamps, and a wooden pivot is arranged
so as to permit the stretched work to be inclined at any angle
convenient. Both stand and frame should be well made and of good wood,
for they must be able to stand strain and be perfectly firm and true
when fixed for work.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

A small circular frame, such as is shown in fig. 3, is useful for
marking linen or for any small work. This, formed of two hoops fitting
closely one within the other, can be procured in wood, ivory, or bone,
of various sizes, the one illustrated being about 6 inches in diameter.
The material to be worked upon is stretched between these hoops like the
parchment on a drum. These tambour frames, as they are called, are
sometimes fixed into a small stand or fitted with a wooden clamp for
fastening to a table; this frees both hands for work. These tambours
cannot well be recommended; the material is apt to stretch unevenly, and
a worked part, if flattened between the hoops, is liable to be damaged.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

The illustration at fig. 4 shows a simple little instrument for making
a twisted cord. It is interesting to note that Etienne Binet, who wrote
on embroidery about 1620, when discussing some necessary equipment for
an embroideress mentions "_un rouet pour faire les cordons_."

There is sometimes a difficulty in procuring the cord just right to suit
the finished work; the texture may be too coarse to put beside fine
embroidery, it may not be a good match, and, even if so at first, it may
fade quite differently from the worked silks. For these and other
reasons it is a safe method to make the cord one's self, possibly with
some materials of the kind already used in the embroidery.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

This appliance enables the worker to make any kind of twisted cord; it
is as simple as a toy to handle, and gives excellent results. It is a
metal instrument about 8 inches in height. The three small discs are
wheels, supported on the arms of an upright cross which has a heavy
circular base. These three wheels are connected by a cord with a larger
wheel below that has a handle attached to it. The cord runs in a groove
round the circumference of each wheel, and must be held taut in
position. By turning the handle of the large wheel the three small ones
are set in motion. Three hooks, attached to the axles of the small
wheels, are therefore rotated with them. One end of each ply of the cord
in making is looped on to one of these hooks, the other ends are
attached to three similar hooks fixed into a block of wood which, when
in use, is firmly clamped to the table. Further instruction in the
making of cords is given in Chapter XIII.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

To trace the pattern on to the material the following articles may be
required: Indian ink, a small finely-pointed sable brush, a tube of oil
paint, flake white or light red, according to the colour of the ground
material, turpentine, powdered charcoal or white chalk for pounce,
tracing paper, drawing-pins, and a pricker. This last-mentioned tool is
shown in fig. 5. It is about 5 inches long, and is like a needle with
the blunt end fitted into a handle. For rubbing on the pounce some soft
clinging material rolled into a ball is necessary. A piece of old silk
hose tightly rolled up makes an excellent pad for the purpose.

The knife shown in fig. 6 is useful for cutting out at times when the
use of scissors is not practical. It is used in an upright position,
with the point outwards.

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

A spindle for winding gold thread upon whilst working is shown in fig.
7. It is about 8 inches long. A soft padding of cotton thread is first
placed round (between A and B, fig. 7), and the gold thread wound upon
that. The end of the thread passes through the forked piece at the top
on its way to being worked into the material. The use of this or some
similar appliance enables the worker to avoid much touching of the metal
threads.

A small tool called a piercer is represented by fig. 8; it is used in
gold work; the flat end assists in placing the gold in position, and
also in making the floss silk lie quite flat; the pointed end is used
for piercing holes in the material for passing coarse thread to the
back, and for other purposes. This little tool, made of steel, is about
5 inches in length.

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

[Illustration: Fig. 8.]


MATERIALS

The surface is a matter of special interest in embroidery work. This
makes the choice of materials of great importance. Besides the question
of appearance, these must be suitable to the purpose, durable, and, if
possible, pleasant to work with and upon. The materials chosen should
be the best of their kind, for time and labour are too valuable to be
spent upon poor stuffs; occasionally a piece of old work is seen with
the ground material in shreds and the embroidery upon it in a good state
of preservation, which is a pity, for a newly applied ground of any kind
is never as satisfactory as the original one. Still another plea for the
use of good materials is the moral effect they may have upon the worker,
inciting her to put forth her best efforts in using them.

[Illustration: Fig. 9.]

The purpose to which the work is to be put usually decides the ground
material, besides governing pattern, stitches, and everything else. A
background is chosen, as a rule, to show to advantage and preserve what
is to be placed upon it, though sometimes it is the other way about, and
the pattern is planned to suit an already existing ground.

A background must take its right place, and not be too much in evidence,
although if of the right kind it may be full of interest. There are,
roughly speaking, three ways of treating the ground, leaving the
material just as it is, covering part of it with stitching, or working
entirely over it.

If there is no work upon the ground the choice of material becomes more
important. Texture, colour, tone, and possibly pattern, have all to be
considered, though the problem is often best solved by the selection of
a plain white linen. The question of texture is sometimes one of its
suitability for stitching upon; colour and tone may be of all kinds and
degrees from white to black; these two, as a rule, being particularly
happy ones. If the ground stuff is patterned, as in the case of a
damasked silk, it must be specially chosen to suit the work to be placed
upon it; small diaper patterns are frequently very good, since they
break up the surface pleasantly without being too evident.

Linen, which well answers all the usual requirements, is, for this
reason, very frequently chosen for a ground material. It can be procured
in great variety, the handmade linens being the best of all. Of kinds
besides the ordinary are twilled linens, of which one named Kirriemuir
twill is similar to the material used in the fine old embroidered
curtains. Some damask linens look very well as backgrounds for
embroidery; the pattern is sometimes a slightly raised diaper, which
forms a pleasantly broken surface. Loosely woven linens can be obtained
specially suitable for drawn thread work. In any case, if there is
dressing in the new material, it must be well boiled before the
embroidery is commenced: this makes it much softer for stitching
through. Coloured linens are rarely satisfactory, a certain kind of blue
being almost the only exception. The safest plan is to keep to pure
white, or to the unbleached varieties that have a slightly grey or warm
tone about them. Wools, silks, and flax threads all look well upon a
linen ground; it is not usually in good taste to embroider with poor
thread upon a rich ground material, and, upon the other hand, gold
thread and floss demand silk or velvet rather than linen, though any
rule of this kind may on occasion be broken.

Velvet and satin make excellent backgrounds for rich work; they should
not be used unless of good quality. The pile of the best velvet is
shorter than that of poorer kinds, and so is easier to manipulate, which
is a further reason for using the best. It is in any case a difficult
material, so much so that work is often carried out on linen and
afterwards applied to a velvet ground. The modern velvets, even the best
of them, are for quality or colour not comparable with the old ones.

Silk of different kinds is largely employed, since it makes a suitable
ground for many kinds of embroidery. Twilled and damasked silks are much
used; in the last-named kind, patterns must be carefully chosen to suit
the particular purpose. A thick ribbed silk is rarely satisfactory for
embroidery purposes.

For working with silk thread, an untwisted floss takes the first place,
but it needs some skill in manipulation. Filofloss is somewhat similar,
but it has a slight twist in it, making it easier to work, though
producing a less satisfactory result. Filosel is useful for some kinds
of work, but it is a poorer quality of silk. The purse silks, and what
is called embroidery silk, are all excellent; they are tightly twisted
varieties of fine quality. There are various others in use; a visit to a
good embroidery depôt will probably be the best means of finding out
about these and about materials in general.

Wools can be obtained in various thicknesses and twistings, each good in
their way. Some workers prefer a but slightly twisted wool; however,
examples of old wool work are to be found in which a finely twisted
variety is used with most satisfactory effect.

Flax threads can be obtained in very good colours, and are to be highly
recommended. There are various cottons procurable, either coloured or
white, that are good for marking and other embroidery purposes where an
evenly twisted thread is desirable.

Pearls and precious stones take their place in rich embroideries, also
various less expensive but pretty stones may often be made use of
effectively.

Beads are a fascinating material to work with; all kinds of pretty
things can be done with them, either sewing them upon a ground, knitting
or crocheting, or making use of a small bead loom. A good deal of the
ready-made bought bead work, that only requires a monotonous ground to
be filled in around an already worked pattern of sorts, is not at all
suggestive of its possibilities. Beads of both paste and glass can be
obtained in much greater variety than is usually known, from the most
minute in size to large varieties of all kinds of shapes and patterns,
the colours of most of them being particularly good. The larger
ornamental beads are useful in many ways, sometimes taking the place of
tassels or fringes.

Many kinds of most curious materials are at times brought into the
service of embroidery, but the above-mentioned ones are the most usual.




CHAPTER III

PATTERN DESIGNING

  The Difficulties of Pattern Making--A Stock-in-Trade--Some
  Principles upon which Patterns are Built Up--Spacing-Out--Nature and
  Convention--Shading--Figure Work--Limitations--Colour.


A beginner sometimes experiences difficulty in preparing her own
patterns. A designer needs a wide knowledge of many subjects, which
necessitates much time being given to study; also drawing ability is
necessary to enable the worker to set down her ideas upon paper. For
much simple and pretty work, however, a slight acquaintance with drawing
and design is sufficient, and any one who can master the requisite
stitches can also acquire some knowledge of these two subjects.

The word design frightens some who do not know quite what it means or
entails. Perhaps they do not realise that the design has already been
begun when the object to be worked has been settled, and the material,
thread, and stitches have been decided upon--the rest comes in much the
same way, partly by a system of choice; as it is necessary to know what
materials there are which can be used, so must the chief varieties of
pattern be known from which choice can be made. All patterns are built
up on some fundamental plan, of which the number is comparatively small.
The ability to choose, plan, and arrange is in a greater or less degree
inherent in every one, so there should be, after all, no great
difficulty in the design. The necessary underlying qualities are--a nice
taste, freedom from affectation, an eye for colour and form, and, it
might be added, a fair share of common sense.

A pattern maker requires some stock-in-trade, and it is wise to collect
together a store of some well-classified design material of ascertained
value, ready to be drawn upon when required. A good knowledge of plants
and flowers is very necessary. This is best acquired by making careful
drawings from nature. In choosing flowers for embroidery purposes, the
best-known ones, such as the daisy, rose, or carnation, give more
pleasure to the observer than rare unrecognisable varieties. Figures,
birds, beasts, and such things as inscriptions, monograms, shields of
arms and emblems, all demand study and drawing, both from miscellaneous
examples and from embroideries.

The treatment of all these should be studied in old work, in order that
the curious conventions and all kinds of amusing and interesting ideas
that have gradually grown up in the past may still be made use of and
added to, instead of being cast aside in a wild endeavour after
something original. The student who collects a supply of the foregoing
materials will find she has considerably widened her knowledge during
the process, and is better prepared to make designs.

In making a pattern the first thing to be decided upon is some main
idea, the detail that is to carry it out must then be considered. This
latter may be of various types, such as flowers, foliage, figures,
animals, geometrical forms, interlacing strapwork, quatrefoils, &c.,
&c.; perhaps several of these _motifs_ may be combined together in the
same design.

[Illustration: Fig. 10.]

One of the simplest plans upon which a pattern can be arranged is that
of some form recurring at regular intervals over the surface. The
principle involved is repetition; an example of it is shown at fig. 10.
The form that is used here is a sprig of flower, but the repeating
element admits of infinite variation, it may be anything from a dot to
an angel.

[Illustration: Fig. 11.]

Copes and chasubles, bedspreads and curtains, are often to be seen
decorated with some repeating form. Fig. 11 shows in outline a
conventional sprig that is repeated in this fashion over the surface of
a famous cope in Ely Cathedral. Fig. 12 is an example of a sprig of
flower taken from a XVIIth century embroidered curtain; similar bunches,
but composed of different flowers, recur at intervals over this hanging.

It may interest the practical worker to know what are the different
stitches used upon this figure. The petals of the top flower are in
chain stitch in gradated colouring, the centre is an open crossing of
chain surrounded by stamens in stem stitch in varied colour, the
outermost leaves are outlined in stem stitch with an open filling of
little crossed stitches. The petals of the lower flower are worked
similarly, and the centre is carried out in chain stitch and French
knots. The leaves are filled in with ingenious variations of these
stitches.

[Illustration: Fig. 12.]

The repeating element is perhaps a symbolical figure, a heraldic shield,
or it may be some geometrical form that supplies the motive. Fig. 13 is
a conventional sprig of hawthorn that ornaments in this way an altar
frontal at Zanthen. It is by no means necessary that the element which
repeats should be always identical; so long as it is similar in size,
form, and general character it will probably be the more interesting if
variety is introduced.

The principle of repetition is again found in fig. 14, but with an
additional feature; a sprig of flower is used, with the further
introduction of diagonal lines, expressed by leaf sprays, which are
arranged so as to surround each flower and divide it from the adjoining
ones.

[Illustration: Fig. 13.]

It is advisable to space out the required surface in some way before
commencing to draw out a pattern; for carrying out fig. 14 it would be
well to pencil out the surface as in fig. 15; a connection between these
two will be perceived at a glance. This spacing-out of the required
surface in one way or another is of great assistance, and may even prove
suggestive in the planning of the design. It helps the regularity of the
work, and order is essential in design as in most other things in life.

[Illustration: Fig. 14.]

Another very usual expedient is that of introducing a main central form,
with others branching out on either side and symmetrically balancing
each other. An example of this is given in fig. 16. The symmetry may be
much more free than this; a tree is symmetrical taken as a whole, but
the two sides do not exactly repeat each other.

[Illustration: Fig. 15.]

A plan very commonly employed is that of radiating main lines all
diverging from one central point. Fig. 17 shows a design following this
principle; there is infinite variety in the ways in which this may be
carried out.

[Illustration: Fig. 16.]

[Illustration: Fig. 17.]

Another method would be to plan a continuous flowing line with forms
branching out on one side or on both. Figs. 18 and 19 are border
designs, for which purpose this arrangement is often used, though it can
also well form an all-over pattern; sometimes these lines used over a
surface are made to cross each other, tartan wise, by running in two
directions, producing an apparently complicated design by very simple
means.

[Illustration: Figs. 18 and 19.]

[Illustration: Fig. 20.]

Designs may be planned on the counterchange principle. This is a system
of mass designing that involves the problem of making a pattern out of
one shape, continually repeated, and fitting into itself in such a way
as to leave no interstices. The simplest example of this is to be found
in the chess board, and it will easily be seen that a great number of
shapes might be used instead of the square. Fig. 20 is an example of a
counterchange design carried out in inlay; for this method of work
counterchange is very suitable. On reference to the chapter upon this
work another example will be found (page 181). Fig. 21 illustrates the
same principle, further complicated by the repetition of the form in
three directions instead of in two only.

[Illustration: Fig. 21.]

A method of further enriching a straightforward pattern, covering a
plain surface, is to work a subsidiary pattern upon the background. This
is usually of a monotonous and formal character in order not to clash
with the primary decoration, though this relationship may sometimes be
found reversed. It has the appearance of being some decoration belonging
to the ground rather than to the primary pattern; in its simplest form
it appears as a mere repeating dot or a lattice (see fig. 22), but it
may be so elaborated as to cover with an intricate design every portion
of the exposed ground not decorated with the main pattern.

Many other distinct kinds of work might be mentioned, such as needlework
pictures, the story-telling embroideries that can be made so
particularly attractive. Embroidered landscapes, formal gardens,
mysterious woods, views of towns and palaces, are, if rightly treated,
very fine. In order to learn the way to work such subjects we must go to
the XVIth and XVIIth century _petit point_ pictures, and to the detail
in fine tapestries. The wrong method of going to work is to imitate the
effect sought after by the painter.

[Illustration: Fig. 22.]

It is a mistake in embroidery design to be too naturalistic. In painting
it may be the especial aim to exactly imitate nature, but here are
wanted embroidery flowers, animals and figures, possessing the character
and likeness of the things represented, but in no way trying to make us
believe that they are real. The semblance of a bumble bee crawling upon
the tea cloth gives a hardly pleasant sensation and much savours of
the practical joke, which is seldom in good taste; the needle, however,
adds convention to almost anything, and will usually manage the bee all
right unless the worker goes out of the way to add a shadow and a high
light. Such things as perspective, light and shade or modelling of form,
should all be very much simplified if not avoided, for embroidery
conforms to the requirements of decoration and must not falsify the
surface that it ornaments. Shading is made use of in order to give more
variety to, and exhibit the beauty of, colour by means of gradation, to
explain more clearly the design, and so on; it is not employed for the
purpose of fixing the lighting of the composition from one point by
means of systematically adjusted light and shade, or of making a form
stand out so realistically as to almost project from the background.

In avoiding too much resemblance to natural forms it is not necessary to
make things ugly; a conventional flower implies no unmeaning
straightness or impossible curve, it may keep all its interesting
characteristics, but it has to obey other requirements specially
necessary in the particular design. Another point to be noted is that,
since there is freedom of choice of flowers and other objects, only
those perfect and well-formed should be chosen; all accidents of growth
and disease may, happily, be omitted; if anything of this kind is put in
it helps to give the naturalistic look which is to be avoided. Both
sides of a leaf should match, though it may happen in nature, through
misfortune, that one is deformed and small.

In figure work, which, though ambitious, is one of the most interesting
kinds of embroidery, the figures, like all other things, must be treated
with a certain amount of simplicity; very little attempt must be made to
obtain flesh tones, roundness of form, perspective, or foreshortening.
The work should be just sufficiently near to nature to be a good
embroidery rendering of it. However, without overstepping the limits
there is a great deal that may be expressed, such things as character,
gesture, grace, colour, and so on, matters which are after all of first
importance. Detail, if of the right kind, may be filled in, but it is
wrong to attempt what is to the craft very laborious to obtain, for
this would be misdirected energy, which is great waste. A right use of
the figure can be seen in the XIIIth century embroidery pictures, which,
covering mediæval church vestments, often display episodes from the
lives of the saints. These are some of the masterpieces of the art of
embroidery; observation of nature is carried to a marvellous pitch, but
the execution never sinks into commonplace realism.

Certain restrictions are always present, in making a design, that must
be conformed to, such as, the limit of space, the materials with which
the work is to be carried out, the use to which it will be put, and so
on. These, instead of being difficulties, can afford help in the way of
suggestion and limitation. A bad design may look as if it obeyed them
unwillingly--a form is perhaps cramped, perhaps stretched out in order
to fit its place, instead of looking as if it naturally fitted it
whether the confining lines were there or not. In the early herbals,
illustrated with woodcuts, examples can be found over and over again of
a flower filling a required space simply and well; fig. 23 is taken from
the herbal of Carolus Clusius, printed at Antwerp in 1601 by the great
house of Plantin. The draughtsman in this case had to draw a plant to
fit a standard-sized engraver's block, and he had a certain number of
facts to tell about it; he drew the plant as simply and
straightforwardly as possible, making good use of all the available
space, the result being a well-planned and balanced piece of work, with
no affectation or unnecessary lines about it.

[Illustration: Fig. 23.]

Fine colour is a quality appreciated at first sight, though often
unconsciously. It is a difficult subject to speak of very definitely; an
eye for colour is natural to some, but in any case the faculty can be
cultivated and developed. By way of studying the subject, we can go to
nature and learn as much as we are capable of appreciating; even such
things as butterflies, shells, and birds' eggs are suggestive. Again,
embroideries, illuminated manuscripts, pictures, painted decoration, may
be studied, and so on; in fact, colour is so universal that it is not
possible to get away from it. Unfortunately we are sometimes forced to
learn what to avoid as well as what to emulate.

Colour is entirely relative, that is to say it depends upon its
immediate surroundings for what it appears to be. Also it has effects
varying with the material which it dyes; wool is of an absorbent nature,
whereas silk has powers of reflection. It is a safe plan to use true
colours, real blue, red or green, not slate, terra cotta, and olive.
Gold, silver, white and black, are valuable additions to the colour
palette; it should be remembered about the former that precious things
must be used with economy or they become cheap and perhaps vulgar.

[Illustration: Fig. 24.]

For getting satisfactory colour there is a useful method which can at
times be made use of; this is to stitch it down in alternate lines of
two different tints, which, seen together at a little distance, give the
desired effect. Backgrounds can be covered over with some small
geometrical pattern carried out in this way, such as is shown in fig.
24, perhaps using in alternation bright blue and black instead of a
single medium tint of blue all over. At a slight distance the tone may
be the same in either case, but this method gives a pleasantly varied
and refined effect, which avoids muddiness, and shows up the pattern
better. This same method is used for expressing form more clearly as
well as for colour; waves of hair, for instance, are much more clearly
expressed when worked in this way.




CHAPTER IV

STITCHES

  Introduction--Chain Stitch--Zigzag Chain--Chequered Chain--Twisted
  Chain--Open Chain--Braid Stitch--Cable Chain--Knotted Chain--Split
  Stitch.


It is necessary for every worker to have a certain amount of knowledge
of stitches, for they are, so to speak, the language of the art, and
though not of first importance, still there is a great deal in
stitchery. The needlewoman should be absolute master of her needle, for
there is a great charm in beautifully carried out stitching; also a good
design can be made mechanical and uninteresting by a wrong method of
execution. The simplest and most common stitches are the best, and are
all that are necessary for the doing of good work. Work carried out
entirely in one stitch has a certain unity and character that is very
pleasing. There are a great number of stitches in existence, that is, if
each slight variation has a different name assigned to it. The names
are sometimes misleading, for often the same stitch is known by several
different ones; descriptive names have where possible been chosen for
those discussed in the following pages.

A worker may find it useful to keep by her a sampler with the most
characteristic stitches placed upon it; a glance at this will be
suggestive when she is in doubt as to which to use, for it is often
difficult to recollect just the right and most suitable one at a
moment's notice. It is necessary to learn only the main varieties, for
each individual worker can adapt, combine, and invent variations to suit
a special purpose.

The direction of the stitch is important; tone, if not colour, can be
very much altered by change in direction; also growth and form can be
suggested by it; for instance, lines going across a stem are not usually
so satisfactory as those running the length of it; these suggesting
growth better. Folds of drapery are often explained by direction of the
lines of stitching quite as much as by gradation of colour.

With reference to the stitches described in the following chapters, the
worker is advised to try to work them by simply examining the diagrams,
and, if in any difficulty, then to refer to the printed description, for
such directions are apt to be tedious. The simplest way to master these
is to let some one read them out step by step, and to work from
dictation. It should be remembered that the use of a particular thread
often makes or mars a stitch, some requiring soft silks to show them to
advantage, whilst others may need a stoutly twisted thread.

Chain stitch is universal, and one of the most ancient of stitches. It
is the most commonly used of a group that might be described as linked
stitches. Much beautiful work has been carried out entirely in it, and
when a monotonous even line is required, this is a most suitable stitch
to employ. It is equally in request for outline and filling in, and its
chain-like adaptability makes it specially good for following out curved
forms or spiral lines. Tambour stitch is practically the same in result,
though worked in quite a different manner, for it is carried out in a
frame with a fine crochet hook, instead of with a needle. This makes it
quicker in execution, but more mechanical in appearance, so it is not to
be as much recommended.

[Illustration: Fig. 25.]

To work chain stitch (fig. 25) bring the needle through at the top of
the traced line, hold the working thread down towards the left with the
thumb, insert the needle at the point where the thread has just come
through and bring it up on the traced line about one-sixteenth of an
inch further along, draw the thread through over the held down thread.
It should show a neat line of back-stitching on the reverse side. The
chain can be made broader by inserting the needle a little to the right,
instead of at the exact point where the last thread came through. Care
must be taken in the working not to draw the thread too tightly, as this
stitch is inclined to pucker the material, especially when it is worked
in curved lines.

A flower and leaf worked with a solid filling of chain stitch are shown
in fig. 26. The dark outline of the flower is in back stitch, the centre
a mass of French knots, and the stem in stem stitch. By working the
petals in curved lines in this way the shape is well suggested, and the
play of light on the curves is particularly happy, especially if the
thread used is silk or gold. Another slight variation from this would be
to work the lines of chain stitch in different shades of colour, and so
get each petal gradually either lighter or darker towards its base; this
gives a very pretty effect. Fig. 27 shows an oak leaf carried out in
this way, the lines upon it indicate the way in which the stitches
would be worked. The rule in solid fillings is to work from the outside
inwards where possible, and thus make sure of a good outline.

[Illustration: Fig. 26.]

In the Victoria and Albert Museum there is a white linen dress[1]
daintily embroidered in chain stitch. It is an excellent example of a
kind of design suitable to this stitch; the leaves and flowers are
carried out in lines of chain stitch following the outline, and in these
lines use is made of strongly contrasting colour to both show up the
form better, and also decorate it. The leaf in fig. 28 is in style
somewhat similar to this, and is intended to be carried out in two
distinct colours.

[Illustration: Fig. 27.]

[Illustration: Fig. 28.]

Chain stitches can be worked singly; they are used in this way as a
powdering over a background. Sometimes they may be seen conventionally
suggesting the small feathers on the shoulder of a bird's wing by being
dotted over it at regular intervals. Fig. 29 shows how they might be
used to carry out a tiny flower, five separate stitches represent the
petals, and two more the leaves at the base; this is a simpler and more
satisfactory method than to attempt very minute forms with satin
stitches.

[Illustration: Fig. 29.]

The common chain makes a particularly neat border stitch taken in zigzag
fashion. To work this (fig. 30)--Trace two parallel lines on the
material and work the chain across from side to side at an angle of 45°
to the traced lines. For further security it is well to catch down the
end of the stitch just completed with the needle as it commences the
following one. The line can be further decorated by placing a French
knot, perhaps in a contrasting colour, in each little triangular space
left by working the stitch.

[Illustration: Fig. 30.]

[Illustration: Fig. 31.]

There is an ingenious method of working ordinary chain stitch in a
chequering of two colours (fig. 31). It is quite simple to work. Thread
a needle with two different coloured threads, commence the chain stitch
in the usual way until the thread has to be placed under the point of
the needle for forming the loop. Place only one of the two threads
underneath, leaving the other on one side out of the way, then draw the
needle and thread through over the one held down. A chain stitch will
have been formed with the thread that was looped under the needle. For
the next stitch, the alternate thread is placed under, and so on, taking
each thread in turn. The thread not in use each time usually requires a
little adjustment to make it entirely disappear from the surface.

Twisted chain is worked very similarly to the ordinary chain stitch. It
has not such a decidedly looped appearance, which is sometimes an
advantage. To work it (fig. 32)--Bring the thread through at the top of
the line, hold it down under the thumb to the left, and insert the
needle to the left of the traced line, slightly below the point where
the thread has come through. Bring it out again on the traced line,
about one-eighth of an inch lower down, and draw it through over the
held down thread.

An entirely different effect can be obtained by working this stitch
much closer together, but in exactly the same way. It will then
resemble a satin stitch slightly raised on one side. This is known as
rope stitch and is at times very useful.

[Illustration: Fig. 32.]

[Illustration: Fig. 33.]

Open chain stitch makes a good broad line; it looks best when worked
with a stout thread. To carry out the stitch (fig. 33)--Trace two
parallel lines upon the material, about one-eighth of an inch apart,
and bring the thread through at the top of the left-hand one. Hold the
thread down with the thumb and insert the needle exactly opposite on the
other line, bring it up one-eighth of an inch lower down and draw the
thread through over the held down part, leaving a rather slack loop upon
the material. Then insert the needle on the first line again, inside
the slack loop, and bring it out one-eighth of an inch below. Repeat
this on each side alternately. Fig. 34 is a drawing from a piece of
white linen work in which the open chain stitch is used in combination
with other stitches. This figure, with its open-work centre, is repeated
diagonally over a white linen cloth exhibited in the Victoria and Albert
Museum.

[Illustration: Fig. 34.]

Braid stitch rather resembles a fancy braid laid upon the material. It
looks best when carried out with a stoutly twisted thread. To work it
(fig. 35)--Trace two parallel lines upon the material about one-eighth
of an inch apart, and bring the thread through at the right-hand end of
the lower line. Throw the thread across to the left and hold it slackly
under the thumb. Place the needle pointing towards the worker under this
held thread, then twist it round towards the left and over the held
thread until it points in the opposite direction. It will now have the
thread twisted loosely over it. Next, insert the needle on the upper
line one-eighth of an inch from the starting-point, and bring it
through on the lower line exactly underneath. Place the thumb over the
stitch in process of making and draw the thread through as the diagram
shows. It can be worked openly or more closely as preferred.

[Illustration: Fig. 35.]

[Illustration: Fig. 36.]

Cable chain is descriptively named, for, when worked with a stoutly
twisted thread, it has very much the appearance of a chain laid upon
the material, rather too much so perhaps to be a pretty embroidery
stitch. To work it (fig. 36)--Bring the needle through at the top of the
traced line, throw the thread round to the left and hold it down with
the thumb near where it has come through the material. Pass the needle
under the held down thread from left to right and draw it through until
there is only a small loop left. Insert the needle in the centre of this
loop, on the traced line about one-sixteenth of an inch below the
starting-point. Bring it out a quarter of an inch below and outside the
loop. Take the thread in the right hand and tighten the loop that has
now been formed, and then pass the thread under the point of the needle
towards the left (see diagram). Place the left thumb over the stitch in
process of making and draw the thread through; this will complete the
first two links of the chain; to continue, repeat from the beginning.

Knotted chain is a pretty stitch; to look well it must be worked with a
stout thread. To carry it out (fig. 37)--Trace two parallel lines upon
the material, about one-eighth of an inch apart. Bring the thread
through at the right hand end in the centre between the two lines, then
insert the needle on the upper line one-sixteenth of an inch further
along, and bring it through on the lower line immediately below. Draw
the thread through and there will be a short slanting line left upon the
material. Throw the thread round to the left and hold it under the
thumb, then pass the needle and thread through the slanting line from
above downwards, leaving the thread a little slack. Place the thread
again under the thumb, then in the same way as before, from above
downwards, pass the needle and thread through this slack loop. This
makes the first two links of the chain; the last one will not be
properly fixed in place until the next stitch is taken. The dotted
vertical line on the diagram shows the piece of material taken up by the
needle upon commencing the next stitch.

[Illustration: Fig. 37.]

[Illustration: Fig. 38.]

Split stitch is a most useful one for many purposes. It is difficult to
distinguish from a fine chain when done, but in the working it much more
resembles stem stitch. It can be carried out in the hand or in a frame.
This stitch, frequently seen upon ancient work, was much used for both
draperies and features; the lines of the stitching usually, by their
direction, expressing moulding of form or folds of drapery. To work it
(fig. 38)--Bring the thread through at the lower end of the traced line,
then insert the needle about one-eighth of an inch further along, and
bring it through on the line two or three threads nearer the
starting-point; whilst bringing it through take it also through the
centre of the working thread, which thus splits each stitch.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] No. 184, 1898.




CHAPTER V

STITCHES--(_continued_)

  Satin Stitch--Long and Short Stitch--Stem Stitch--Overcast
  Stitch--Back Stitch--Buttonhole Stitch--Tailor's Buttonhole--Fancy
  Buttonhole Edgings--Flower in Open Buttonhole Stitch--Leaf in Close
  Buttonhole Stitches--Petal in Solid Buttonholing.


SATIN AND SIMILAR STITCHES

Satin stitch is perhaps the most commonly used of all stitches. It is
more quickly worked by hand, but for complicated work the help of a
frame is required. Floss silk thread is seen to greatest advantage in a
stitch of this kind, for it shows off the glossiness of silk
particularly well. It is straightforward in the working and needs no
further description than is given by the diagram (fig. 39). The stitches
may vary in length, they must neither be impracticably long nor, on the
other hand, too much cut up, lest the silky effect be partly lost. These
stitches lie close together and in parallel lines; the chief difference
between satin and several other closely allied stitches being that these
others may radiate or vary in direction according to the space to be
filled. The stitch is usually worked in oblique lines; stems, leaves,
and petals would be treated in this way; sometimes it is worked
regularly having regard to the warp and woof of the material; it would
be treated thus when used in conjunction with cross or stroke stitch.

[Illustration: Fig. 39.]

It will be seen that there is as much silk at the back as on the front
of the work. There is a method of carrying out the stitch by which this
waste of material at the back is avoided; the thread is returned to the
front close to where it went through instead of crossing over and coming
up on the other side. The effect on the right side, however, is not so
good, so this method cannot be recommended.

One of the technical difficulties with satin stitch is to get a neat
firm line at the edges of the filled space; this is excellently attained
by the Chinese and Japanese, who use this satin stitch a great deal.
They frequently work each petal of a complicated flower separately,
leaving as a division, between each one and the next, a fine line of
material firmly and clearly drawn.

[Illustration: Fig. 40.]

The stitch is much used for raised work, and also lends itself well to
gradation of colour. Fig. 40 is an example of shading in satin stitch.
In this case each new row of stitches fits in just between those of the
last row; this is a bold but very effective method of expressing
gradation. A variation upon this is shown in fig. 42; the bands of
different colour are here necessarily worked in a chevron pattern which
makes the shading rather more gradual. An example of the same thing can
be seen in fig. 44 in the leaf upon which the squirrel sits. Apart from
gradation of colour, the surface to be covered by satin stitch has often
to be partitioned up in some way in order to make the satin stitches of
a practical length.

[Illustration: Fig. 41.]

Long and short stitch is a very slight variation, if any, from satin
stitch. The name describes the method of working, for it is carried out
by working alternately a long and a short stitch, the stitches being
picked up just as in satin stitch. It is useful for close fillings and
shaded work, and also as a solid outline for any kind of open filling.
The working of the stitch can be seen in fig. 41, where the band of
lightest colour on the upper part of the leaf is worked in long and
short stitch. The advantage of this way of working can be seen at once,
it makes a firm outline on the one edge and a nicely broken-up one on
the other, just ready for another shade to be worked in. In order to
carry out the rest of the shading on the leaf in the same way the
stitches can be all of the same length; this will always ensure a broken
line at the edge, which is a necessity for this method of gradation.
Long and short stitch used as an outline for a leaf with an open filling
can be seen on page 209. The _opus plumarium_ or feather stitch that we
read of in the descriptions of the old embroideries was a similar stitch
to this, and so called, some say, because it resembled the plumage of a
bird.

[Illustration: Fig. 42.]

Stem stitch, well known and frequently in use for various purposes, such
as for lines, outlines, gradated and flat fillings, and so on, is
usually done in the hand, and is quite simple; fig. 43 explains the
working. If a broad line is required the needle is put in more
obliquely, and a raised effect can be obtained by working over a laid
thread. The thread must be kept to the same side of the needle, either
to the left or to the right as better suits the purpose in hand; the
effect is more line-like when it is kept to the right. Occasionally,
when just a double line is to be worked, it is deliberately done in the
two ways, and then the line resembles a narrow plait. A solid filling
in stem stitch should be worked in lines as illustrated in the squirrel
in fig. 44. This little beast is taken from the curtain shown in Plate
VII., and is a good example of the life and interest that the
introduction of such things adds to embroideries.

[Illustration: Fig. 43.]

[Illustration: Fig. 44.]

The stitches just described were largely used in crewel work. This is a
rather vague name that denotes a decorative kind of needlework carried
out with coloured wools upon a plain white linen ground. The design is
usually composed of conventionally treated leaves and flowers, often
growing from boldly curved stems. These were partly shaded in solid
stitches, partly worked with geometrical open fillings; ornamental birds
and beasts of all kinds were introduced, and the effect of the whole was
very beautiful. The work is characteristically English, and a great
deal of it was executed in the XVIIth century. Plates VII. and VIII. are
illustrative of the type of work, and fig. 45 represents a detail. The
various stitches which occur in this drawing are stem, herring-bone,
long and short, knot, basket, buttonhole, single chain and satin
stitches.

[Illustration: Fig. 45.]

[Illustration: Fig. 46.]

[Illustration: Fig. 47.]

Overcast stitch in embroidery is practically a very short raised satin
stitch. It requires neat workmanship, and then makes a bold clear line
or outline. To work it (fig. 46)--Run or couch down a thread on the
traced line, then with fine thread cover this over with close upright
stitches, picking up as little material as possible each time in order
to make the line clear and round. The stitch is worked most perfectly in
a frame.

Back stitch sometimes makes a good line or outline. To work it (fig.
47)--Bring the needle through one-sixteenth of an inch from the end of
the traced line, insert it at the commencement and bring it through
again one-sixteenth of an inch beyond where it first came out. Each
stitch, it will be seen, commences at the point where the last one
finished.


BUTTONHOLE STITCH AND ITS APPLICATION

Buttonhole stitch, which is well known in plain needlework, is very
useful also in embroidery, besides being an important stitch in
needlepoint lace. Owing to its construction it is well suited for the
covering of raw edges, but it is also adaptable to a variety of other
purposes, such as are open or close fillings of leaves and flowers, cut
work, and the outlining of applied work.

[Illustration: Fig. 48.]

There are two ways of forming the stitch, the common buttonhole and what
is called tailor's buttonhole.

To work the ordinary buttonhole stitch (fig. 48)--Bring the needle
through at the left-hand end of the traced line, hold the thread down
to the left with the thumb and insert the needle as shown in the
diagram, draw it through over the held thread to complete the stitch. It
is worked openly in the diagram, but it may, as required, be either more
or less open or quite closed.

[Illustration: Fig. 49.]

The tailor's buttonhole is for some purposes more satisfactory; the
stitch is firmer than the other kind owing to the heading having an
extra knot in it; this makes it also more ornamental. To work it (fig.
49)--Commence in the same way as the last stitch until the needle and
thread are in the position shown in fig. 48 then, with the right hand
take hold of the thread near the eye of the needle, bring it down and
loop it under the point from right to left, draw the needle and thread
through over these two loops, and the first stitch is made.

[Illustration: Fig. 50.]

Buttonhole stitch can be varied in many ways, dependent mainly upon the
spacing of the stitch and the direction that the needle takes when
picking up the material. Fig. 50 shows four simple varieties; the first
is the open buttonhole spaced slightly irregularly and with a thread
slipped underneath it; any variety of spacing can be arranged, and the
thread shown running underneath, which sometimes forms a pretty
addition, is usually of a contrasting colour or material. The second
shows the stitches taken slanting-wise, so that they cross each other.
In the third the stitches are at different angles and of unequal length.
The fourth example shows two lines of spaced buttonhole stitch fitting
neatly the one into the other and forming a solid line. One row is
worked first, leaving just sufficient space between each stitch for the
second row to fill up, which can be carried out by reversing the
position of the material and exactly repeating the first line in the
same or in a different colour.

[Illustration: Fig. 51.]

A flower filled in with open buttonhole stitch is shown at fig. 51. The
centre consists of a mass of French knots, and the outside line is in
satin stitch. The innermost circle of buttonholing is worked first, the
next row is worked over the heading of the first row as well as into the
material; the succeeding rows are worked in the same way until the
outside limit is reached, and there the satin stitch just covers the
heading of the last row of buttonhole stitching. Gradation of colour can
easily be introduced by using a different shade for each circle of
stitches, and this produces a very pretty effect. An open method of
filling a space, whether flower, leaf, drapery, or background, is
sometimes preferable to a solid filling, and the two methods can very
well be used together as each shows off the other. These light fillings
give opportunity for further variety and ingenuity in the stitching, and
prevent the work from looking heavy. A butterfly, carried out partly in
open stitches, is illustrated in fig. 52.

[Illustration: Fig. 52.]

Fig. 53 is, in the original, a gay little flower carried out in orange
and yellow. The stitch employed here is a close buttonhole.

[Illustration: Fig. 53.]

Another example of the use of close buttonhole is shown in the ivy leaf
in fig. 54. The stitch is worked in two rows, back to back, in each lobe
of the leaf, and the resulting ridge down the centre rather happily
suggests the veining. This method of filling in might be just reversed
for a rose leaf; the heading of the stitch would then suggest the
serrated edge, and the meeting of the two rows down the centre the line
of the vein.

[Illustration: Fig. 54.]

A cluster of berries can be very prettily worked in buttonhole stitch in
the way shown in fig. 55. The stitches are so arranged that the heading
outlines each berry, and the needle enters the material at the same
point, always in the centre. A bullion stitch in a darker colour marks
the eye of the berry.

[Illustration: Fig. 55.]

A good method of filling a space with solid buttonhole stitching is
shown in fig. 56. Each row is worked into the heading of the preceding
row, and the stitches do not pierce the material except in the first row
and at the extremities of succeeding rows. They are placed rather close
together in order to completely cover the ground. The stitch is worked,
first, from left to right, then for the next row from right to left;
this is quite easy and enables the work to be continuously carried out.
Sometimes, when the first row is done, the thread is thrown across to
the side where the row began, and there made fast; then the second row
is worked with stitches which take up the thrown thread as well as the
heading of the first row. By using a more open buttonhole and thus
partly exposing the laid thread, a filling, both quick and effective, is
obtained. This is a useful method to employ when the work is done over a
padding of threads, for there is no necessity to pierce the material
except at the edges.

[Illustration: Fig. 56.]




CHAPTER VI

STITCHES--(_continued_)

  Knots and Knot Stitches--Herring-bone Stitch--Feather Stitch--Basket
  Stitch--Fishbone Stitch--Cretan Stitch--Roumanian Stitch--Various
  Insertion Stitches--Picots.


KNOTS AND KNOT STITCHES

It would be difficult to go far in embroidery without requiring knots
for one purpose or another. They are useful in all sorts of ways, and
make a pleasant contrast to the other stitches. For the enrichment of
border lines and various parts of the work, both pattern and background,
they are most serviceable, and also for solid fillings; for such places
as centres of flowers or parts of leaves, they are again valuable. They
have been used to form a continuous outline, but owing to their tendency
to make a weak line, not frequently; indeed they usually show to better
advantage when slightly separated.

Examples are to be seen of English knotted line work in which the
knotting was executed in the thread previously to embroidering with it.
The knotting of thread was a pastime with ladies in the XVIIth century.
The thread, usually a linen one and as a rule home spun, was wound upon
a netting-needle, and by the aid of this a close series of knots was
made upon it; when finished it somewhat resembled a string of beads.
Balls of this prepared knotted thread may still be found, treasured up
in old work receptacles. When prepared it was couched on to the material
with fine thread, like a cord or braid, and made to follow out some
prearranged pattern. In white linen work it was used for carrying out
ornamental borderings on infants' robes and other dainty articles.

[Illustration: Fig. 57.]

French knots can be worked in the hand or in a frame. They are easier to
manage in the latter, and to look well they must be neatly and firmly
made. Completed they should resemble beads lying end upwards on the
material. To work the French knot (fig. 57)--Bring the thread through
the material at the required point, take hold of it with the left finger
and thumb near the starting-point (A on plan), then let the point of the
needle encircle the held thread twice, twist the needle round and insert
it at point B on plan, draw the thread through to the back, not letting
go the held thread until necessary. Fig. 58 shows some French knots
decorating a leaf spray, and various other examples of their use can be
found in the book.

[Illustration: Fig. 58.]

Bullion knots resemble tight curls of thread laid on the material. They
can be used as a variation from French knots, and even for the
representation of petals and small leaves. To be satisfactory they must
be firm, stout, and tightly coiled; some knack is required to make them
properly. To work the bullion knot (fig. 59)--Bring the thread through
at the required place, insert the needle one-eighth of an inch from this
point and bring it through again exactly at it. Take hold of the thread
about two inches from where it came through and twist it several times
round the point of the needle, the number of times being dependent on
the required length of the knot. Place the left thumb upon the tight
coil on the needle, in order to keep it in place, and draw the needle
and thread through it, then pass the thread through to the back at the
point where the needle was last inserted (point A on plan). The thumb
must not be removed until it is in the way. Fig. 60 represents a flower,
of which the centre is formed of bullion together with French knots.

[Illustration: Fig. 59.]

[Illustration: Fig. 60.]

[Illustration: Fig. 61.]

Fig. 61 shows a knotted stitch that is similar in result to the knotted
threads discussed earlier in the chapter. In this case the knotting of
the thread and the fixing to the material is done at the same time. It
is a useful stitch when a jagged line is wanted, and can be seen used,
for instance, for the branching veins in open work leaves, as in fig.
62. The diagram explains the working of the stitch; at point A on the
plan the left thumb holds the thread down whilst the stitch is in
progress.

[Illustration: Fig. 62.]


MISCELLANEOUS STITCHES

[Illustration: Fig. 63.]

The stitch illustrated at fig. 63 is very similar to the common
herring-bone. The only practical difference is that in the plain
needlework stitch there is usually a smaller piece of material picked up
by the needle each time. To work it as in the diagram--Trace two
parallel lines on the material and bring the thread through at the
commencement of the lower line, insert it on the opposite line rather
farther along and there pick up a stitch, as the needle is doing in the
figure. Then on the opposite line pick up a similar stitch a little in
advance of the one just finished. After this work the stitches on either
line alternately, commencing each one at the point where the last one
ended; this forms on the underside a double row of back stitches. It is
quite easy to work this stitch with the back stitches on the working
side, and when they are required to be on the surface it is advisable to
do it in that way. When embroidering upon a semi-transparent material
this stitch is a satisfactory one to use, the back stitching follows out
the outline on either side of the form, and the crossing of the threads
on the under side shows through prettily. This stitch sometimes goes by
the name of double back stitch. It is useful in many ways, making a
light stitch for stems, leaves, or flowers; it can be sometimes found in
Eastern work used for an entire embroidery. When used for flowers or
leaves the width and the closeness of the stitch are varied to suit the
shape to be filled. An example of its use as a flower filling is shown
in the carnation at fig. 64, which is carried out in four shades of
colour. Considerable use is made of this stitch in embroidered curtain
shown in Plate VII.; it is there employed for all the stems and various
flowers upon the hanging.

[Illustration: Fig. 64.]

[Illustration: Fig. 65.]

The feather stitch, often used to decorate plain needlework, is now to
be discussed; although similar in name it must not be confused with the
feather or plumage stitch that has already been mentioned. The stitch is
so simple and so much in use as hardly to need description; fig. 65
explains the working. There can be many slight variations of the stitch,
the worker perhaps devising them needle in hand. Two are shown in fig.
66. The one to the left is worked very like the ordinary stitch; the
needle picks up the material in a straight line instead of slightly
obliquely, and each stitch touches the one immediately above; it is
here made use of as a couching stitch, a bunch of threads of a
contrasting colour is laid on the material, and the stitch worked over
it from side to side. The right-hand example shows the ordinary feather
stitch worked more closely and in a broader line; carried out in this
way, it can be used for a leaf filling.

[Illustration: Fig. 66.]

Basket stitch, useful for a solid line, shows up very clearly when
worked with a stout twisted thread. This stitch would be appropriately
used when applied to some representation of basket work. To carry out
the diagram (fig. 67)--Trace two parallel lines on the material, and to
commence, bring the thread through on the left-hand line, then insert
the needle on the right-hand line about one-eighth of an inch lower down
and bring it through on the left-hand line exactly opposite (see needle
in fig.); the next stitch is worked by inserting the needle on the
right-hand line but above the last stitch, that is at point A on
diagram, and bringing it through at B. To continue, repeat from the
beginning.

[Illustration: Fig. 67.]

A particularly good line for a border is made by fishbone stitch. It can
be worked in one colour, or as easily in a chequering of two or three,
as shown in the diagram (fig. 68); to carry it out in this way the
worker must have two threads in use, bringing through each as required.
For such purposes as the fillings of small leaves, this stitch is very
useful (see fig. 58). The meeting of the stitches in the centre suggest
the veining line, also the change in direction of the thread gives, to
the two sides of the leaf, pleasant variation in tone. To work
it--Trace three parallel lines upon the material and bring the thread
through on the upper line at the left-hand end. Insert the needle and
bring it through as in process in the diagram, then repeat the same
stitch on the other side the reverse way, that is, insert the needle
just over the central line and bring it through on the upper one close
to the last stitch. Care must be taken that the stitches cross well over
each other at the centre, or the material will show through.

[Illustration: Fig. 68.]

[Illustration: Fig. 69.]

The stitch shown in fig. 69, known as plait or Cretan, is commonly seen
on Cretan and other Eastern embroideries. It can be used as a solid
border stitch or as a filling, varying in width as required. To work
it--Bring the thread through on the lower central line, then insert the
needle on the uppermost line and bring it through on the next below as
in process in the diagram; then, still keeping the thread to the right,
insert the needle immediately underneath on the lowest line and bring it
through on the line next above, in fashion similar to the last stitch,
but in reverse direction. To continue, work the stitch alternately on
one side and the other, always keeping the thread to the right of the
needle. In order to make the central plait broader take up rather less
material with the needle; this will decrease the outer and increase the
inner lines. Fig. 70 is taken from a Cretan embroidery, in which this
stitch is mainly used.

[Illustration: Fig. 70.]

[Illustration: Fig. 71.]

Another similar but more simple stitch, often seen in Eastern work, is
shown in fig. 71. It can also frequently be found employed on XVIIth
century English wool work hangings. It is sometimes called Roumanian
stitch, and is composed of one long stitch crossed by a short one in the
centre. To work it--Trace two parallel lines on the material and bring
the thread through on the left-hand line at the top. Insert the needle
on the opposite line and bring it through near the centre, as shown in
process in the diagram. For the next half of the stitch the needle
enters the material at point A on plan, and is brought through again on
the left-hand line close to the last stitch, and so in position to
commence again. An illustration of this stitch in use as a filling can
be seen at fig. 72. It is worked in four shades of green wool, and each
line of stitches is so arranged as to encroach slightly on the line
before by means of setting each stitch just between two of the last row.
This method of working has two advantages; the shading is thus made
more gradual, and a pleasant undulating effect is given to the surface
of the leaf. This can be most easily understood by a practical trial of
the stitch and method.

[Illustration: Fig. 72.]


INSERTION STITCHES

There is occasion sometimes in embroidery to join edges together
visibly. This gives an opportunity for some additional pretty
stitching--the addition of something like this, that is perhaps not
absolutely necessary, has extra value from the evidence it gives of the
worker's interest and delight in her work, a quality always appreciated;
on the other hand, work done from the motive of getting a result with as
little labour as possible is valued at just its worth.

These insertion stitches are useful for joining together edges of
cushion covers, bags, detached bands, also for the ornamentation of
dress, and for embroideries upon which drawn thread work is not
possible. A stout thread is usually suitable for the purpose. The raw
edges must first be turned in and flattened, and the parts to be joined
can if necessary be tacked in place on a temporary ground such as
_toile cirée_.

Fig. 73 illustrates a twisted insertion stitch that is quickly executed
and very frequently used. The diagram sufficiently explains the working
without further description.

[Illustration: Fig. 73.]

Buttonhole stitch can be turned to account for this purpose. Fig. 74
shows the tailor's buttonhole used as an insertion stitch; for this
purpose it is the better of the two kinds of buttonhole. The stitches
could be arranged in various ways; in the present example three are
worked closely together on either side in turn. The only difficulty with
this buttonhole insertion is that on one side the stitch has to be
worked in direction contrary to that usual, that is from right to left
instead of from left to right. In the diagram the needle is shown
working in this reverse way.

[Illustration: Fig. 74.]

[Illustration: Fig. 75.]

Fig. 75 is a knotted insertion stitch; the knot at each side makes the
stitch a very rigid one. To work it--Bring the thread through at the
lower left-hand side, insert the needle on the upper side a little
towards the right, draw the thread through, and then tie the knot on it
as in process in the diagram.

[Illustration: Fig. 76.]

A rather more complicated joining stitch is shown in fig. 76. It could
be carried out with different coloured threads. The two sides must be
first worked with the edging, which is practically the braid stitch
described on page 88. Commence the stitch in exactly the same way as
when carrying out braid stitch, but work on the edge of the material as
in buttonholing, the working edge in this case being away from the
worker. Let the worker, having reached the point of pulling the thread
through to complete the stitch, draw it out in the direction away from
her. This will draw the stitch towards the edge, where it will form a
knot. In the diagram one of the stitches has been partly undone in order
to show the working more clearly. When the two sides are bound with the
stitch, they can be laced together with another thread as in the
illustration.


PICOTS

Picots are commonly in use in lace work and they are sometimes required
for embroidery purposes, especially in the kinds of work nearly allied
to lace, such as cut work, or for an added ornament to an edging stitch.

[Illustration: Fig. 77.]

Fig. 77 shows too small picots added to a buttonhole bar, and on the
lower bar is shown the method of working the left-hand picot. The pin
that passes into the material behind the bar can be fixed in the bar
itself if there happens to be no material underneath. After reaching
the point illustrated in the diagram, the needle draws the thread
through, thus making a firm knot round the loop. This completes the
picot, the bar is then buttonholed to the end. The second picot is made
in much the same way; instead, however, of putting the needle as the
diagram shows, bring the thread up through the centre of the loop, then
round under the pin from left to right, and it will be in position to
make three buttonhole stitches along the loop, which completes the
second example.

[Illustration: Fig. 78.]

The upper bar on fig. 78 shows a buttonholed picot. The bar must be
worked to the left-hand end of the required picot; the thread is then
from there taken back about one-eighth of an inch and threaded through
the edge of the buttonhole. This is repeated to and fro until there is a
loop composed of three threads ready to be buttonholed over. Upon this
being done, the thread will have arrived at the right point to continue
the bar.

Bullion stitch makes another simple picot--Work the bar to the point
where the picot is required, then, instead of taking the next stitch,
insert the point of the needle in the heading of the last stitch. Leave
the needle in this position, and twist the thread six or eight times
round the point of it, just as for the bullion knot (fig. 59). Place the
left thumb over the tight coil thus formed, and pull the needle and
thread through tightly in order to make the stitch double up into a
tight semi-circle, then continue the buttonholing to the end of the
bar.




CHAPTER VII

CANVAS WORK AND STITCHES

  Introduction--Samplers--Petit Point Pictures--Cross Stitch--Tent
  Stitch--Gobelin Stitch--Irish Stitch--Plait Stitch--Two-sided
  Italian Stitch--Holbein Stitch--Rococo Stitch.


Canvas work, known in the XIIIth century as _opus pulvinarium_ or
cushion work, is of great antiquity, and seems to have had an
independent origin in several countries. It is sometimes given the
misleading name of tapestry, perhaps owing to hangings of all kinds
being called tapestries, whether loom-woven, worked with the needle, or
painted. Large wall hangings with designs similar to those of woven
tapestries have been most successfully carried out on canvas in cross or
tent stitch; as a rule, however, smaller objects are worked, such as
furniture coverings, screens or cushions, whence it is obvious canvas
work received its ancient and descriptive Latin name. Many Eastern
carpets are worked upon a strong canvas in a kind of tent stitch, and
so come under the heading of canvas work. It is a particularly durable
method of embroidering, and this makes it suitable for use upon anything
subjected to hard wear.

The work has usually a very decided and attractive character of its own.
A familiar example of this can be seen in the XVIIIth century samplers.
Its peculiar character is perhaps due to the fact that it cannot break
away from a certain conventionality due to constant use of the same
stitch, and its dependence upon the web of the fabric. This regularity
prevents the work from showing certain faults of design that other
methods may exaggerate. It is hardly possible to copy a natural spray of
flowers in cross stitch and keep it very naturalistic. The stitch being
square and alike all over gives a formality of treatment to every part
of the design, also, some detail is perforce omitted owing to the
impossibility of putting it in; all of this tends to a right method of
treatment, which renders the sampler an admirable lesson not only in
workmanship but also in design.

The XVIth and XVIIth century pictorial subjects worked upon fine canvas
in cross or tent stitch afford instances of most interesting work in
canvas stitches. Some of these, though, as a rule, very much smaller in
size, equal, in their way, the finest tapestries. Most of them, if
judged from a painter's standpoint, would be pronounced failures, but
this effect is not what is sought after; the method of treatment belongs
rather to the great traditions of the tapestry weaver, and is not
governed by the canons of the painter. Plate VI. shows a detail of
foliage from a particularly fine example of this work lately added to
the Victoria and Albert Museum collection.[2]

In what went by the name of Berlin wool work, popular in the early XIXth
century, we have before us a degenerate offshoot of this fine and poetic
kind of work in which all its possibilities are missed, with a result
that is prosaic in the extreme. Some of the canvas-work seat covers
decorated with geometrical designs, seen on Chippendale chairs, were a
pleasant and satisfactory variation in their way, but in most of the
work after that period, the attempt at impossible naturalistic effect
gave such unsatisfactory results as to almost deal a death blow to all
canvas embroidery. It is, however, a method too good and useful to die
out; it must always be more or less in vogue.

Patterns carried out in canvas stitches are sometimes to be seen worked
apparently upon velvet or similar ground materials. This is done by
first laying the canvas upon the velvet and stitching through both
materials; this would have to be carried out in a frame. The threads of
the canvas are afterwards either withdrawn or closely cut off. In the
former case, the stitches must be drawn tight, or the finished work will
not look well. This method has the advantage of saving the labour of
working the background, and sometimes it suits the pattern to have a
contrast in the ground material. In old embroideries, heraldic devices
may be seen successfully treated in this way.

The usual canvas stitches can be worked upon other fabrics that have an
even and square mesh, such as various kinds of linen; also other
embroidery stitches, such as stem, satin, or chain, can be used upon
canvas; they are then always worked with a certain regularity, following
the web of the material.

Canvas work can be done in the hand or in a frame, but the technique is
often better in work done in a frame. In all-over work it is important
that not even a suggestion of the ground fabric should be allowed to
show through; for this reason work in light colours should be done on
white canvas, and _vice versâ_, as far as possible, also the thread used
must suit in thickness the mesh of the canvas. To work a plain ground
well is less easy than to work the pattern, though it may sound more
simple. The back of the work, though not necessarily similar to the
front, must be alike in stitch all over, for the direction the stitch
takes at the back affects the regularity of appearance of the front. The
stitch must not be commenced in exactly the same place in each row, lest
a ridge should appear upon the surface; this can be avoided by using
threads of different lengths. A ground is usually commenced at the lower
left-hand corner, and a pattern, if a complicated one, from the centre
outwards. These technical points are of importance, but they are of
little value unless the stitches are at the same time expressing an
interesting and suitable design.

The stitches used are exceedingly numerous; those described in the
following pages are the varieties most commonly seen.

Cross stitch, the best known in this group, can be worked in slightly
different ways, according to the purpose for which it is required. On
the surface it is always the same, but it can vary at the back. For
instance, when used for marking purposes it should form on the reverse
side either a cross or a square, to do either of which demands some
ingenuity on the part of the worker. For ordinary work the really
correct method is to complete each stitch before going on to the next,
though grounding is frequently done by working the first half of the
stitch along an entire line, and completing the cross upon a return
journey. In any case, the crossing must always be worked in the same
direction.

Cross stitch is a double stitch worked diagonally over two threads of
the canvas each way. It can, however, be taken over more or fewer
threads if required larger or smaller. To work it (fig. 79)--Bring the
needle through on the upper left side of the threads to be covered, and
take it back again on the lower right, then bring it through on the
upper right side and return it to the back on the lower left, which
completes the first stitch.

[Illustration: Fig. 79.]

Tent stitch (fig. 80) is the finest canvas stitch, and is therefore
suitable for work involving much detail. Pictorial and heraldic subjects
are frequently carried out in it. It is worked diagonally over a
perpendicular and horizontal thread of the canvas. The diagram shows
the method of working both back and front. It will be noticed that
though the line goes alternately from left to right and from right to
left, the stitch is always the same at the back as well as the same upon
the front; if this were not so, alternate rows would have a different
appearance upon the right side. The diagram does not show the connection
between the first and the second row, but it is evident that it must be
a short upright line.

[Illustration: Fig. 80.]

Gobelin stitch is a useful variety; it lends itself to shading better
than cross stitch. It is most often worked upon a fine single canvas,
and it can be used as a raised stitch. Fig. 81 represents the stitch; it
is worked similarly to tent stitch but over two threads in height and
one in width, no matter whether the single or double thread canvas is
used. In order to work it as a raised stitch, a line of some kind of
padding is thrown across the canvas, and the stitch taken over it. This
line can be arranged to show in part, in which case the material must be
one presentable, such as a gold cord or narrow braid. The padding would
be covered with stitching to form the background, and left exposed for
the pattern, which would probably be a simple repeating form of some
kind. Gobelin stitch is sometimes worked quite perpendicularly just over
two threads in height.

[Illustration: Fig. 81.]

Irish stitch is pretty and quickly worked. It is usually taken
perpendicularly over four threads of the canvas (fig. 82), though the
number over which it is taken may vary. It is worked in such a way as to
make the stitches of each succeeding row fit between those of the last
row, and can be carried out either diagonally or in horizontal lines.
What is known as Florentine work is carried out in a stitch of this
kind. The pattern in this kind of work is taken horizontally across the
ground in a succession of shaded zigzag lines.

[Illustration: Fig. 82.]

Plait stitch is often used for grounding. It resembles a simple plait
laid in close rows to and fro on the ground. It can frequently be seen
used upon the Italian XVIth century linen work, that in which the
pattern is left in plain linen, and the ground worked in some colour.
The diagram in fig. 83 shows the method of working the stitch. If
carried out correctly, the back of the material should show a row of
short perpendicular lines, each composed of two threads.

[Illustration: Fig. 83.]

Two-sided Italian stitch is descriptively named, for it is alike on both
sides. This is frequently seen on XVIth and XVIIth century Italian linen
work, similar to that mentioned above. A loosely woven linen makes a
suitable ground material, for in the working the stitches must be pulled
firmly, so as to draw the threads of the fabric together; this gives
over the ground a squared open-work effect, which is very pretty. Fig.
84 explains the working of the stitch; it is shown in four stages, and
is quite simple; the final result is a cross surrounded by a square. The
lowest figure in the diagram shows the last stage, for the upper side of
the square is filled in when the row above is worked. The drawing
together of the web is not shown, but at a trial it should be done, for
in that lies the special character of the stitch. The silk used must be
just thick enough to well cover the linen, but not too thick, for then
the work would be clumsy.

[Illustration: Fig. 84.]

[Illustration: Fig. 85.]

Holbein stitch (fig. 85), also known as stroke or line stitch, is alike
on both sides, and is often used in conjunction with cross and satin
stitch, as well as alone. Very intricate and interesting patterns can be
devised to be carried out with these three stitches, worked always with
regard to the web of the linen. Squared paper could be used for
planning the design, as the stitches would all be practically of the
same length, and the pattern must be one that can be easily carried out
alike on both sides. The stitch is worked as follows: An even running
stitch, picking up as much material as it leaves, is taken all round the
pattern. This does half the work on either side; the gaps are then
filled up by the running stitch being taken in a contrary direction,
which completes the pattern. Occasionally stitches go off at an angle
from the running pattern; these are completed on the first journey by a
satin stitch being made at the necessary point. The present diagram is a
zigzag line, with one of these stitches going off at each angle. Fig. 86
is an example of a border design carried out in Holbein stitch.

[Illustration: Fig. 86.]

[Illustration: Fig. 87.]

The stitch illustrated in fig. 87 is known as rococo stitch. It is a
useful one for carrying out a conventional design, such as, to give a
simple illustration, a flower sprig repeating in the spaces formed by a
trellis pattern. The effect of the stitch when worked cannot be judged
from this diagram; to see this properly a piece of canvas must be worked
entirely over with it. The pattern chosen is usually one that lends
itself to being worked in diagonal lines, as this stitch is best worked
in that way. It entirely hides the canvas background, and is carried out
very similarly to the oriental stitch in fig. 71. By the help of that
diagram and description and the present one, which gives various steps,
the worker will easily master the stitch, which is quite simple. The
ordinary carrying out of the stitch is shown where the needle is at
work, and in another part the diagram, by some loosened stitches,
illustrates how to pass from one cluster to the next.

Some fine examples of canvas work design, introducing a variety of
stitches, may be seen in the Victoria and Albert Museum. These are large
panels filled with foliage and flowers growing about architectural
columns.[3]

FOOTNOTES:

[2] No. 879, 1904.

[3] No. 517-522, 1896.




CHAPTER VIII

METHODS OF WORK

  Couching--Braid Work--Laid Work--Applied Work--Inlaid Work--Patch
  Work.


COUCHING

Couching is the name given to a method of embroidery in which one thread
is attached to the material by another one. Sometimes not only one
thread but a number of threads are couched down together; or it may be
cord, braid, or metal thread that is attached to the material in this
way. Fig. 88 shows some couching in progress. The method probably arose
through the difficulty experienced in passing either coarse or very
delicate threads through a material. Couching is constantly in use with
gold thread embroidery, and it is further discussed in the chapter upon
that subject, where also is described an entirely different method,
which is to be recommended for couching other as well as for gold
threads.

[Illustration: Fig. 88.]

Couching is useful in a variety of ways, _e.g._ for carrying out work in
line or for outlining other embroidery, applied work for instance, which
is frequently finished off by means of a couched thread; in the case of
a difficult ground material, it is one of the most manageable methods of
working. The geometrical open fillings of leaves and backgrounds are
often composed of lines of thread thrown across and couched down at
regular intervals. Fig. 89 is an example of a favourite filling of this
kind. Embroidery stitches can be made use of for couching down other
threads; a bunch of threads may be laid upon the material, and an open
chain, buttonhole, or feather stitch worked over in order to fix it in
place.

[Illustration: Fig. 89.]

Braid work is quickly and easily executed; it needs only a suitable
pattern and a pretty braid for couching down to be most successful.
There are a few points to be observed about the technique--the cut edge
of a braid is awkward to manage, for it must, with a special needle, be
taken through to the back of the material and there made secure and
flat; for this reason the design should be so planned as to have as few
breaks as possible. Interlacing strap work designs, of which a simple
example is given in fig. 90, are very suitable for braid work. The
thread that couches down the braid may be quite invisible, or, on the
other hand, it may be made use of to further decorate the braid by being
placed visibly across it, perhaps forming a chequering or other simple
pattern, as shown in fig. 91. Ravellings of the braid may be used as
invisible couching threads for stitching it down. Curves and sharp
corners need special attention by way of extra stitches. The completed
work is much improved by several hours' pressure under a weight.

[Illustration: Fig. 90.]


LAID WORK

[Illustration: Fig. 91.]

Laid work might be described as couching on a more extended scale--a
given space is covered with threads taken from side to side in parallel
lines close together, fixed at either extremity by entering the
material. Further security is usually given by small couching stitches
dotted down at intervals over the laid threads, or by throwing single
lines of thread across in a contrary direction and tying these down at
intervals with couching stitches. Yet another way is, to work a split or
stem stitch over the laid threads, and thus fix them down. Fig. 92 shows
a flower carried out in laid work. The tying-down threads can often be
made use of in one way or another to further decorate, or to explain
form, by means of contrasting colour, change in direction, and so on.
The laid stitches in this flower are taken from the centre outwards and
fixed in place by couched circular lines of thread. The centre of the
flower has a geometrical filling, composed of a couched lattice pattern
with French knots between. Conventional centres of this and like kinds
are very pretty for embroidery flowers; such patterns as those shown in
fig. 93 can often be seen in use, and they need only a trial to be
frequently adopted.

[Illustration: Fig. 92.]

[Illustration: Fig. 93.]

Laid work shows off the gloss and texture of silk to great advantage,
which is due to the thread being laid upon the material without being
cut up into small stitches. Floss silk is much used for the work; it
must not be at all twisted in the laying down, since this mars the
effect. The work is carried out in a frame; it is quickly executed and
economical, the thread being practically all upon the surface. Owing to
the length of the stitches, this is not a very durable method, so it
should not be subjected to hard wear. The work has sometimes a flimsy,
unsatisfactory appearance, probably because of these long stitches. It
will be seen that the silk passing through to the back, and then
immediately to the front again, takes up very little of the material. A
method in use for giving greater strength in this way is to lay the silk
first in alternate lines and to fill up the gaps thus left upon a
second journey across the form. For added strength, use might be made of
a linen thread at the back, as in the _point couché rentré ou retiré_
method that is discussed later.

[Illustration: Fig. 94.]

A gold thread outline gives a nice finish to laid work. If there is
nothing in the way of an outline, and the pattern and ground are both
covered with laid threads, the edges of the pattern are likely to look
weak. Fig. 94 shows a leaf filled in with rather loosely laid threads
and outlined and veined with gold passing, the veining answering the
double purpose of fixing down the laid threads and veining the leaf at
the same time.

In this work, the colouring is frequently in flat tones, but if
necessary it is quite easy to introduce gradation. Further variety can
be obtained by a contrast in colour in the tying-down threads.


APPLIED WORK

The ancient Latin term _opus consutum_, and the modern French one
_appliqué_, which is perhaps the name most commonly in use, both refer
to the same kind of work; what is now called cut work is quite
different from this, and is described elsewhere. Under the heading of
applied work comes anything that, cut out of one material, is applied to
another; it may have been previously embroidered, or it may be just the
plain stuff. Both kinds can, as has been proved, be carried out with
excellent effect, but much unsuitable and badly designed work has been
done by this method, with the result that the very name has fallen into
disrepute.

The simplest kind of applied work is that in which the design, traced
upon one material, then cut out along the outline of the pattern, is
applied to another material, the junction of the two materials being
hidden by a cord or suitable stitch. The applied work is most often
flat, but it can be in slight or in strong relief. The texture of the
materials employed may be an important factor in the result, for a
contrast in material as well as in colour is often wanted; sometimes the
former alone is sufficient. The choice of material depends very much
upon the use to which the finished work will be put, but this simple
form of applied work often relies for part of its effect upon an
intrinsic interest in the material, so it is usually carried out with
such materials as velvet, satin, or silk, either plain or figured.

The design for this kind of work should be of a bold conventional type,
such as large foliage with the character of the heraldic mantling; any
naturalistic flowers, figures, or animals easily become grotesque. A
simple outline to the forms is necessary, both because of the technical
difficulties and for the effect of the finished work. This kind of work
is hardly suitable for expressing fine detail; oftentimes it is seen
from a distance, and many indentations on an outline sometimes tend to
weaken it. Heraldry can be well expressed by this method. Fig. 95 is an
example from a piece of XIIIth century work, a fragment of the surcoat
of William de Fortibus, third Earl of Albemarle, who lived in the reign
of Henry III.; the example can be seen in the British Museum. This
method of work is also particularly suitable for such purposes as the
decoration of wall surfaces, for hangings of various kinds, or banners;
it can, however, be used for many other purposes, provided the design
and the materials are well chosen.

[Illustration: Fig. 95.]

Owing to the difficulty of working upon some ground stuffs, the method
has arisen of carrying out the embroidery upon an easily worked ground,
such as linen; cutting it out, when finished, along the outline and
applying it to the proper ground, the junction of the two materials
being hidden by a cord or some equivalent. It is usually further
completed by light sprays or some other kind of finishing touches being
placed around the applied part, these worked directly on to the proper
ground. This prevents the embroidery from looking too bald and detached
from its surroundings, of which there is always a danger when it is
carried out separately and then attached; if at all possible it is
always more satisfactory to work directly on to the right ground.

As a matter of fact it is almost always possible to do this; the workers
of the XIIIth century, the period at which the art of embroidery was at
its height, carried out the most exquisitely fine stitching and design
on such grounds as velvet that had almost as long a pile as some
varieties of plush. The famous cope of English work known as the Bowden
cope, of which a detail is given in Plate I., is an excellent
illustration of this point. Upon careful examination of the work it is
apparent that between the stitching and the velvet there is a layer of
material, composed either of fine linen or silk. This would be of great
help in the carrying out of the stitching. It is exceedingly probable
that this layer of fine material was at the commencement of the work
laid completely over the velvet background of the cope; for one thing,
the design, with its finely drawn detail, could easily be perfectly
traced upon a surface of this kind and only imperfectly upon velvet;
another advantage of this method would be, that the background would be
kept quite free from dust and from getting soiled by the hands during
the lengthy process of the work. The stitching would be carried through
all the surfaces, and when finished, the fine surface layer would be cut
away close round the edges of the design, which would be quite easily
done. This method of working upon a difficult ground is well worth
trying in place of the applied method.

To return to the discussion of applied embroidery--let us suppose the
embroidered piece to be just completed on its linen ground, still
stretched in the frame in which it was worked. In another frame, stretch
the background material and trace upon it the exact outline of the piece
to be applied. Cut out the embroidered piece carefully round the edge,
allowing about one-sixteenth of an inch margin outside the worked part,
leaving, if necessary, little connecting ties of material here and
there for temporary support. With fine steel pins or needles fix the
cut-out work exactly over the tracing already made on the ground
material, then make it secure round the edge with rather close stitches
of silk placed at right-angles to the outline; with fine materials the
raw edge of the applied part can be neatly tucked under and fixed in
place by this overcast stitch. A cord is next sewn on to hide the fixing
and give a finish to the edge. The colour of this cord is important,
since its colour may increase the expanse of either the applied part or
the ground. Sometimes a double cord is put round, and in this case the
inner one is attached to the embroidery before it is cut out of the
frame, and the second attached afterwards. The inner one is often of a
colour predominating in the embroidery, and the outer one of the colour
of the ground. Gold cord is very usual; if a coloured silk one is used
it must be a perfect match. The ordinary twisted cord looks best
attached invisibly; to do this, slightly untwist it whilst stitching,
and insert the needle in the opening thus formed. Some kinds of flat
braids look well with the fixing stitches taken deliberately over them
and forming part of the ornamentation (see fig. 91). Bunches of silk are
sometimes couched round with a buttonhole or other stitch, but whatever
the outline may consist of, it should be a firm bold line.

The work must be perfectly flat when completed. Puckering may occur
through want of care in the preliminary straining or in the fixing on of
the applied parts. Some materials are more easy to manage than others.
The difficult ones can if necessary have a preliminary backing applied,
which is useful also if the material is inclined to fray. The backing
may consist of a thin coating of embroidery paste, or of tissue paper or
fine holland pasted over the part to be applied. The more all this kind
of thing can be avoided, the better the work, for pasting of any kind is
apt to give a stiff mechanical look; also, if the work is intended to
hang in folds any stiffness would be most impracticable.

Even more than simpler work applied embroidery needs the finish of some
light work upon the ground. Gold threads and spangles, arranged in
fashion similar to the sprays in fig. 112, are very often used.
Sometimes, instead of this, some small pattern in outline is run all
over the ground in order to enrich it.


INLAID WORK

Inlaid work is in effect similar to the applied, and it is used for the
same purposes. The difference with this is that both background and
pattern are cut out and fitted into each other, instead of only one of
them being cut out and laid on an entire ground. The method of work is
economical, for there need be very little waste of material. What is
left from cutting out the pattern and background for one piece can be
used as ground and pattern for another and possibly companion piece.
There is in Perugia a church which possesses a complete set of draperies
of this description, that were made at a good period for this work,
early XVIth century, and evidently were designed for the position they
occupy. On festivals, the piers, pulpit, and parts of the wall are hung
with these rose and gold-coloured hangings of inlaid work. The design is
a conventional scroll-work pattern, and the various hangings have
alternately the rose ground with gold pattern, and gold ground with rose
pattern, the whole forming a rich and harmonious interchange of colour.

[Illustration: Fig. 96.]

Fig. 96 is an example of inlaid work. It is a XVth century tabard said
to have belonged to Charles the Bold, and now in the Musée Historique at
Berne. The pattern, it will be noticed, is planned on the counterchange
principle, which is particularly well suited for this method of work.

A very ancient piece of the same kind of inlaid work is the funeral tent
of Queen Isi-em-Keb, dated about 980 B.C., which is in the Boulak
Museum, Cairo. It is composed of thousands of pieces of gazelle hide
dyed in various colours and stitched together so as to form a wonderful
design.[4]

To carry out the work--Stitch in a frame some holland to use as a
background; this may be only temporary, being removed when the work is
completed, or it may be left for additional strength. The materials for
both background and pattern must first be carefully cut out. It is a
good plan, where possible, to cut the two together so as to ensure exact
similarity, for they have to fit together afterwards like the parts of a
puzzle. The cut edges cannot be allowed to fray, so if there is any
danger of this, precautions must be taken to prevent it, though the
better way is to choose in the first place more suitable material.
Leather is a particularly good example of one. Any pasting or backing
which might be used for prevention of fraying would prevent also that
possibility of exposing both sides of the work, which in inlay is
sometimes a valuable quality; also, the stiffening which unavoidably
results from pasting is rarely an improvement. When materials of
different thicknesses are used together, the thinner one can be lined
with fine holland so as to make it nearer equal in strength. After the
materials are cut out the next process is to lay them in position on the
prepared holland and tack them to it. Then, with an overcast stitch that
must not be allowed to pierce the under surface, join all the edges
together, and cover the stitches with a finishing cord or braid. The
backing can now be removed if need be.


PATCHWORK

Patchwork can hardly attain to a high position amongst the various
branches of embroidery. The main object of doing patchwork frequently is
to make good use of valuable scraps of waste material. Unless, however,
the product shows evidence of well thought out colour and arrangement,
it cannot come under the heading of embroidery. Interesting results,
however, of many kinds can be produced from this paint-box of brightly
coloured scraps of material by ingenious mixing and shaping of them.
Patchwork infers a rather more mosaic-like design than inlaid work, to
which it is in some respects similar. The geometrically planned mosaic
and inlay pavements that are to be seen so commonly in Italy and the
East suggest great variety of patterns that could be applied to
patchwork. The illustration at fig. 97 is a simple example taken from
this source. Too often the results are only "alarming," as the Countess
of Wilton expressively puts it, thinking, probably, of the patterns
frequently seen upon cushions, patterns more resembling bright-coloured
bricks set in cornerwise than anything else. They are the most unrestful
looking things imaginable. The important elements of the work lie in the
colour, shape, and texture of the pieces used, for upon the right
selection the result wholly depends. The shapes chosen must be simple
owing to the necessity of fitting and stitching them together, but there
is plenty of variety obtainable with simplicity. The design may consist
of one shape repeated or several. If only one, it is limited to a few
geometrical figures, such as the square, hexagon, or shell shape; if
more than one, there can be greater variety of pattern. Fig. 98 is an
example in which four shapes are made use of, a large and small circle,
an octagon, and an S-like twist. Four of these twists together make the
figure that interlaces over the surface. Embroidery stitching can be
added to patchwork; for instance, this example might have a neat border
pattern worked on all the S-shapes, as suggested in the diagram, which
would probably considerably increase its interest. Fig. 99 shows flowers
springing from the base of the shell-form in use upon it. The embroidery
could be simply carried out in one colour, or if a more gorgeous result
were required, variety could be introduced in this way as well as in the
ground, and a marvellous combination of intricate colour could be thus
produced.

[Illustration: Fig. 97.]

[Illustration: Fig. 98.]

For the work to be made up satisfactorily it is necessary that the
shapes be accurately cut out. To ensure this, a metal plate is cut and
all the shapes are taken from it; sometimes, in lieu of this, a pattern
is cut out in stiff cardboard. Lay this pattern-shape on the wrong side
of the material and pencil it round, then carefully cut out the stuff,
leaving about a quarter of an inch for turning in. Next lay the
pattern-shape upon a piece of stiff paper or thin card-board and again
trace off the shape, this time cutting it out exactly to the pattern,
tack the material to the paper, and stitch down the raw edges at the
back. Lay the prepared patches on a table and put them in place by
referring to the design, and then commence sewing the edges together
with an overcast stitch on the wrong side. When all are sewn, remove the
papers and flatten the seams with an iron. Any braid or stitch that may
be required to mask the join is next put on; this may be made ornamental
by interlacing knots at the corners, or by any other device that happens
to suit the work. The last thing to be done is to put a neat lining upon
the back to cover and protect the numerous raw edges.

[Illustration: Fig. 99.]

FOOTNOTE:

[4] For further information see "The Funeral Tent of an Egyptian Queen,"
by Villiers Stuart.




CHAPTER IX

METHODS OF WORK--(_continued_)

   Quilting--Raised Work--Darning--Open Fillings--Darned Netting.


Quilting is a method of working by which three materials are fixed
together by more or less all-over stitching. It probably developed
through the necessity of keeping the three layers in place. For
practical purposes only, the sewing machine does the work excellently,
but by making the stitching follow out some prearranged design, it is
raised to the level of art. Plate III. is an interesting example showing
what can be done in the way of design with the stitching over the
surface. Embroidery may be added to the quilting, and this is often an
improvement. The Eastern nations carry out marvellously intricate
designs in quilting, and English XVIIIth century work of this kind shows
Eastern influence strongly. A good example of this is a very interesting
piece in the Victoria and Albert Museum.[5]

The first aim in quilting was evidently warmth, and the name denotes one
of the chief uses to which it is put. It is made use of also for
curtains, infants' caps or gloves (see fig. 100), all these things
requiring the three layers for warmth. The materials usually consist of
a surface one, which can be silk, fine linen or anything else; an
interlining of some softer material having a certain amount of spring in
it, such as flannel, cotton wadding, or wool; and for the third, an
underneath lining of some kind. A cord is sometimes inserted instead of
the inner layer of stuff, the lines of stitching running along either
side to keep it in place. Occasionally there are only the top and the
under layer, with no intervening material. The stitch usually employed
is a running, back, or chain stitch, and it can be of the colour of
the surface, or a contrast to it. Gold silk is often seen upon a white
linen ground. The chief interest in the work lies in the choice of
pattern, such things as colour, variety of stitching, interest in
material, are not made much of. In planning the pattern, use is made of
the knowledge that the closely stitched parts will lie more flatly, so
it frequently happens that the ground has a small diaper running over
it, and the pattern part, being less worked upon, perhaps only outlined,
stands out more and forms an effective contrast.

[Illustration: Fig. 100.]


RAISED WORK

In the XIVth century raised work was commonly done, but few examples are
known of date earlier than this. The raised effect is obtained by an
interposed layer of padding, which is a good method of getting a certain
kind of effect. It is perhaps wise to err on the side of too little
rather than too much relief. An example of too much and also of a wrong
kind is the English stump work that was popular in the XVIIth century,
when figures were stuffed like dolls, the clothes made separately and
attached, even to the shoes and stockings. Germain de St. Aubin, writing
in 1769, describes with much admiration a kind of _broderie en ronde
bosse_, apparently much the same thing and in equally doubtful taste,
though the skill required to carry it out must have been considerable.

The work, usually done in a frame, must be well carried out technically;
the padding should be quite perfect in the form required before the
final surface layer is worked over it, for this one will not make any
deficiency right, but will only serve to show it up the more. Another
point to be careful about is to make the padding stop well within the
traced line of the pattern, otherwise the finished design will turn out
much larger than was originally intended. The outline is sometimes
worked round at the commencement, whereby its correctness is ensured.

[Illustration: Fig. 101.]

[Illustration: Fig. 102.]

Many different materials are brought into use for padding purposes. One
of the simplest and most durable is a running of thread as illustrated
in fig. 101. The thread can be arranged so as to be thicker in the
centre than at the edges by laying some extra stitches over that part.
If a quite flat padding is required, the shape, cut out in cloth, felt,
or parchment, is attached by stitches to the material as shown in fig.
102; the surface stitching would be taken across it. Cardboard,
sometimes pasted on to the ground, is used for this purpose, but it is
unsatisfactory in several ways; for instance, cardboard letters are
procurable for embroidering initials upon linen, but they are not at all
practical for anything that goes through the wash; moreover, the letters
are sometimes of bad design. Cotton wool is used as a stuffing, its
surface being usually covered over with muslin, but this again would
not stand much wear of any kind, and so could only be used under certain
conditions.

[Illustration: Fig. 103.]

Another good method is to couch down a hank of threads of fine cotton or
perhaps wool as illustrated in fig. 103. For raised lines there is a
special kind of string procurable that can be couched to the ground
material at the required places. The padding, whatever it may be
composed of, should be as nearly as possible of the same colour as the
surface layer, in view of any after wear and tear misplacing the
threads.

[Illustration: Fig. 104.]

The top layer of underlay must lie in direction contrary to the surface
embroidery stitching, which is very often some form of satin stitch
taken from side to side over the padding. Instead of going through the
material it can be fixed on each side with a couching stitch, as in
fig. 104. A stronger way than these would be that shown in fig. 129.
Buttonhole is a good stitch for working over a padding; it would be
worked solidly in the manner described and illustrated on page 117, but
taken, as there shown, over a padding instead of over a flat surface.


DARNING

There is a most practical sound about darning; it can, however, be made
good use of in embroidery as well as in plain needlework. There are two
rather different kinds in use; in both the stitch is a running one and
done in much the same way that a thin place would be darned in mending.

One kind of darning is rather popular at the present moment, and
examples of it may be familiar; it is a large, bold kind of work, often
carried out with a coarse twisted silk. Upon the background, the lines
of stitching usually run straight across or up and down, in the pattern,
they radiate according to the shape of the form to be filled. The entire
material is covered one way or another by the running stitches, and
just one thread of the ground fabric is picked up where necessary at
irregular intervals; a loosely woven linen is often chosen for working
upon, one in which it is easy to pick up the single thread. Gradation of
colour can easily be introduced; the design chosen is most frequently
some kind of conventional flower and leafy scroll. This method of
embroidery is seen to best advantage when used upon large surfaces.

The second kind is called pattern darning; in it the stitches are picked
up in some regular order, so that they form various geometrical patterns
over the surface. It is worked by counting the threads of the fine linen
ground and picking up a single thread or more in some regular sequence.
The threads are run in parallel lines close together, either
horizontally or vertically, so as to take advantage of the web of the
fabric. The work is particularly pretty and not difficult, requiring
only patience and good eyesight. Fig. 105 gives some simple examples of
the work--The first is a chevron pattern, formed by picking up one
thread and leaving about five each time; each succeeding row moves a
step forward or backward as required to carry out the pattern. In the
second example the darning is taken two ways of the material; in the
centre, where it meets and crosses, it entirely covers the ground. A
different colour might be used for each direction, which would look very
well at the crossing in the centre. The four corners are filled up with
a chequer darn; this each time picks up as much material as it leaves.
The third example shows the darning stitch forming a diamond pattern.
Samplers, dated early XIXth century, may be seen entirely filled with
these pattern darns; they are covered with most intricate and beautiful
sample squares showing various patterns in darning, and were possibly
done in order to learn how to repair damask table linen. In a collection
of early Egyptian work in the Victoria and Albert Museum, there is some
pattern darning, dated VIth to IXth century, A.D., which proves it to be
a very early method of embroidering.

[Illustration: Fig. 105.]

[Illustration: Fig. 106.]

This pattern darning, however, is so pretty that it is often possible to
make use of it in embroidery work for all kinds of purposes. It makes a
very good background if there is sufficient space to show the pattern,
if there is not, the irregular darning might be used instead, for it
would in that case be just as good and much quicker to work. To
pattern-darn the ground with the ornament upon it left in the plain
material, perhaps not worked upon at all, is a very effective method of
carrying out a design, see fig. 106 for example. Again it might very
well be used for the conventional carrying out of draperies in the same
way as in _point couché rentré ou retiré_.[6] The draperies on the
figure in the frontispiece could easily be carried out with silk thread
in the darning stitch, in fact this method of decoration more closely
resembles the early couching than any other; it is not quite as
satisfactory because the single threads of the background that are
picked up prevent the ground showing nothing but silk. Bands of this
work may be seen ornamenting needle books or work cases; it shows to
best advantage when worked finely with floss or filosel silk, the coarse
twisted silks are too thick for the purpose.


OPEN WORK FILLINGS

[Illustration: Fig. 107.]

[Illustration: Fig. 108.]

Patterns can be carried out in line, they can be worked quite solidly,
and there is a method that lies between these two known as open filling.
The open and solid fillings are often used together in the same piece of
work; examples of this can be seen on the XVIIth century wool-work
curtains, the large scrolling leaves are sometimes partly worked openly
and a portion, possibly reflexed, filled in with solid stitches in
gradating colour; see for an example Plate VIII. This has a very good
effect, it prevents the work looking too heavy, shows up the form more
clearly, and allows of more variety in the stitching. With open fillings
the outline surrounding them must always be some firm decided line, such
as is made by a band of satin or long and short stitch, or, in the case
of larger forms, by several rows of different line stitches worked
closely together, one inside the other, most likely in different shades
of colour. A filling of open work can be carried out in a variety of
ways; it may be a decorated trellis, a regular dotting of some kind, or
some geometrical pattern in outline, or some light stitch such as an
open buttonhole (see fig. 107), which would be treated each as a
diapering over the form to be filled. It does not much matter what the
filling is as long as it is dispersed pretty regularly over the space,
giving the effect at a little distance of a light pervading tone, and
when examined closely exhibiting an interesting small pattern. The open
filling method can be used entirely throughout a design with very pretty
effect; an example of this may be seen on an embroidered coverlet and
pillow case in the Victoria and Albert Museum.[7] The pattern, composed
of vine leaves and grapes, is carried out in dark brown silk on a linen
ground, the leaves being all outlined with satin stitch. There is
wonderful variety in the patterns, no two alike, which form the open
fillings of the leaves; this makes them most interesting to examine, and
is evidence of enthusiasm in their designing. Fig. 108, a leaf taken
from this specimen, shows one method of filling a form with open
work.[8] Fig. 109 shows a collection of patterns taken from the same
piece of embroidery. It will be observed that small stitches of the same
length compose the pattern, which can be designed upon squared paper and
easily copied on to the linen ground by always picking up the same
number of threads. To look well these little forms must be accurately
worked, and they or similar kinds can be used upon flowers, leaves,
beasts, draperies, or anything else quite indiscriminately. Fig. 110,
from a cap in the Victoria and Albert Museum, is a drawing showing the
same kind of open filling in use upon a bird.[9]

[Illustration: Fig. 109.]

[Illustration: Fig. 110.]

A quicker way of carrying out these geometrical fillings is by using
such forms as a lattice and throwing the lines from side to side
across the shape to be filled, fixing them down, where they cross each
other, with couching stitches; the interstices left between the threads
can be filled in with little stars, crosses, or dots (see fig. 111).
Buttonhole stitch, if made use of as an open filling, would be taken in
lines straight across a form, the stitches being worked possibly two or
three closely together and then a space, and so on.

[Illustration: Fig. 111.]

Fig. 112 suggests another method of lightly filling a leaf with a
conventional veining and dotting. There is no limit to the variety which
can be obtained in this method of working.

[Illustration: Fig. 112.]

Open fillings are effective for use upon any work that is intended to be
seen with a light at the back; they make very decorative the various
forms they fill, in such things as muslin window blinds, curtains, fire
screens, whether hand screens or the larger type. For articles of this
kind the patterns should be rather more solid and less lined in
character; fig. 113, taken from a window blind exhibited in the Victoria
and Albert Museum, exemplifies what is meant; most of the patterns
illustrated in fig. 100 could be treated in a more solid manner if
necessary, and would look equally well that way. When working upon
transparent grounds special care must be taken with the reverse side as
well as with the surface, for the work to be practically alike upon both
sides; there must be no threads running from one form to another nor any
visible fastening off of ends.

[Illustration: Fig. 113.]


DARNED NETTING

[Illustration: Fig. 114.]

Darned netting, or _lacis_, as it is sometimes called, might almost come
under the heading of either lace or embroidery. It is used effectively
with other kinds of white linen work, bands or squares of it being let
into the linen; the contrast of the solid with the more open work gives
a pretty effect. Fig. 114 is an example of this work. The darning is
done on a plain netted ground which can be prepared by the worker if
acquainted with netting, if not, the squares can be obtained ready for
working upon. The pattern must be designed upon squared paper as for
cross stitch work, then it is simply a question of following out the
pattern upon the square net ground. Every square of the patterned part
must be crossed in each direction by two lines of darning, which should
about fill it up. The various lines are run in and out as continuously
as possible, so as to avoid unnecessary fastening off or passing from
one part to another. When a fresh thread is required, join it with a
knot to the end of the last one (see figs. 165 and 166), and darn the
ends in neatly with the other threads. These knots are often used in
embroidery, for they are both strong and small. Detached stitches and
parts must be worked by themselves; the thread should not be carried
from one to the other. The work must be done in a frame and carried out
with a blunt-pointed needle. The same thread is used for the netted
ground and for the darned pattern. A method of work that the French call
_dessein réservé_ is, in result, rather similar to this, but it is
worked in just the reverse way. The pattern, whatever it may be, is
left in the plain linen, and the background has certain threads in each
direction withdrawn at regular intervals, whereby the effect of the
squared net ground is obtained.

FOOTNOTES:

[5] No. 1564, 1902.

[6] For description of this method, see page 238.

[7] A piece belonging to Lord Falkland.

[8] Fig. 18 is a drawing from the border of the same example.

[9] No. 308, 1902.




CHAPTER X

METHODS OF WORK--(_continued_)

  Drawn Thread Work--Hem Stitching--Simple Border Patterns--Darned
  Thread Patterns--Corners--Cut or Open Work--Various Methods of
  Refilling the Open Spaces.


This method of work is the acknowledged link between embroidery and
lace, and was possibly the origin of the latter. Drawn work is that in
which the threads of either the warp or the weft of the material are
withdrawn and those remaining worked into a pattern, by either
clustering together or working over them in some fashion. The cut or
open work, as it is sometimes called, is that in which both warp and
weft are in places cut away, and the open spaces thus formed are partly
refilled with a device of one kind or another.

The work is most often carried out in white thread on white linen, but
coloured threads may occasionally be introduced with advantage. It is a
durable method of work, and particularly suitable for the decoration of
various house-linens, things that must undergo daily wear and wash; its
rather unobtrusive character too makes it the more suitable for this
purpose. The work is used in conjunction with other kinds of embroidery,
perhaps making a neat finish to an edge, or lightening what would
otherwise be too heavy in appearance.

Drawn thread and cut work can be carried out with such detail and
fineness as to really become most delicate lace. In this chapter,
however, it is intended to be treated rather as an adjunct to other
embroidery, therefore only elementary work will be discussed. More
attention might with advantage be paid to the design of this kind of
work, for more might be done with it than sometimes is. For one thing,
there is very little variety in the patterns, and the result often seems
a spidery mass of incomprehensible threads with no very perceivable
plan; perhaps if more attention were paid to the proportion and massing
of the solid and open parts, a better result might be attained. Neatness
and simplicity are good qualities in the pattern, the method of work not
being suited to the expression of the various larger and bolder types of
design.


DRAWN THREAD WORK

In drawn work the question is how to treat the remaining warp threads
after the weft has been withdrawn. They can be clustered in bunches in
different ways with ornamental stitches added, or be entirely covered
over with darning or overcast stitches in such a way as to form a
pattern.

The beginning of most drawn thread work is hem stitching, the two edges
marking the limit of the withdrawn threads have usually to be hem
stitched before any pattern can be carried out. One method of doing this
is in progress in fig. 115. In order to work it, draw out three or four
threads of the warp and tack the hem down to the top edge of the line
thus made. The diagram explains the remainder of the working.

[Illustration: Fig. 115.]

Fig. 116 shows in the first example clusters of four threads drawn
together at each edge by hem stitching in such a way as to form a
ladder-like pattern. This and the one below are the ornamentations of a
plain hem that are most commonly seen. The variation in pattern in the
lower one is obtained by drawing together on the lower edge two threads
from two consecutive bunches in the upper row instead of just repeating
over again the same divisioning as before. These two examples are drawn
to show the reverse, not the working side.

[Illustration: Fig. 116.]

Another way of disposing of the undrawn threads is to cover them with a
kind of darning stitch, as illustrated in fig. 117. This kind of work is
more solid than the other, and is for that reason very durable. This
example is commenced at the right-hand corner, where the threads are
drawn loosely in order to explain the working. The needle, which should
have a blunt point, takes the thread to and fro alternately over and
under two clusters of warp thread, drawing them together a little
during the process; half-way down, the needle leaves the first set of
threads and continues working with the second and a new set (see needle
in diagram). When this is worked down to the base the needle takes the
thread invisibly up the centre of the worked part to the point where it
is required for the continuation of the pattern. The working of this
simple pattern explains the principle upon which all kinds of pretty and
more complicated designs can be carried out. The darning thread may be
coloured; in a more intricate design two or three different colours
might be introduced.

[Illustration: Fig. 117.]

[Illustration: Fig. 118.]

Fig. 118 shows another pattern in the same kind of work. The darning
stitch begins by working to and fro over and under four clusters of warp
threads, part way down it continues over the two central ones only,
leaving the outside clusters alone for the present. It finishes up, as
at the beginning, to and fro over the four. The threads that were left
are next covered with an overcast stitch, the adjoining ones in each
case are caught together in the centre in order to form the X shape that
recurs along the pattern. This darning kind of work is very closely
allied to weaving, and especially the kind often seen in Coptic work, in
which bands of the woof threads are purposely omitted in places, whilst
the fabric is being made, in order that a pattern may be hand-woven in
afterwards to take their place. Many beautiful examples of this work are
on view in the Victoria and Albert Museum.

[Illustration: Fig. 119.]

In working a drawn thread border round a square shape, at each corner
there comes an open space that requires a filling. Fig. 119 shows two
wheels that are commonly used to ornament such places. The square in the
first one has a preliminary groundwork of threads thrown across from
corner to corner and from side to side, all meeting and crossing in the
centre. The working thread is brought through at this point and the
wheel commenced by taking a kind of back stitch over a bar and bringing
the needle up beyond the next bar. It then takes the thread a step back
and over the same bar and brings it up beyond the next; this goes on
until the circle is of sufficient size, the stitches growing a little
longer in each succeeding row. In the diagram the thread is loosened at
the end to explain the working. The lower example is a commonly used
wheel, which is made by the thread running round alternately over and
under a bar until the wheel is completed. It should be as solid as the
upper one, but is purposely left loose in the diagram. Either of the
wheels could have a line of buttonhole stitching worked round the edge
as a finish. This figure shows also the two usual ways of making firm
the raw edges in cut work--the square shape is bound by an overcast
stitch, and the round one by buttonholing.


CUT OR OPEN WORK

Cut work can be most interesting both to look at and to carry out. In
the XVIIth century Italy was famous for its _punto tagliato_ or cut
work. John Taylor mentions "rare Italian cutworke" in "The Praise of
the Needle." This poem may perhaps be of interest to some; it was
prefixed to a book of embroidery patterns of cut work named "The
Needle's Excellency." It ran through twelve editions, the first of which
was printed in 1621, and sold at "the signe of the Marigold in Paules
Churchyard." Copies may be seen in the British Museum Library; in the
Bodleian, Oxford, in the Ryland's Library, Manchester, and occasionally
elsewhere. Fig. 120 shows a pattern taken from this book.

There are several distinct varieties of cut work, for instance, that
known as renaissance embroidery, which is usually composed of an
arabesque design from which the background is cut away, leaving the
pattern in the linen; the cut edges are outlined and protected by an
overcast stitch. The pattern has to be specially planned with the idea
of holding strongly together, but, if necessary, buttonholed bars can be
added to form strengthening ties in any weak part.

Another kind of cut work is that known as _broderie anglaise_, and
sometimes as Madeira work, over which our grandmothers spent much time,
perhaps without adequate result. The pattern is followed out by round
holes pierced in the linen with a stiletto and then overcast round the
edges. At the present day the work is done mostly by machinery, though
hand work also is procurable.

[Illustration: Fig. 120.]

Perhaps the prettiest kind of cut work is that in which various-shaped
spaces are cut out of the linen, and these filled in, in part, with
some design built up with stitches. There are various methods of
refilling the spaces cut out, one of the simplest is a diapering formed
by some lace stitch, such as an open buttonhole. As a rule, the
decoration of the open spaces is based upon bars of thread that are
either composed of warp or woof threads left, instead of being cut away,
or else upon fresh threads thrown across in various directions. The
pattern is planned on and about these strengthening ties, and where
necessary receiving support from them. An ingenious worker will soon
devise ways of refilling the spaces by all kinds of interesting
patterns, which can be geometrical or floral, or any kinds of objects
that can be attractively represented in conventional fashion, such as
figures, birds, insects, ships in full sail, or anything else. It must,
however, be remembered that the various forms filling the spaces are for
use in the way of strength as well as for ornament, and that the work is
often put upon objects that have to endure daily wear.

Open work is frequently mixed with other, and especially with white
embroidery, and such things as counterpanes may be seen arranged with a
chequering of alternate squares of embroidered linen and open work.

Fig. 121 shows in progress a simple method of filling a space, mainly
making use of the strengthening threads that have been left at regular
intervals over the cut part. The threads are covered with an overcast
stitch, and alternate squares of those that recur over the space are
decorated with a cross. This is made by the working thread, after
reaching the right point at the centre of an overcast line, being thrown
across the space and then twisted back over itself to the
starting-point, where it is in the right position for continuing the
overcast line. The crosses being put in at the same time as the
overcasting of the bars renders some forethought necessary to get each
in at just the right time and place.

[Illustration: Fig. 121.]

[Illustration: Fig. 122.]

Another kind of filling can be seen in progress in fig. 122. The
stitches used in it are overcast and buttonhole. With the help of this
last-mentioned stitch patterns of all kinds can be carried out, for each
succeeding row of the stitch can be worked into the heading of the last
row, and in this way it is possible to build up any required shape. This
figure is a working diagram of a piece of cut work of which the
completed square with its surrounding decoration can be seen in fig. 34.
After overcasting the raw edges a diagonal thread is thrown across (E D
on plan), upon which the pattern shall be built up; the thread is taken
once to and fro and then twisted back again for a third crossing.
Commence by overcasting the threads from point D, and upon reaching the
part where the pattern is widened out, change the stitch to an open
buttonholing (as shown on line B). It is worked openly in this way in
order to leave space for another row of the same kind of stitching to be
fitted in from the opposite side, which is the next thing to be done.
Then an outer row of buttonhole stitch is worked on each side of the
central bar and into the heading of the first row of stitching; this is
shown in progress where the needle is at work. The entire pattern is
carried out in this way, first laying down foundation threads in the
necessary places and then covering them up with either overcasting or
buttonhole stitch as required. It is easily possible to carry out
flowers and all kinds of other things sufficiently well to make them
pleasantly recognisable.




CHAPTER XI

EMBROIDERY WITH GOLD AND SILVER THREADS

  Introduction--Materials--Precautions for the Prevention of
  Tarnish--Ancient Method of Couching--Its various Good
  Points--Description of Working Diagram--Working a Raised
  Bar--Examples of Patterns Employed in Old Work--Illustrations upon
  Draped Figures--Usual Method of Couching--Couching Patterns--Outline
  Work--Raised Work--The Use of Purls, Bullions, &c.


Gold and silver threads have always played an important part in
embroidered work, and are a most valuable addition to the worker's stock
of materials, for they give a splendour and richness that is not
obtainable in any other way. They have been utilised from the earliest
times in both embroidery and weaving; in scripture and other ancient
historical writings there is abundant proof of this fact.

The earliest form of gold thread in use was the pure metal beaten into
thin plates and then cut into long narrow strips; that it was sometimes
rounded into wire form is very probable. The first wire-drawing machine
is said to have been invented by a workman at Nuremberg, but it was not
until two centuries later that the drawing-mills were introduced into
England.

Gold thread, similar to that we now use, entwined about a silk one, is
mentioned in a XIVth century Latin poem; also, it is known that in the
XIIIth century our English ladies prepared their own gold thread before
working it in, and it was of the same type as ours, the gold being
spirally twisted round a thread of silk or flax.[10]

To be a skilled worker with gold thread needs considerable application
and practice. There is much variety in the work, some branches of it
being more simple to manipulate than others. It is desirable for all
workers to understand something of gold work, for it is frequently
employed in conjunction with other embroidery, as well as alone. Fig.
123 shows a couched line of gold thread outlining some silk embroidery,
which gives a pretty jewel-like effect of something precious in a
setting of gold.

[Illustration: Fig. 123.]

Gold embroidery may be divided roughly into three main classes, outline
work, solid flat work, and raised work. Outline work is, as far as
technique is concerned, one of the simplest forms of gold embroidery.
The pattern is followed round with a gold cord or double thread of
passing, fixed either visibly or invisibly with a couching stitch; the
work needs but an interesting design and suitable background to be most
successful. Fig. 124 illustrates a portion of a design, carried out with
gold cord upon a velvet ground, which has been further enriched by the
addition of little applied white flowers. The raised work, and that
which introduces the use of purls and bullions, is at once more
complicated, and perhaps hardly as pleasing as the simpler flat work.

[Illustration: Fig. 124.]

The method of applying the gold to the material is usually by couching
of one form or another, for most of the threads are too inflexible to
be stitched through. The ground, if it shows at all, is usually a rich
stuff, such as velvet, satin, or silk, in order to be in keeping with
the valuable thread. If the ground chosen is difficult to work upon, the
embroidery is carried out upon linen, and the finished work afterwards
applied to the ground. If both background and pattern are solidly
embroidered, linen can be used as the permanent ground. It is usual to
have two layers of material for working upon, for gold threads are heavy
and require the support of the double ground. There are several
advantages in this double material, as the old workers knew, for we find
they commonly used two. The under-layer can be a strong linen, and the
surface one silk, satin, or a fine linen, as required.


MATERIALS

A variety of metal threads are manufactured for embroidery purposes, and
they are all obtainable in gold, silver, or imitations of these;
aluminium thread has been made lately, and has the advantage of being
untarnishable, but its colour and quality do not seem quite
satisfactory, and it is not popular. The imitation threads are never
worth the using; they tarnish to a worse colour, and are more difficult
in manipulation; what goes by the name of real gold, is silver or
copper, plated with the more valuable metal. The pure gold thread is
said not to be so practical as this, being too brittle; but somehow or
other it was more successfully manufactured in the past than nowadays,
for some gold work six centuries old exhibits beautifully bright
threads.

The following list comprises the chief threads used in this work:--

_Passing._--This is a bright smooth thread, resembling in appearance a
gold wire; it consists of a narrow flat strip of gold spirally twisted
round a silken thread. It can be obtained in different sizes, the finest
qualities going by the name of tambour. Most passing has to be couched
on to the material, but it is possible to stitch in the tambour like
ordinary thread.

_Purl._--This resembles a smooth round hollow tube of metal, very
pliable and elastic; when pulled lengthways it is found to be
constructed like a closely coiled spiral spring. It is manufactured in
lengths of about one yard, and for use it is cut into small sections of
any required size with scissors or a knife. There are several varieties
of purl, namely, the smooth, rough, check, and wire check. The smooth
has a bright polished appearance, which is obtained by a flat gold wire
being spun spirally round; the rough has a duller and more yellow
appearance, which is owing to the wire having been rounded; the check is
bright and sparkling, and consists of the flattened wire spun in a
different way, so that parts of it catch the light and sparkle; the wire
check is the same thing, but duller and of a deeper yellow, owing again
to its being made of the round wire.

_Bullion._--This is the name given to the larger sizes of purl.

_Pearl Purl._--This is manufactured in the same spiral tube-like fashion
as the other purl, but the gold wire is previously hollowed out in this
[inverted U] shape, the convex side being the one exposed. This, when
spun round, has the appearance of a string of tiny gold beads. It is
frequently used as an outlining thread.

Various gold twists and cords can be obtained; they are composed of
several threads twisted up in the usual cord fashion, each ply
consisting of gold spun round a silk thread.

_Plate_ is a flat strip of metal commonly about one-sixteenth of an inch
wide; it can be obtained in different widths.

_Spangles._--These are small variously shaped pieces of thin metal,
usually pierced with a hole in the centre for fixing on to the material.
They are frequently circular in shape, and either flat or slightly
concave; the latter are the prettier. Many fancy shapes also are
obtainable, but they are inclined to look tawdry, and suggestive of the
pantomime.

_Cloth of Gold and Silver._--This is a fabric manufactured of silk, with
gold or silver thread inwoven in the making. It is not now so much used
as formerly, when it was in great request for robes of kings and other
high dignitaries of church or state.

A special make of silk for couching down gold thread is obtainable in
various colours. It is called horsetail or sewings, and is both fine and
strong.

Padding for use in raised gold work is usually yellow, and for silver,
white or grey. Yellow soft cotton, linen thread, or silk, are all used
for the purpose.

Various precautions can and must be taken to keep the gold thread
bright, for under unfavourable circumstances it rapidly assumes a bad
colour; the silver thread is even more liable to tarnish than the gold,
and it turns a worse colour, going black. There is a special paper
manufactured to wrap threads in, and the stock supply should be kept in
a tin or air-tight bottle; this is in order to protect the metal from
damp, which is most injurious; to do this is a difficult matter in the
English climate. Linen used for working upon, or as backing, is best
unbleached, for sometimes the chemicals used in the bleaching process
have a deleterious effect upon the gold; a piece of gold embroidery
wrapped up in cotton wool for preservation has been found completely
spoiled by some chemical in this wool, which proved more disastrous than
exposure to air would have been. Gas, strong scents, handling
(especially with hot hands), all have an evil effect, and so should be
avoided as much as possible. Work even whilst in progress should be kept
covered as much as is practicable, and should not be allowed to hang
about; the quicker it is done the better. A piece of finished work can
be polished up with a leather pad or a brush, similar to a housemaid's
brush for silver-cleaning purposes; this of course, must be used with
care.


ANCIENT METHOD OF COUCHING

Gold thread can be couched on to the material in two distinct ways, one
of them in use at the present day, the other one that was commonly
practised in the XIIIth and XIVth centuries. About the second half of
the last-named century the earlier method was supplanted by the present
one. Almost every example of early gold thread work exhibits this
obsolete and ingenious method of couching. The Syon cope and the Jesse
cope in the Victoria and Albert Museum may be mentioned as famous
examples. M. Louis de Farcy[11] draws especial attention to this
beautiful method of working, to which he gives the name _point couché
rentré ou retiré_, and strongly urges its revival; he points out many
distinct advantages it has over the method now in use.

The durability is very great, owing to the couching thread being upon
the reverse side, where it is protected from wear and tear, and being
out of sight can be made strong and durable. If a thread is accidentally
broken it does not necessarily give way along an entire line, as may
easily happen in the present method. A proof of this point can be seen
upon the beautiful Ascoli cope lately in the Victoria and Albert Museum,
about which there has been so much discussion of late as to in what
country it originated, and who was the rightful owner. The early
couching worked entirely over the background of the cope is in a state
of perfect preservation; portions of the gold thread drapery have here
and there been couched by the other method, the tying down threads have,
in those parts, mostly disappeared, and the gold hangs loose and ragged
upon the surface.

By the way in which it is worked, there results a particularly pleasing
and even surface, agreeably varied by play of light and shade. Another
advantage of the ancient method is that the completed work is very
flexible; this point will appeal to those who have experienced the
extreme stiffness of a large surface of ordinarily couched metal
threads. Flexibility is an invaluable quality for any work destined,
like copes and curtains, to hang in folds.

Representations of draperies upon figures are well expressed, for by the
way in which they are worked there comes an indentation along the lines
marking the folds; this emphasises them rather happily, and also breaks
up the surface in a satisfactory manner.

Fig. 125 is a diagram that will aid in explaining the working, it gives
both the front and the reverse side. This has been found to be the
simplest and the most practical method of obtaining a result similar to
the early examples; there is, however, no means other than examination
of result whereby to get at this obsolete method. To all appearance
there is upon the surface a kind of satin stitch worked in gold passing,
the stitches carrying out some geometrical pattern, such as a chevron or
lattice; but at the back a linen thread is seen running to and fro in
close parallel lines in the same direction as the surface thread, and at
regular intervals encircled by the gold passing, just as if this was
intended to couch down the linen thread.

[Illustration: Fig. 125. Front. Back.]

The ingenuity and satisfactoriness of the method must be admitted by all
who give it a trial, and it is interesting to conjecture how it may have
arisen. Possibly weaving suggested it to the embroiderers, for, take
away the intervening material, and it is not unlike woven work, and
these two arts would very likely be the accomplishment of the same
person. Perhaps the commonly used method of taking a coarse thread
through to the back (see fig. 167) suggested it, for this is briefly the
whole process.

In order to try the couching, a two-fold ground material must be firmly
stretched in an embroidery frame, a strong linen underneath and a
thinner closely woven one upon the upper side. Some fine gold passing
and some strong linen thread, well waxed, are required to work with,
also an embroidery needle with long eye and sharp point, the size, which
is important, depending upon the threads in use; the needle has to
pierce the two-fold ground material, making a hole only just large
enough for the passage of a double gold thread.

If the linen has a regular even thread the drawn pattern shown in the
diagram can be worked by counting the threads of the ground fabric, but
if this is difficult or impossible, as in the case say of a twilled
surface, a careful tracing must be made upon the linen; a beginner may
find this the easier way in any case.

The end of the gold thread, which by now, in readiness for working,
will be wound upon the bobbin or spindle, must be passed through to the
back at the starting-point, the top left-hand corner in the diagram. The
linen thread secures it at the back and then comes through to the front
upon the traced line exactly beneath (see arrow on plan). It now
encircles the gold thread which the left hand draws out rather tautly,
and then returns by the same hole to the back, pulling the metal thread
through with it. There is knack in taking the gold thread only just
through and leaving the completed stitch straight and flat upon the
surface. The process is now repeated, the linen thread coming through to
the front again upon the next traced line, and so on. When the base of
the pattern is reached the gold thread is taken through once upon that
line, and then commences a like journey upwards.

This practically explains the couching; variety is obtained by change of
pattern, but the method of carrying it out is always the same. Figs.
126, 127, and 128 show three patterns taken from old examples of this
couching.

[Illustration: Fig. 126.]

[Illustration: Fig. 127.]

The difficulties in technique are easily overcome; an important aid in
this matter is the use of materials exactly right; this means needles
and threads of the correct size, the ground composed of suitable
fabrics, and properly strained in a frame. The aim in the working is to
get each stitch perfectly flat and straight in its correct place in
spite of the obstinacy of the metal thread; to avoid making the
perforation larger than necessary, for this makes the work clumsy; to
make each succeeding line lie closely beside the last one, for the
surface must be of solid gold, and if the ground showed through in
places it would impoverish the effect.

[Illustration: Fig. 128.]

The direction of the couched thread is usually either vertical or
horizontal, and it may be both of these in the same piece of work. The
reason of this may be because it is worked by counting the threads of
the fabric, or because the pattern is always treated as a diaper and
placed upon the surface without regard to contour. The exception to this
rule of direction is when the couching is taken along a stem or the
narrow hem of a robe to form the border, or along a girdle, it then
follows the direction of the band, this being evidently the most
straightforward and satisfactory method to use for the purpose.

[Illustration: Fig. 129. Front. Back.]

The _point couché rentré ou retiré_ is an excellent method to use for
working a raised bar. Fig. 129 shows the front and reverse sides of a
bar worked by it. The gold thread comes cleanly through from the back of
the material instead of being clumsily doubled upon the surface, and the
durability is evidently great. The linen thread, it will be seen, runs
to and fro at the back, at each turn securing the gold thread.

[Illustration: Fig. 130.]

In fig. 130 this couching is to be seen in use upon drapery. It is taken
entirely over the exterior surface of the cloak, and upon the crown,
sceptre, and model of the church. The lines expressing the folds of
drapery are in this case shown by the couching at these places being
taken in a different direction. Fine gold passing is used for the
couched thread, much finer than can possibly be shown in the drawing,
and the pattern chosen for the couching down is a chevron. The other
parts of the work are done with silk thread in a fine chain or split
stitch. The play of light upon the varied surface of the golden cloak is
very beautiful; the drawing of the figure is perhaps primitive, and,
regarded from the draughtsman's point of view, somewhat ludicrous; it is
however sufficiently good to express all that its author intended, and
there is something very human in this dignified little king who would
not have you forget that he founded a church. The king who is
personified here is Edward the Confessor, so the church is Westminster
Abbey, of which he was the founder.

[Illustration: Fig. 131.]

The Madonna and child forming the frontispiece of the work is another
example of this couching. The method of expressing the folds of drapery
is slightly different from that employed upon the king's robes. All
drapery carried out in this stitch is worked in somewhat the same
fashion, that is, the couching running to and fro between the lines
marks each fold as roughly shown at fig. 131. This method leaves an
indented line to express the drapery, which is a more satisfactory way
than a simple line of dark colour worked over the gold, as in more
modern work. The indented line is often further emphasised by a line of
dark silk stitched along it, which is done in this case. The figures
are taken from the Jesse cope in the Victoria and Albert Museum;[12]
this vestment, with its red silk background and its finely coloured and
drawn ancestors of Christ posed amongst encircling vine branches, is a
most beautiful, though sadly mutilated, example of XIIIth century design
and workmanship.


MODERN METHOD OF COUCHING

In the usual form of couching the gold thread is attached to the
material by fine strong silk. The thread is fastened down as a rule
two-fold, sometimes even three-fold; this method is both quicker and
more effective than couching each thread separately. As the couching
thread is necessarily in evidence, decorative use is often made of it as
well as practical; the stitches, for instance, may be planned so as to
carry out some pattern (see fig. 132) instead of being put down at
random. There is no limit to the variety of the patterns that can be
devised in this way.

Decorative use can be made of the colour of the couching thread; a hot
colour warms the tone of the gold and a cool one does the reverse; and
the more contrasting the colour the more it is in evidence.

[Illustration: Fig. 132.]

[Illustration: Fig. 133.]

The gold thread may be couched solidly in straight lines, as the above
figure shows, or it may be arranged in wavy lines either close or open,
as in fig. 133. The thread is waved by bending it round the pointed end
of a piercer just before fixing down. This waving line is particularly
suitable for the gold thread, since the slight change in direction
allows the light to play upon the metal very prettily. For this reason
gold is often couched solidly in circular or shell form over a ground.
In gold embroidery, therefore, the direction of the thread is a
specially important matter.

[Illustration: Fig. 134.]

At the end of a line a technical difficulty sometimes arises in the
turning of the thread, which is apt to be clumsy. This difficulty is
overcome in various ways; the most usual is to return the doubled thread
as neatly as possible and continue the next line; another is to cut the
thread sharp off, secure it close to the end with a double stitch, and
recommence in like fashion; the thread can sometimes be passed through
to the back and brought up in position for working the next line. The
fine point of a leaf may present difficulties in the same way; sometimes
one of the two threads is temporarily let slip and the point completed
with the single one, the left thread being picked up upon the return
(see fig. 134). For such occasions as this it is more practical to wind
the two threads of passing upon separate bobbins, and bring them
together at the working. Another way of overcoming the point difficulty
is shown at fig. 135.


RAISED WORK

The couched gold threads may be raised in parts by means of some kind of
padding interposed between it and the ground. They are very effective so
treated, since the raised metal catches and reflects the light in a
pleasing manner. This raising of the thread, however, has been carried
to such extremes as to resemble goldsmith's work rather than embroidery,
and it is then hardly in good taste.

[Illustration: Fig. 135.]

A simple method of raising the gold is to lay down lines of string at
stated intervals over the ground. The well-known form called basket
stitch is done in this way; fig. 136 illustrates this stitch, a part of
the square is left unworked in order to expose the under-layer of
string. To carry out the diagram--First couch down the lines of string
at regular intervals over the surface, then commence laying on the gold
by carrying a doubled thread of passing over two bars of string, and
there fixing it down to the material, then over two more and fixing it
down again, and so on to the end of the line. This is exactly repeated
for a second line of passing, then, for the next two lines, commence by
carrying the passing for the first stitch over one bar only, and for the
remainder of the line over the two as before. This process repeated
makes the wicker-like pattern so frequently seen in gold work. It can be
used as a filling or as a border. It is evident that with the same
arrangement of strings many other patterns could be carried out by
varying the points of couching down.

[Illustration: Fig. 136.]

Another way in which string is used for padding the gold is illustrated
in fig. 137. The pattern, which in the first part is two diamond shapes
and a border line, is laid down in string. The doubled gold thread is
then taken horizontally to and fro in close parallel lines over the part
to be worked, and fixed by couching stitches at necessary intervals;
wherever else these stitches may be put, one must always be placed upon
each side of a raised line to make it sharp and clear. Other kinds of
padding are used in this method of work; for instance, a lozenge shape
may be stuffed with layers of soft cotton, as shown in the second part
of this same diagram. Sometimes most complicated patterns are laid down
in string and covered with gold thread in this way, _e.g._:--fig. 138
shows an interlacing pattern taken from the border of an orphrey upon a
XVth century chasuble.

[Illustration: Fig. 137.]


THE USE OF FANCY GOLD THREADS

A cursory glance must be given to the use of purls and other fancy
threads, but these are mostly used nowadays for badges on uniforms, or
for masonic purposes, and are carried out by the trade. These threads,
when tarnished, are very difficult to clean, they easily turn a bad
colour and catch the dust, and for real embroidery purposes are not as
satisfactory as the plainer threads.

[Illustration: Fig. 138.]

Purl and bullion must be cut very accurately into pieces of the required
size, and attached to the material as a bead would be. The metal must be
as little as possible touched with the fingers; the cut pieces can be
placed upon a tray lined with some soft springy substance, such as felt,
in order to be easily picked up with the point of the needle, and they
can be adjusted to their right position upon the work by the aid of the
flat end of the piercer; unnecessary handling may be avoided in this
way.

These threads, laid over padding either straight across or at an angle,
may be used for the stems or petals of conventional flowers. The various
kinds, dull, bright, and check, may perhaps be used in succession.

Plate is frequently taken to and fro over the same kind of forms over a
prepared padding, being caught down by a stitch on each side by a method
the French call _le guipé_. It needs skill and practice to do this well.
Crinkled plate used to be couched on to work, but now is not much used
in this way.

Pearl purl is most often seen outlining a form filled in with the other
threads; an enlarged example of this thread lies vertically down the
centre of fig. 139, the end of it is pulled out, in order to show the
formation of the thread.

[Illustration: Fig. 139.]

Spangles are usually sewn down separately; they may be attached by
stitches from the centre outwards or by the thread being passed through
a piece of purl and then returning to the back through the hole in the
centre of the spangle. Fig. 139 illustrates another way of using these
spangles to form a long tail shape. Here again they are attached with
the help of pieces of purl. In the same figure are given some
illustrations of the use of the fancy threads; to learn more about them
the student should examine XVIth to XVIIIth century gold work during
which period they were in popular use.

FOOTNOTES:

[10] See Dr. Rock's "Textile Fabrics."

[11] In _La Broderie du Onzième Siècle jusqu'à Nos Jours_.

[12] No. 175, 1889.




CHAPTER XII

LETTERING, HERALDRY, AND EMBLEMS

  The Uses of Lettering--Marking--Monograms--Heraldry--Emblems.


Lettering of one kind or another is frequently in request. It is useful
for inscriptions, verses, names attached to figures, the signing and
dating of work, and for the more ordinary purposes of marking linen and
so forth. Signed and dated work has peculiar attractiveness: it can be
placed amidst definite historical associations: an authenticated piece
of embroidery, say of the reign of King Richard Coeur de Lion, Queen
Anne, or George III., would be an historical document and a standard to
gauge the period of any uninscribed examples. Although few of us are
likely to possess treasures of the XIIIth century, signed and dated
pieces of our great-grandmothers' embroideries are interesting personal
landmarks in family history, so for this reason, amongst others,
unostentatious marks of identification are by no means out of place.
Descriptive names or verses are also a means of amplifying the story and
so enlivening our curiosity.

[Illustration: Fig. 140.]

Lettering can answer a further purpose still; it can enrich the design,
for, if rightly chosen and employed, letters are very decorative. They
may be seen forming a border to a piece of work. The three letters in
fig. 140 were taken from an XIth century embroidered cope, which has a
fine inscription running round the entire lower margin.[13] The names of
the saints and martyrs standing in rows in the columned arcades,
affected at certain periods, are sometimes inscribed in the mouldings of
the arches above them or along the base; kneeling donors can be seen
naïvely presenting a little scroll inscribed with prayers, and many
other interesting uses of lettering might be recalled. The names St.
Luke and St. John, shown in fig. 141, are taken from a beautiful
embroidered example of Gothic lettering.

[Illustration: Fig. 141.]

Illuminated manuscripts supply fine examples of initial letters and
writing. A visit to the show-cases in the King's Library at the British
Museum will be of great interest to the student; the illustrations also
to be seen there, the beautifully composed and coloured figure-subjects,
would be equally suitable for carrying out in embroidery; indeed it is
very probable that many of the figure compositions on the old copes and
chasubles were derived from such a source. Fig. 142 gives as an example
of an alphabet one taken from a Benedictionale of late XVth century
date.

[Illustration: Fig. 142.]

A practical purpose to which lettering is often put is the marking of
linen. To learn how to do this used to be a recognised part of a girl's
education, and was one of the objects of the sampler. Marking can be
anything from a simple cross-stitch initial to an elaborately worked
monogram. For simple work the corner to be marked can be tacked upon
_toile cirée_, a material not unlike American cloth. Tambour frames
also are useful for this purpose.

Fig. 143 shows the stitches most used for working simple letters such as
those seen upon the old samplers. The first is cross stitch, which for
marking purposes should be worked so as to be alike on both sides. To do
this requires some forethought whilst the work progresses, and
necessitates an occasional doubling of one of the crossed stitches, in
order to reach the point for commencing the next one and at the same
time preserving a cross on each side.

[Illustration: Fig. 143.]

The second stitch in the diagram shows a square on one side and is a
cross upon the reverse. This makes a good stitch for the purpose, is
quite simple to manipulate, and is easier to manage than the cross on
both sides.

The third example is made use of when a larger letter is required. It is
known as blanket stitch, and is used for the marking of such things. It
may be further completed by a neat back stitch just fitting along the
outside edges of the other stitches.

[Illustration: Fig. 144.]

Many embroidery stitches are suitable for marking purposes, such as
satin, chain, stem, back, rope, basket, and others. The Oriental stitch
which carries out the letter in fig. 144 is a good one when both sides
can be seen, for though these are quite different, it is presentable
upon either. The diagram shows the appearance of the stitch on the front
and on the back.

A simple initial letter may be made interesting by enriching the ground
behind it with some form of diaper patterning. An example of this is
shown in fig. 145. The letter could be worked in a plain satin stitch
over a padding of threads, and the pattern on the ground in a darning
stitch and French knots, or in any other suitable way.

[Illustration: Fig. 145.]

A monogram carried out in embroidery can be a very pretty thing; there
is scope in it for ingenuity both of design and of stitching. The
letters may be decorated and tied up with a floral spray, strap work or
a combination of several _motifs_. Fig. 146 shows a monogram composed of
the letters I. G. ornamented and bound together by a ribbon-like
interlacing band. The letters are worked in a raised satin stitch, and a
running stitch in another colour threads in and out down the centre of
each letter. The outline is stem stitch in a darker colour. The band is
outlined on both sides with an overcast stitch, which always makes a
particularly neat edging for anything of this sort. The centre is filled
with a row of French knots, the tassels are worked in close lines of
stem stitch, and the petals of the small flowers in satin stitch,
finished off with a French knot at the centre.

[Illustration: Fig. 146.]

Another mark of proprietorship and origin was the shield of arms of the
owner, which introduces the subject of heraldry. A shield executed with
the needle is often seen, and looks particularly rich. Heraldry is an
intricate science, full of pitfalls for the unwary, and demands an
earnest study of its complex rules and regulations. Every one should
know at least some fine examples of great national shields such as the
Lions of England, the Fleur de Lys of France, and the Imperial Eagle.
Examples of shields surmounted by helmets and crests with quaint and
flowing mantling are to be seen in all kinds of art work.

Various stitches and methods specially lend themselves to the expression
of heraldry. Those which, like cross stitch, impose a certain
simplicity, are very good. Another suitable medium is applied work, of
which an illustration can be seen on page 95. Gold and silver thread are
very useful here, and look exceptionally rich when couched in the XIIIth
century method. Fig. 147 is an embroidered coat of arms dated the first
half of the XIVth century. It is executed almost entirely in the _point
couché rentré ou retiré_. The arms are those of the Clinton and
Leyburne families--_argent, 6 cross crosslets fitchée 3, 2 and 1 on a
chief azure, two mullets or_.

[Illustration: Fig. 147.]

In designing heraldic work care must be taken to introduce no debased
forms such as were current after the XVth century. The XIIIth and XIVth
centuries are the periods considered best for the study of this subject.
Heraldry sometimes adds historic interest to embroideries; owners or
donors may be traced by their coat of arms appearing upon some part of
the work.

[Illustration: Fig. 148.]

Allied to heraldry and marking are a number of decorative objects that
have acquired peculiar traditional significance of an emblematic or
symbolical nature, hard to define. The Cross of Christianity may be
instanced, the olive branch of peace, the mirror of truth, and the snake
of eternity. The name of a saint is frequently declared by an emblem
accompanying the figure. In appropriate surroundings emblems may often
be used effectively. For knowledge about these things the student must
go to various books that deal with the special subject. Fig. 148 is an
illustration of the well-known emblem, the Pelican in her piety.

FOOTNOTE:

[13] This cope is full of interest in every detail. See M. Louis de
Farcy, _La Broderie du Onzième Siècle jusqu'à Nos Jours_. Plate II.




CHAPTER XIII

THE GARNITURE OF WORK

  Finishing off--Making up--Edges--Use of Cord-making Appliance--Cord
  Twisted by Hand--Knotted Cord--Fringes--Tassels--Knots.


When the embroidery is completed, the making up, the addition of
tasteful finishing touches, and such things as fringes, tassels, and
linings, must all be considered. These will, if judiciously made use of,
give a distinction and character to the work that might be missed if due
care and thought were not expended upon such details. This part of the
work might be compared to the garnishing of a boiled fowl with lemon and
parsley, a minor detail, but a very effective one.

It is possible, by the help of such expedients, to emphasise certain
colours and bring out points of the design, as well as to give
completeness and finish. Such things as fringes, cords, and tassels are
often more satisfactory when made by the worker and with materials like
those used in the embroidery, for such will be more likely to be in
keeping with the character of the rest, and to be more interesting in
detail. In the finishing off the same taste and neatness of execution is
required as in the embroidery. Good work can be very much marred in the
making up; on the other hand, a little extra interest added on a part
not often seen renders it doubly valuable.

The mounting of certain things should not be attempted at home; boxes
should be handed over to the cabinetmaker, books to the bookbinder, and
so on, for it is not possible for any one not an expert to do these
things properly, and even good work can look poor if badly set.

The question how to appropriately finish off an edge often arises; let
it be hem stitched rather than plain hemmed; or a narrow line of drawn
thread work may be inserted, for an open-work border is frequently a
set-off to the rest of the embroidery. If a binding is placed over the
edge this can be fixed with a pretty stitch, or the stitch alone can
bind the edge, one such as buttonhole, overcast, or that shown in fig.
76. With some stitches the edge of the material can be rolled over a
piping cord and the stitch worked over the thus emphasised margin.

The difficulty of procuring cord suitable for use with embroidered work
makes the appliance illustrated at fig. 149 a useful possession.[14] The
cords made upon this wheel can be of any thickness, according to the
number of plies and the substance in each. Different colours and
materials can be twisted up together, such as a gold and silk thread.

[Illustration: Fig. 149.]

To make a three-plied cord, cut three equal lengths of thread rather
longer than the required cord is to be, as it shortens in the
twisting. Make a loop at each end of the thread, or, better still,
attach tiny metal rings at the ends. Hook the threads in position as
shown in the diagram, and place the instrument far enough from the
clamped block of wood to make the threads that are stretched between
quite taut. Now commence the twisting by turning the large wheel quickly
with an even motion in the direction that continues to twist up the
threads, keeping the left hand on the instrument to steady it, for it
gradually slides towards the block as the twisting continues. When
corkscrew-like knots begin to come in the threads, stop revolving the
wheel, unhook the two outer threads and place them both on the central
hooks together with the third thread, keeping them taut during the
process. Revolve the large wheel again, in the direction opposite to
that in which it has been working, and continue turning until the cord
is tightly twisted up. It is now made, and can be removed from the
machine. The second twisting had better be over-done rather than not
sufficiently, since if over-twisted the cord rights itself upon being
removed from the machine. A two-ply cord is made in like manner, by
using first the two outer hooks only, and then placing both threads
together on the central hooks.

There is a simple way of making this cord without the help of any
instrument, but it is not possible to get the perfect result that the
machine gives. It is most easily carried out by two persons, though one
can do it. In order to make a two-plied cord, by hand, take a thread
rather more than twice the length of the required cord. Let each worker
take an end of the thread in the right hand and commence to twist it
between the thumb and finger, each working in direction opposite to the
other and keeping the thread at tension. When twisted as much as
possible without getting corkscrew-like knots in the thread, the cord
must be doubled in half by holding it at the centre and bringing
together the two ends, which are then knotted. During the entire process
the thread must be kept under tension. If one end of the cord is now let
go it should immediately twist itself up tight, and remain in that
position. If any small knots form during the process run the cord
sharply through the fingers once or twice to straighten it out.

[Illustration: Fig. 150.]

[Illustration: Fig. 151.]

[Illustration: Fig. 152.]

Another pretty kind of cord is a knotted one. It is made in the hand in
most primitive fashion by using the two first fingers as crochet hooks.
The thread used for making it should be stout and firm. To commence
making the cord, knot two pieces of thread together and place the
threads in position as shown in fig. 150. The next step is shown in fig.
151, which is the index finger of the left hand bringing the darker
thread through the loop. Fig. 152 shows this thread looped on the
finger, the cord held in the left hand instead of the right, and the
right hand in process of drawing the lighter thread, which was the last
loop, tight. The next move, fig. 153, shows the right-hand first finger
making the new loop with the lighter thread, and fig. 154 shows the
loop on the finger, the cord passed over to be held in the right hand
again, and the left hand this time pulling the last loop tight. Continue
making the cord by following out the last four positions consecutively.

[Illustration: Fig. 153.]

[Illustration: Fig. 154.]

A very usual finish to an edge is a fringe. This can be made either by
fraying out the material or by adding a detached fringe, either knotting
it in or attaching it in some other way. If the fringe is to be a
frayed-out one, the best way to do it is to first draw out a few warp
threads where the head of the fringe is to come, then hem stitch the
upper edge of this, see the right-hand end of fig. 155; this makes the
heading of the fringe secure, after which the remainder of the warp
threads can be withdrawn. When fringing a square in this fashion, it is
well to save some of the frayings out to knot in at the four corners
where otherwise there would be gaps.

[Illustration: Fig. 155.]

To knot an added fringe into the border is a very simple matter. Begin
by cutting the threads that are to compose it all to one length, about
double that of the required fringe. Take a few together to form a bunch
and double it in half. With a stiletto make a hole near the edge of the
material; then bring from the back a crochet hook through this hole, and
draw the loop formed by the doubling of the bunch a little way through,
then take the ends of the bunch through the loop and draw them tight in
order to make the knotting firm.

[Illustration: Fig. 156.]

There are many ways of patterning a plain fringe, sometimes a change of
colour in the knotted-in threads is sufficient, as shown in fig. 156.
Another very usual way is to divide the bunches and refasten them
together in some way to form a pattern. Fig. 157 is an example of this;
they may be either knotted together, as in the first half of the
diagram, or bound with thread as in the second half, the needle reaching
the required places by running in zigzag fashion up the thread and down
again.

[Illustration: Fig. 157.]

A simple fringe can be made of strands twisted together, as in the first
half of fig. 158. This is made upon the same principle as the twisted
cord already described. About three threads of the fringe are twisted up
tight, and an adjoining three treated in the same fashion. These threes
are then twisted together in the direction opposite to that which has
just been used, and thus are securely locked together. The ends of the
completed fringe may require a little trimming off to make all of an
equal length. The second half of the diagram shows a durable and simple
fringe made by a close series of knots down the thread.

[Illustration: Fig. 158.]

Fig. 159 suggests two methods by which a stitching of coloured thread
near the margin can help to decorate a plain fringed edge.

[Illustration: Fig. 159.]

A row of tassels makes a pretty finish to various things. Complicated
tassel-making requires a professional hand; even a simple tassel
requires making properly. The first proceeding is to wind some thread
round a piece of cardboard, which should be a little wider than the
tassel is to be long; then double a piece of the same thread and thread
the two ends into a needle, thus leaving a loop at the usual knot end.
Slip the needle through the centre of the wound thread close to the
cardboard, then through the loop and draw the thread tight; this will
bind the threads securely at that point. They can then be cut exactly
opposite this on the other side, which will release the cardboard. Give
the binding thread another tightening pull, and then take the needle and
thread straight through the centre, as shown in fig. 160, and fasten it
off with a good knot. This knot will be in the ball part of the tassel
and will help to make it round. Next, double the tassel into shape ready
for the collar. Thread the needle as before and make the thread encircle
the tassel, as shown in the second figure in the diagram, drawing the
thread quite tight, and, if necessary, winding it several times round
the neck of the tassel until the collar is of sufficient width, then
take the needle and thread straight through the centre, bringing it out
at the top, where it can be made use of to fix the tassel in its place
upon the work. With sharp scissors trim the edge of the tassel which
now is complete. The ball part can be further decorated by covering it
with an open network of stitches in some contrasting colour; buttonhole
and various lace stitches can be used for the purpose.

[Illustration: Fig. 160.]


KNOTS

Knots, which can be very pretty, are at times required in embroidery;
anything that requires a fastening may give an opportunity for some
pretty interlacing strap work or knotting. Also knots may be practically
useful in both weaving and embroidery, for sometimes a finishing thread
must be knotted on to a new one, since there may be no opportunity of
making a firm commencement with the aid of the material.

The knot shown in fig. 161 is called the girdle knot; it might be made
use of in many other ways. To carry it out, make a loop with one end of
the cord and hold it between the left finger and thumb, the looped part
being towards the right, and the end that points downwards to the left
passing over the other end. Take up the other piece of cord, pass it
diagonally across the surface of the loop, commencing from the
right-hand lower side, then round under one end and over the other, then
up into the loop from underneath, over its own end that crosses the loop
there, and then out under the loop at the top right-hand corner.

[Illustration: Fig. 161.]

The Chinese knot, which is used for a sailor's collar, is shown in fig.
162. The looped end can be left as large as necessary. To work it the
first part of the knot is laid in position on the table, commencing at
point A; for the latter part (from point C) the thread is interlaced
through to the finish. It can then be pulled tight, taking care in the
drawing-together process that the various loops are adjusted in right
position.

[Illustration: Fig. 162.]

[Illustration: Fig. 163.]

Another ornamental knot is shown at fig. 163. To make it--Form a loop
and hold it between the left thumb and finger, the loop pointing to the
right, the longer end pointing upwards and passing over the end that
points downwards. Take hold of the end pointing upwards, pass it
perpendicularly downwards across the surface of the loop, then round
under the other end, up over its own end, under the side of the loop,
over its own end that lies across the loop, and out under the loop at
the right-hand end. Pull as tight as required. All these knots may be
made of double cord by running a second through, following the lead of
the first, just before tightening up the knot. The one last described
may be made of doubled cord from the commencement, the looped end being
used as the working end: the knot will then finish off with a loop at
one end, which can be used as a loop or cut if required.

[Illustration: Fig. 164.]

Fig. 164 is an example of a pretty piece of interlacing strap work
attached to a fastening.

The weavers' knot (fig. 165) is useful for practical purposes in both
weaving and embroidery; this knot is universally employed by the cotton
weavers when the warp breaks. It is made as follows--Place the two ends
that are to be knotted together between the thumb and first finger of
the left hand in such a way that they cross each other at right angles,
the end that points towards the left passing under the one pointing
towards the right. Pass the long end of thread that hangs down towards
the right, and which is the newly attaching piece, over the thumb, round
the back of the end pointing to the left in front of the other end, and
let it hang down again towards the right, holding the loop thus made
between the thumb and finger; then pass the end pointing towards the
right down through this loop and out on the opposite side. To draw the
knot tight, pull the end which hangs down towards the right, which will
tighten the loop and so complete the knot.

[Illustration: Fig. 165.]

The reef knot (fig. 166) is another useful one, and it has this
advantage over the weaver's knot, that both short ends return parallel
to the long ones instead of going off at an angle; this makes it neater
for some purposes.

[Illustration: Fig. 166.]

FOOTNOTE:

[14] This will be found described in detail in Chapter II. There is an
interesting drawing of a neat little machine, similar to this, but
worked by cogwheels, in _L'Art du Brodeur_, by Germain de St. Aubin
(1770).




CHAPTER XIV

PRACTICAL DIRECTIONS

  Transferring Patterns--Paste for Embroidery Purposes--Protection and
  Preservation of Work--Washing Embroidery--Prevention and Cure of
  Puckered Work--Points about the Thread--Dressing the Frame.


The best method of getting the pattern on to the material is to draw it
on directly with a brush; since this, however, is not always possible,
other ways of doing it can be employed.

The pattern can be transferred to the background by a process called
pouncing. To do this fix some tracing-paper over the design and
carefully take the outline; a good margin of plain paper should be left
round the outside in order to prevent any of the pounce getting
accidentally rubbed on to the embroidery. The next process is the
perforation of the pattern. Lay the tracing upon some substance of the
nature of thick felt, then with a pricker or a needle, held in an
upright position, pierce tiny holes all round the outline of the
pattern, very close together. This completed, attach the perforated
tracing securely to the material, the smooth side of the perforations
towards the stuff. Both material and tracing paper may be fixed to a
board with drawing pins. Next, rub the pounce, which consists of finely
powdered charcoal or of white chalk, lightly over the perforated parts
with a soft pad, keeping the rubbing always in the same direction; once
or twice at the most over the surface is quite sufficient, often too
much is rubbed through, which afterwards is only in the way. The pad,
first dipped into the pounce, is rubbed preparatorily upon some paper to
remove the superfluous powder, and then upon the actual work. Carefully
remove the tracing-paper; there should now be visible upon the surface
of the material, in charcoal dust, a perfectly clear reproduction of the
pattern. Should, however, the impression be blurred, it is quite easy to
flick everything away with a duster and repeat the process. The causes
of failure would most probably be that the perforations were too large
or too far apart, or that there was some movement of either paper or
material during the process. It is necessary for the pattern to be
permanently fixed upon the ground material; blow lightly to remove any
superfluous powder, then, with a brush dipped in light red oil-paint
moistened with turpentine, trace a fine clear line over the powdered
pattern. When this is dry, what is left of the charcoal can be lightly
dusted away. Red is in most cases a good colour to use for tracing
purposes, for if by chance any tracing should show or come off on the
thread it will be a clean-looking colour, and one comparatively easily
removed in any after cleaning.

Red or blue carbonised paper is used for tracing patterns; it is not a
good medium though it may be an expeditious one. If it is used, an after
painting over the outline will make the marking permanent.

When pouncing or painting is difficult, a method of indicating the
pattern upon the stuff is to trace the design on tissue paper, and tack
it to the ground material with cotton, the stitching of which should
follow the outline of the design, and be kept as much as possible upon
the front. The thin paper is then torn away, and there will be some
suggestion of pattern left upon the material.

Transparent ground stuffs need only be laid upon the pattern; then the
tracing can be taken directly on the stuff.

Paste is sometimes in request for embroidery purposes; the following is
a good recipe--Pour rather less than half a pint of cold water into a
saucepan, add to this a piece of carpenter's glue about the size of a
small filbert and place it on the fire to heat. Put three teaspoonfuls
of flour into a basin, and with cold water mix to a smooth paste; when
the water in the saucepan boils add it to the paste, stirring well all
the time; then place the mixture in the saucepan and boil for about two
minutes. When cold it is ready for use. It may be required as a
preservative; for instance, canvas work when finished can have a thin
coating of paste rubbed over the back in order to preserve the stitches
from giving or running; when the work is to be used for such things as
furniture coverings this may be a good thing to do. Applied work is
sometimes pasted on to its new ground, and a backing may be fixed to the
surface material by paste. The more all this can be avoided the better,
for its tendency is to give a stiff mechanical look to work;
professional people, however, are rather fond of the paste pot. Paste,
if used, must be of the right kind, or it will do more harm than good.
It should be very fresh, and have no acid in its ingredients, of which
gum arabic must not be one if any after stitching has to take place
through the stuff, for gum makes it hard and less penetrable. The paste
must be applied and allowed to dry thoroughly before the work is removed
from the frame. A finger makes a good brush for the purpose. The paste
should be put on as thinly and evenly as possible, care being taken not
to rub on the cross of the material, since this might stretch it
unevenly.

Shoemakers' paste is easily procured, and can be used for embroidery
purposes. This is made from rye flour, and is very strong. It is
harmless if perfectly fresh.

A good many things go to the keeping of work fresh and orderly, which is
a very important matter. The work must be kept carefully covered up when
not in use; finished parts can sometimes be covered whilst the work is
going on, for the covering is easily raised when comparison with the
part in progress is necessary. The work should have some protection if
the hand rests on it; the worker should wear a white apron with sleeves.
The worker's hand should be cool, dry, and smooth; hot hands should
frequently be washed. The use of pumice stone cures slight roughness,
but fine work cannot be attempted if the fingers are for any reason
constantly rough. Wools and silks need a case to keep them orderly and
clean. The best way to preserve valuable embroidery is to frame it,
which, of course, is not always practicable, but it is a sure safeguard
against moth and dust.

For washing embroidery special soap should be procured. It is not well
to use any ordinary soap, for this may contain alkali, which would
injure the colours in the work. Dissolve the soap in boiling water, and
add cold to make it just warm and of the required strength. Immerse the
embroidery in the lather thus made, and work it about gently, avoiding
any friction. When clean, rinse first in warm water, afterwards in cold,
to which a little salt may be added. The water must be squeezed out
carefully and the material quickly dried. If ironing is necessary it
must be done on the wrong side, but if the work can be pinned out on a
board to dry, and in this way stretched and smoothed without any
ironing, so much the better, for the embroidery will not be flattened at
all. Another way of ironing embroidery that is not harmful is to do it
from underneath while some one holds out the material.

It is easy to prevent the puckering of work when it is carried out in
the frame; there is, however, no necessity for it to occur in hand work.
Certain stitches are more inclined to draw up the material than others,
and extra care has to be taken in working upon the cross of the fabric.
The work should be held in convex fashion over the fingers of the left
hand. Weights are occasionally attached to the corners of the work to
prevent any unconscious drawing of it up.

There are remedies for the cure of slightly puckered work. Place on a
drawing-board some clean blotting-paper, damp it evenly over with a wet
handkerchief, and then lay the work, right side up, upon it. Fix the
work down to the board with drawing-pins, inserted at regular short
intervals round the edge, endeavouring during the process to stretch the
material to its original shape. This needs doing carefully, for it is
quite possible to stretch it to a wrong shape, and it will remain as now
pinned out. Next, lay some white paper or a handkerchief upon the
surface of the work, and then place upon it a flat weight that presses
equally on every part of the embroidery. Leave it undisturbed for a
night, and the puckering will probably be cured. Work, if not puckered,
may be improved by going through this process, which practically amounts
to a mild ironing, but without any injurious effects.

[Illustration: Fig. 167.]

There are various points about the thread that should be known. To
commence a new thread run a few stitches in the material upon the right
side upon a part that will afterwards be covered by the working. This is
a better way than a fastening on the wrong side, for it is both neater
and more secure. A knot made at the beginning is fairly safe, but it is
undesirable for several reasons. The needleful should not be lengthy
lest it gets worn before it is all worked in. With some threads it is
important to thread only the proper end into the eye of the needle,
since one way they will work in roughly and the other way smoothly. An
end of a coarse thread can be taken through to the back of the material
by the help of a fine one; the fine thread is brought through from the
back by the needle, it then encircles the coarse one, and returns to the
back by the same hole, pulling the coarse thread with it, as in process
in fig. 167. Taking it through by the aid of a thick needle would make
too large a hole. Thread can be knotted into the eye of the needle if
for any reason it is required to be quite safe from accidental
unthreading. The neatest way of doing this is to pass the needle
through the centre of the thread and draw it tight; this is a useful
trick for any unskilled worker with needles and thread, for re-threading
also may be a difficulty. When work has to be unpicked it is better to
cut the threads rather than do any drawing out, for they are in any case
unfit for further use, and this method wears the material less; a
beginner must not shirk unpicking if first-rate results are to be
obtained.


FRAME WORK

Certain stitches and methods of work cannot be carried out except with
the help of a frame, others are hand stitches, and some few can be
worked either way. Work done in a frame takes longer than that done by
hand, and is rather more fatiguing. Each method has its advantages; in
the frame it is perhaps easier to get good technique, for difficulties
such as puckering the material, irregular stitching, and so on, are more
easily avoided, also it is more possible to see the effect of the whole
whilst the part progresses. In frame work a thimble is required for each
hand, for one pushes the needle through from above and one from below.
It is a rest to be able to reverse the hands, so both should be equally
dexterous in either position.

To dress the frame correctly is an important preliminary, for unless
done well the effect of much after labour may be spoiled. In the chapter
upon tools and appliances in fig. 9 is shown a piece of linen stretched
in the frame ready for commencing work.

The square of material that is seen to be inserted in the centre of the
stretched linen is to show how a very small piece or a portion of a
large surface could be stretched in the same sized frame. A corner may
require marking or a small detail of embroidery carrying out upon it. A
portion is cut out of the centre of the stretched linen, and the piece
or part of the material to be worked stitched securely to it, as
illustrated in the diagram. The remainder of the material, if there is
any, can be folded up and pinned out of the way over the rollers.

To return to the dressing of the frame--the linen to be stretched,
before being fixed in place, must be hemmed or herring-boned down at the
top and base and then sewn with overcast stitches to the webbings,
inclining during the process to pucker the webbing rather than the
material. The side pieces can now be put through the holes at the ends
of the rollers and the metal pins inserted, or nuts adjusted, as the
case may be, in order to stretch the material to the right tension. The
raw edges at the sides must now be turned in or bound with tape, and a
string securely attached at intervals along the edge; this is for lacing
the string through that now braces the material to the sides of the
frame (see fig. 1). The screw-sided frame has an advantage over the side
pieces shown in fig. 9, in that in the former an extra turn can, at this
point, be given to the nuts to still further stretch the material; on
the other hand, some workers prefer the flat side pieces, thinking that
they make the frame more rigid.

If the material, when fixed to the two webbings, is too long for the
frame, it must be wound round one of the rollers until of the correct
size. This must be done carefully, for a delicate fabric might get
damaged in the process; the roller can be padded with soft paper, and an
interlining of tissue paper can be inserted and wound up with the
material. It may not always be desirable to do this winding round the
rollers; in that case fine glazed holland can be stretched in the frame,
and the part to be first embroidered fixed to it. When the first part of
the work is completed, the holland is cut out of the frame and fresh
pieces substituted as the work goes on. If it is not wished that the
stitches should be taken through both surfaces, as would here be the
case, it would be possible to cut the linen partly away underneath, and
use it only as a kind of inner frame for stretching the material on, in
a way somewhat like that already described (see fig. 9).

A backing to the material, however, is often a necessity--perhaps heavy
work may be put on it or the stuff itself is fragile; in such cases
there must be a backing of some kind. This usually consists of fine
holland or linen, which is first stretched in the frame and then has the
surface material securely stitched to it with overcast stitches, care
being taken that both materials are equally strained.

To frame velvet, sew it to the webbing by the selvedges or that way of
the material, since the pile with that arrangement is more manageable
when the embroidery is in progress.

[Illustration: Fig. 168.]




PART II

TAPESTRY WEAVING




CHAPTER XV

INTRODUCTION


Weaving, a most ancient art, naturally precedes embroidery, for this
necessitates an already existing ground stuff, which is generally some
kind of woven material. All varieties of weaving are done by one
little-varied method, that of the weft passing to and fro in and out of
the warp, and thus binding the whole into a fabric or web.

The kind of weaving which demands from the worker the greatest artistic
skill is that which produced the great masterpieces of Flanders, once
known as Arras, from the town of that name, and now commonly called
Gobelins tapestry, so named from the _Manufacture des Gobelins_ in
Paris, at which establishment, founded over three hundred years ago, it
is still produced.

It is this kind of weaving that is now to be discussed, but without the
least suggestion that the pupil should work upon a scale so large as is
usually followed, though there is no reason against doing so if it is
practicable. Tapestry weaving is so constantly associated with objects
of large size, such as wall hangings, that it is scarcely realised as an
art in this smaller way and as an alternative to embroidery. Yet it can
be work of a most interesting kind even when produced in pieces only six
inches square, as is well shown by existing specimens of the work of the
weavers in Egypt who flourished in the early centuries of the Christian
era. Examples of this work can be seen in many museums; they consist
frequently of decorative panels of tapestry work inlaid in linen tunics
and stuffs that have been used as grave clothes. These early Coptic
examples are, like all tapestry, built up by interweaving various
threads upon warp-strings stretched in close parallel lines. By varying
the colour of the threads that are thus manipulated upon the warp,
patterns of any degree of complexity can be built up directly by hand,
and without the assistance of any further mechanical contrivance. The
peculiarity of this ancient weaving is that the patterns are frequently
woven upon the warp-threads of some fabric, from which the weft either
has been removed, or, what is perhaps more probable, been purposely left
out when the material was made, to leave space for this decorative
pattern weaving to be added to it.

The Latin name for the workman who in this way wove in the ornamental
patterns was _Plumarius_, which is a name known to be applied to an
embroiderer also. This weaving of small subjects is certainly very
little removed from embroidery; it may fairly be called needlework, for
it is as often carried out with needles as with bobbins, the former
being frequently better suited to the size of the work.

In execution weaving is not more difficult than embroidered work; it can
be done in an ordinary room and upon a simple loom that is not more
cumbersome than an embroidery frame; in fact an embroidery frame can
sometimes be used in the place of a loom.

Weaving takes about as long in doing as finely stitched solid
needlework, for in weaving the entire fabric is made, both pattern and
ground. The speed with which the work can be done of course varies
considerably, being mainly dependent upon the design that is being
carried out. Also the quality of the materials used affects the rate of
working; for instance, the thickness of the warp-strings and the placing
of them nearer together or further apart. Moreover the weft may be
composed of one strand or of several strands together.

In weaving, unless the materials used are very fine, it is impossible to
get minute detail in drawing; fortunately it is seldom necessary to
attempt much of this. The simpler and more direct work is as good as,
and sometimes better than, that with finely gradated colour, shading,
and form. On the other hand, work, small in scale, even though simply
treated, does not look well when carried out with very coarse materials,
for they seem out of proportion to the size of it.

The main difficulty in the technique of the work lies in the attainment
of good draughtsmanship, which of course includes light and shade as
well as outline. It is naturally more difficult to draw by means of
bobbin and thread, in horizontal lines, than to work unrestrictedly with
a pencil, or even with an embroidery needle.

There is a great deal in the preparation of the design; as in all other
crafts this must be suited to the method of work; otherwise the
difficulties of execution will be greatly increased and the result will
be less satisfactory. This is even more important in weaving than in
embroidery, for in the latter the stitch and method may possibly be
chosen to suit the design, but in weaving no variation of stitch is
possible; all must be carried out in the same way.

Tapestry weaving, whether for wall hangings or for small objects, has
the same technical difficulties, and certain restrictions govern all
work of the kind. One point to be observed is, the main lines of the
design should go as little as possible in the same direction as the warp
threads. This is because with each change of colour in the weft that
occurs in the direction of the warp, there comes an inevitable
separation in the woven material, which, oft repeated, would materially
impair the strength of the fabric. The less frequently this occurs, of
course, the better, since it entails additional labour, either a
joining-together stitch at the time of working or an after-sewing up
from the back. Long lines made by change of colour going straight or at
a slight angle across the warp-threads, are perfectly simple to manage,
and the hatching lines of shading, as well as the outline, should be
taken as much as possible in this direction.

It will be noticed that most tapestries have the ribbed lines of warp
going horizontally across; in the loom these lines are perpendicular, so
this means that the design has been placed and carried out sideways upon
it. This is for the reason just under discussion, for the long lines of
a design are most frequently perpendicular, take, for instance, lines of
figures, draperies, or architecture, and so by placing the design
sideways in the loom, most of the important lines will come in the
direction most easy for the working of them.

With small pieces it frequently does not matter which way it is carried
out, but it is useful to know when making the design that there is the
alternative of placing it either way upon the warp-threads. If this
matter were not considered and arranged, there might come a good deal of
twisting round one or two warp-threads which would be most
unsatisfactory in working and in appearance. A band of plain colour
framing a square piece of work will be found to be completely detached
from the centre part upon each side of the square, although working in
very straightforwardly at the top and base; if, instead of being a
straight band, the inner edge was vandyked, the work would be well
knitted together upon all sides (see fig. 169). In such ways as this the
technical pitfalls can be somewhat avoided by a designer who understands
the method of the work.

[Illustration: Fig. 169.]

To lay down definite rules for designing is practically impossible;
right and wrong depend upon so many circumstances. The study of fine
tapestries of the best periods is one of the most satisfactory ways of
learning what one may or may not attempt; the beautifully flowered
grounds in many of these show what excellent motives flowers make, and
how they should be treated. It is not usually a good plan to introduce
in any part of the work much plain ground, for it is inclined to look
poor; this is very likely the reason why the grass in tapestry-land is
often covered with such profusion of flowers. Tapestry calls for
beautiful colour, richness, and plenty of interesting detail; it is
essentially decorative work, and must be treated as such. The
arrangement of colours and tones need to be sharply defined; if by
chance a dark leaf comes against another dark one, a line of light
colour is sometimes deliberately run between, perhaps shading or
outlining one of the forms; a flower may even change its colour as it
passes over different backgrounds; what is more remarkable is that this
change, unless sought for, is imperceptible.

The work may be applied to all kinds of uses, such as coverings for
furniture, mats, curtains, bell-pulls, book-covers, bags, boxes, and so
forth. Anything that hangs upon a wall is particularly suitable for
working in tapestry, for at a little distance this kind of work shows up
more effectively than embroidered work does. A great many articles, such
as alms-bags, frontals of all kinds, stoles and book-markers, for use in
churches could most excellently be carried out in tapestry.




CHAPTER XVI

NECESSARY APPLIANCES AND MATERIALS

  The Loom--Mirror--Bobbins and Needles--The Comb--Embroidery Frame
  treated as a Loom--Warp--Wools--Silk--Gold and Silver Thread.


TOOLS AND APPLIANCES

The chief requisite for weaving is the loom; this can be made by a
carpenter from a working drawing. In the Victoria and Albert Museum
there is a model of a small tapestry loom, presented by William Morris,
which a novice will do well to examine. It is quite possible to carry
out a small piece of weaving upon an embroidery frame, but to work in a
loom which has all the proper appliances is always quicker, better, and
absolutely necessary with work of any size.

There are two main varieties of tapestry loom, one in which the
warp-threads are horizontal, and another in which they are vertical. The
latter kind is considered to give the best results, mainly owing to the
possibility of the worker's seeing the right side of the work whilst it
is in progress. This is a great advantage, for tapestry is woven with
the reverse side towards the worker, and progresses by such gradual
steps that the weaver is prone to lose sight of the whole whilst paying
attention to the part in progress, and it will be easily understood that
to be able to go round and view the entire piece is of immense help. A
detail may perhaps be corrected during the progress of the work, but
afterwards this would be an awkward matter. It is one of the
difficulties of weaving to have to finish completely each step as it
comes up. Working from the wrong side is not so hard as it might seem,
for both sides are practically alike; the side towards the worker,
however, shows ends of thread and thread passing from one place to
another, which make it somewhat unpresentable.

[Illustration: Fig. 170.]

[Illustration: Fig. 171.]

Fig. 170 shows a drawing of a small loom with some warp stretched upon
it in readiness for commencing work. It stands upon the ground, and is
about 4 feet high by 2½ feet wide. It is made of beechwood; a hard
wood like this is best, for there must be no possibility of the rollers
bending with the strain of the warp. The loom consists of two uprights
standing upon heavy feet; these uprights are joined together at the top
and base by strengthening cross bars. Two wooden rollers are fixed into
the uprights (see A and B in fig. 170) and in the surface of each of
these a narrow groove is hollowed out lengthwise (see fig. 171); this is
for the purpose of holding a long metal pin, by means of which the
warp-threads are kept in place. The rollers are fitted at one extremity
with a handle for turning them round, and at the other with a ratchet
and toothed wheel to prevent unwinding. The purpose of the upper roller
is to hold the supply of warp-thread and unwind it as required; the
lower one is for winding up the web as the work progresses, so that upon
a loom of this size a piece of work of considerable length can easily be
carried out.

[Illustration: Fig. 172.]

The warp soon after it passes from the top roller is divided into two
leaves by a cylindrical wooden bar about one inch in diameter, called
the cross stave (see fig. 172). The cross stave may be oval or round in
section; if it is oval the warp-threads may be moved more widely apart
when required by turning the stave round, but this is not often
necessary. The upper part of the cross stave can be seen in position in
the loom diagram, which shows also how the stave divides the threads,
which pass alternately one in front and one behind the bar. After this
the threads are passed through a comb-like instrument, having about
fourteen divisions to the inch (see fig. 173). This extends from side to
side of the loom, and lies in a groove made in the bar that fixes the
coat-stave (C in fig. 170) in position at either extremity. It can be
taken out and exchanged for another with a different divisioning, if
necessary; without doing this, however, it is quite possible to put at
intervals two threads through one division, or to pass over one
occasionally if need be. The threads are next fixed in the lower roller.

[Illustration: Fig. 173.]

The coat-stave can be seen projecting from near the top of the loom. A
number of looped threads called coats are fixed to it, and each one of
these encircles a thread of the warp. They are attached only to those
threads that were passed behind the cross stave and form the back leaf
of the warp, and they are for the purpose of pulling these forward when
required.

Underneath the lower roller is fixed a wooden tray, which is useful for
holding bobbins, comb, or scissors.

On the loom is hung a small mirror facing the right side of the work
(see fig. 170). This enables the weaver to glance now and then through
the warp-strings at any detail that is in progress.

Smaller looms can be made, suitable for placing upon a table; these,
standing about two feet in height, must in some way be firmly fixed to
the table, in order to be properly rigid for work.

[Illustration: Fig. 174.]

The thread composing the woof is wound upon a wooden bobbin or shuttle,
such as that shown in fig. 174. The chief point about this is, that it
may not have sharp angles that might catch in the warp whilst passing to
and fro. The pointed end is sometimes made use of to poke between the
warp-threads and press down the weft. A fresh bobbin is employed for
each colour, and the wool is wound upon it two or three strands
together, just as may happen to be required for the work. Large
blunt-pointed needles about three inches long (fig. 175) are often used
in place of bobbins, for with small pieces of work sometimes so little
of a colour is required as to make it unnecessary to wind a quantity on
a bobbin, which is, after all, only a needle with an extra long thread.

[Illustration: Fig. 175.]

[Illustration: Fig. 176.]

A comb is necessary for pressing down the weft whilst the work is in
progress. Combs vary in size and shape; fig. 176 shows one suitable for
this type of work; it is 1½ inches square, slightly wedge-shaped, and
about one-eighth of an inch thick. Boxwood is the most suitable wood to
make them from, since it is particularly hard and fine in the grain.
They are sometimes made of metal, ivory, or bone; for large work, metal
combs of a heavier type are used.

[Illustration: Fig. 177.]

An embroidery frame, which has been already mentioned as a possible
substitute for the loom, is oftentimes an article more easily procured.
Fig. 177 illustrates how a frame of this kind may be prepared with
warp-threads for weaving. One with the screw side pieces is the best,
for these enable the tension of the warp to be slightly adjusted if the
working shows any tendency to slacken the thread.

To prepare the frame for weaving--Place the parts together at the
required distance from each other; secure the end of some warp-thread to
some part of the frame, and then commence to wind it round and round
over the two rollers, placing the threads at approximately the right
distance apart, taking into account when doing this that the two leaves
thus formed will eventually be brought into the same plane. When the
required width of warp-thread is wound upon the rollers, secure the end
of the string and proceed to bring the front and back leaves together by
darning a knitting-needle or some similar article in and out of the
threads at the centre. Then slide it up close to the top roller and
secure it by tying it with string at each end (see diagram). The same
process is gone through with a second pin, which is tied to the lower
roller.

The warp-threads can now be adjusted to their proper distance apart, as
they will probably be a little irregularly spaced. The next process is
to weave two or three courses of warp-thread close to the knitting-pins
at either end; this brings the warp still nearer to being in the one
plane, and enables the threads to be arranged in perfect order by the
aid of the point of the bobbin or a needle, and they will remain as now
placed.

The frame is now ready for work. A piece of plain web, about half an
inch in width, is usually woven before the actual design is begun; this
serves as a selvedge for turning in when the completed work is mounted,
and also gets the warp into condition much better for working upon.

A thick knitting-needle can be passed between the alternate threads of
the warp and placed towards the top of the frame, as shown in the
diagram. This takes the place of the cross-stave in the loom, and, by
thus dividing the warp into two leaves, is of assistance when the
shuttle goes in one direction. Coats cannot easily be applied to an
embroidery frame.

It is quite possible upon a frame of this kind to weave a long narrow
band of any kind. The warp must be wound on and arranged in position at
the necessary length by separating the rollers and temporarily fixing
them apart at the distance required for the band. The surplus warp is
then wound up on the upper roller until the side pieces will fit into
the ends. As it gets worked upon, the completed part is wound upon the
lower roller. A piece both long and wide would be impracticable,
especially if any winding on and off the rollers were necessary.


MATERIALS

There are very few materials required for tapestry weaving; they consist
of, string for warp, wools, silks, and maybe gold and silver thread for
the weft.

The warp is usually composed of a smooth, strong, evenly twisted thread,
specially made for the purpose. It can be procured of various
thicknesses. It happens sometimes that in parts the warp shows, as a
fringe or in some other way; in this case it could be made of a strong
silk thread, such as purse silk, though for edges of mats, the ordinary
string warp fringed out is quite suitable. Occasionally weaving is
carried out in such a way as to expose the warp in various parts of the
work, the pattern being woven, but the ground left altogether unworked.
In a case of this kind the colour and composition of the warp is
naturally important, and must be considered. In a show-case in the
British Museum there can be seen a small book with an interesting woven
binding carried out after this manner. The warp is composed of gold
passing, and the effect of this with a pattern carried out in brightly
coloured silks is very pretty indeed, the gold adding a rich glow to the
whole.

Wool and silk are the chief materials used for the woof. It is well to
choose those of fine texture, for several strands can then be wound
together upon one bobbin, which, with coarse materials, would be too
clumsy a method. When working in this way there is more opportunity of
varying colour and texture, for three shades may be wound upon the
bobbin together to get a required colour, and this has often a prettier
effect than the use of an unblended colour; also, silk and wool are very
satisfactory wound and worked in together, each texture showing the
other to advantage.

Fine gold or silver threads are frequently used in tapestry weaving.
They can be woven in alone, which gives a metallic look, or they may be
mixed with strands of silk. Both ways are very good, and the use of the
metal thread adds great richness to the work. These threads make fine
backgrounds, and they can be used in many ways upon the design; it is a
common practice to carry out the lighting of draperies and of other
parts in real gold, just as they are treated in illuminated manuscripts.




CHAPTER XVII

PREPARATIONS FOR WORK

  Warping the Loom--Dressing the Coat-Stave--Tracing the Pattern upon
  the Threads.


Upon commencing the warping of the loom the first matter to be decided
is the length of the threads. Some extra length must be measured off
besides that actually used for weaving, to allow for what is taken up
in fixing the threads and winding them round the rollers, and as it is
not convenient to work more than about half-way up the loom, this also
has to be allowed for in the length. The threads must all be cut to one
size, and since they have to be doubled in halves when placed on the
loom, this should be twice the required length.

Another question for early decision is the number of warp-threads that
may be allowed per inch. This varies with the coarseness of the strings
and the thickness of the weft that will have to pass to and fro between
them; what governs both of these points is the design, whether there is
much detail or not, for if the drawing is complicated the warp-strings
must be fine in order to be able to carry it out; this point will be
better understood after some experience of working. Fourteen to sixteen
threads to the inch is a very usual number.

The fixing of the threads in the upper roller is a very simple matter.
It is done by doubling each in halves and placing the loop thus formed
over the metal pin, which for this purpose may be temporarily suspended
by string to the frame of the top of the loom just above the roller. It
can be dropped into its place in the groove when all the threads are
looped upon it, and made secure there for the moment by tying some
string round the extremities of the roller.

Each thread is now taken separately through the comb-like instrument.
The cross-stave is laid upon this, so it is well to put it in place now,
and carry the threads alternately in front and behind it, whilst passing
them through the comb. The threading of the strings through the comb
decides the number there will be to the inch, so they must be put
through at the required distance apart.

The upper roller is next given a complete turn, which will make the
metal pin and the threads that are round it secure in the groove. The
winding up must be continued until only about three inches of the
warp-string hang below the lower roller. Some kind of tension must be
applied to the threads whilst this winding is going on, or it will be
done irregularly; a hand, or several hands, holding it, answers the
purpose well enough.

The next process is to fix the threads securely in the lower roller. The
difficulty here lies in getting the placing and tension of the threads
between the two rollers exactly regular and even. If some were slack and
others tight it would be very awkward to correct afterwards, and
impossible to weave upon properly if incorrect.

[Illustration: Fig. 178.]

Fig. 178 shows a practical method by which the warp may be fixed in the
lower roller, but any contrivance will do that gains the required
result. To carry out the fixing as in the diagram, the roller must be
turned so that the groove comes just at the centre in the front. Four
lines of warp-thread are then fixed from end to end of the roller, two
above and two below the groove. Each warp-string in turn is now threaded
in and out of these cross lines, as shown in the diagram. This places
them in regular order, at the correct distance apart, and keeps them at
very nearly the same tension throughout. The metal pin is now placed in
the groove and pushes the threads before it. It must be temporarily made
firm there by string tied round the roller at intervals.

The next process is to tie the warp-threads in knots, either two or four
together, just where they emerge below the pin. This prevents any giving
way, and if the threads are pulled just equally tight immediately before
the knotting, the tension of the entire warp will be the same. The lower
roller is next turned round until the metal pin is made quite firm in
its place by the warp-threads passing across the face of the groove.
The warp will now be fixed in the loom as shown in the drawing in fig.
170.

The placing of the coats upon the coat-stave is the next part of the
preparatory work. Commence by fixing a line of warp-thread along the
exterior side of the coat-stave, making it secure to the bar at both
ends. The coats, encircling the stave and a thread of warp, are fixed to
this string by a kind of buttonhole stitch (see fig. 179). It is
important that each loop should be of exactly the same size; this can be
ensured by temporarily fixing a rod across the loom at the point where
the loops will encircle the warp-thread, and then taking the loop round
this bar as well as round the thread.

[Illustration: Fig. 179.]

To commence making the coats, take a long needleful of warp-thread and
secure the end of it to the string at the right-hand end, and then make
about three small looped stitches upon it (see needle in progress in the
diagram); next, instead of making another of the same stitches, take the
thread down below the stave, let it encircle the first thread of the
back leaf and then be brought up over the coat-stave and string and be
looped under the thread to complete the stitch (see B). Usually a long
and a short stitch are taken alternately, but the number of short ones
may be varied. This process is continued until all the threads of the
back leaf are encircled each by a loop.

A new length of thread must be knotted on to the last one as it gets
used up. The weavers' knot, which is shown on p. 291, might be used for
the purpose. It would be made use of also if by chance the warp-thread
were broken, for it is a knot specially good for the purpose.

When the coats are completed there are still one or two preparations to
be made before actually commencing to weave. Either a metal rod or a
long narrow piece of wood must now be threaded in and out of the
warp-strings and placed in position at the base. This rod can be seen
properly placed in position in fig. 179 in front of the lower cylinder.
This is put there to keep the lines of the woof horizontal when they are
being beaten down by the comb.

Next wind on a bobbin some warp-thread similar to that already on the
loom, or, if that happens to be very coarse, let this be a little finer.
Now weave two courses with this warp-thread and beat it down with the
comb, leaving the woof during the process rather loose. The technique of
weaving with all its difficulties is discussed in Chapter XVIII. When
two of the warp-thread courses are complete, insert either the pointed
end of the bobbin or a blunt needle between the warp-threads below the
woven portion, and if necessary move the warp-strings a little to or fro
until they are equally separated each from the other all along the line.
Next weave about four more courses of the woof; these will serve to keep
the arranged warp-threads still more firmly in place. Then with a red
pencil rule a horizontal line straight across the warp-strings about
one-third of an inch above the woven portion. Wind on another bobbin
some wool and weave it to and fro until the space between the woven
portion and the red line is filled in. Between each course the comb must
beat the woof-threads firmly down. It is often necessary to weave over
some portions of the surface more than over others as the threads pack
down tighter in some parts. The loom should be now in perfect order for
commencing work. The preparatory weaving that has been done is often
useful afterwards as a selvedge.

It is necessary to have a coloured drawing of the design for frequent
reference whilst the work is in progress; also a tracing of the outline
must be marked upon the warp-threads for the worker's further guidance.
The tracing upon the threads must be a reflection of the pattern owing
to the fact that the work is done from the back. It does not affect the
matter if the design is a symmetrical one, but to find the lions of
England facing the wrong way in some completed piece of heraldic work
would be most annoying. In order to get a tracing of the design upon the
threads, a sheet of paper, with a distinct outline of the pattern upon
it, must be attached, possibly by pinning, to the further side of the
warp-threads, exactly where the weaving is to take place. The outline
will be clearly perceivable through the threads, and the next process is
to take pen and Indian ink and make a dot upon each warp-thread in
sequence round the outline of the pattern. When this is completed, the
tracing-paper can be removed, and the dots upon the warp must be taken
all round each thread instead of marking one side only. The marking
round is done by holding a warp-thread between the finger and thumb,
placing the side of the nib against one of the dots, and then twisting
the thread to and fro against it. All the marks upon the first thread
are treated in succession in this way, then the next thread is taken up
and treated in similar fashion, and so on until all are done. Fig. 180
shows a leaf marked upon the warp-threads in readiness for working.
This marking should be clear, sharp, and decided, all the lines being
taken horizontally round, as in fig. 180; if the pattern seems to run up
a thread, a mark just half-way up is sufficient guide. In a piece of
work of any size the tracing must be done, a part at a time, for the
threads moving slightly when the warp is unwound and the web wound up
may displace the marks and make the guiding lines incorrect.

[Illustration: Fig. 180.]




CHAPTER XVIII

THE TECHNIQUE OF WEAVING

  Weaving--Commencing and Fastening Off--The Interlocking Stitch--Fine
  Drawing--Shading--Added After-stitches.


The way in which the woof threading in and out of the warp makes the web
is shown at C, fig. 179. Here the woof has been taken once to and fro; a
movement called a weft or a course, one way only, goes by the name of a
half pass or a shoot. By the use of the cross stave for one direction,
and of the coats for the other, the tediousness of the process of
darning in and out and so picking up the right threads is avoided. It is
not always practical to make use of these appliances; for instance, in
working over only two or three threads it may not be worth while, but
when they can be made use of the work is done twice as rapidly by their
help.

The bobbin enters the loom rather high up, for there the division of
threads is greatest. One hand starts the bobbin upon its journey, the
other hand, entering between the divided warp-threads, takes it on and
out as required. Sometimes the bobbin has to go the entire way between
the leaves, and at others it may be only over two or three threads, this
depending upon the pattern. To enable the bobbin to make the return
passage, the warp must be redivided, the threads that are at the back
must be brought to the front; this is managed by the help of the
coats--a bunch of them is taken in the hand in order to pull forward the
threads to which they are attached. This can be done by sections all
along the line, or just in one part of it if it be so required.

The weft is almost always taken in horizontal lines to and fro. The
exceptions to this rule occur when it is very evident that to run up
and down a narrow slanting line from end to end is far simpler than to
work up in a horizontal zigzag fashion along it.

About an inch of thread is left at the end and at the commencement of
each length of weft; these are secured by the tight packing down of the
threads above them, so there is as a rule no need for any knot or
fastening off, which would be necessary only in the case of commencing
or ending off round a single thread, but it is important for the future
durability of the work to see that the ends are secured. Sometimes a
commencement or a finish is made just where a natural division of the
fabric occurs; in this case, the end of thread would not be secure, for
it might work loose or appear upon the right side. This can usually be
avoided by commencing a little further along the line. The few times
that fastening off or on is necessary, the thread can be run into the
part already woven with a smaller needle, or else be knotted on to a
loose end of wool.

The bobbins not actually in use hang down fixed as in lace work by a
half-hitch. Fig. 181 shows this in process of making; the loop is passed
from the finger on to the bobbin; it will unwind as wanted and yet hold
firm whilst hanging down. The thread is always carried, if practicable,
from one place to where it is next required, in order to avoid
unnecessary breaking off. Tapestry is sometimes woven with both sides
alike, which means only that all the ends must be cut close off. It is
said that work so treated is quite durable.

[Illustration: Fig. 181.]

Special care must be taken that the weft is turned neatly round at the
margins, because if it is at all loose there the work has a ragged,
untidy appearance. This applies also to any turnings that may occur in
other parts due to the carrying out of the pattern; if in these places
the thread is too loose upon the warp, the fabric will be uneven and
pushed out of place; if on the other hand the thread there is too tight,
the slits will gape, and if these are afterwards closed by stitching,
the entire material will be drawn in. A new thread is never commenced
actually at the margin, for it would then be seen upon the right side;
it is quite easy to avoid this happening by commencing an inch further
in. This may entail beginning in a direction which is apparently wrong
for picking up the proper threads, that is, those not picked up in the
row below; but this must happen at times, and the work packs down and
quite prevents the warp showing, as it might be inclined to do in such a
case. It is sometimes at the margin a good plan to pick up two
warp-threads together, for this emphasises the edge rather pleasantly;
this might be advisable in carrying out a long ribbon-like border of any
kind.

After each shoot, the point of the bobbin, the comb, or maybe the
fingers, should press down the woof to make it lie close upon the row
before, and so entirely cover up the warp. Fig. 182 shows the comb in
action, and also the bobbins hanging. The weft must be left a little
slack along the line for this purpose, and some experience is required
in order to leave just the right slackness. The turn at the edge is
arranged first, and then the thread eased evenly along its length in
readiness for being pressed down; it must have the appearance not of
running straight across the warp-strings, but of lying loosely round
them. For packing down a long line, much more play of weft is required
than for a short one.

[Illustration: Fig. 182.]

The usual fault with beginners is to draw the web too tight here and
there. This is a fault to be specially avoided, for it causes the fabric
to be drawn in, and to vary in width, spoiling its appearance and making
the threads difficult to work upon; also the packing down of the weft
could not be properly done, which would cause the warp-threads to be
exposed in parts.

The thoroughness of this packing down of the weft is for several reasons
very important. The durability of the work is much affected by it, both
for the securing of the ends of wool already mentioned, and for the
making of a strong, well-knit piece of fabric. Another reason is, that
the drawing of the various forms in the design may be made incorrect, in
this way: suppose an apple were woven in, apparently correctly, but the
wefts were not pressed down thoroughly, the weaving and packing down of
the wefts above it would be sure to press the part underneath closer
together, and the effect of this would be to make the round apple assume
a flattened oval shape, and cause similar changes throughout the work.

It has already been mentioned that wherever a change of colour occurs
vertically, that is, in the direction of the warp-threads, there results
of necessity a division or slit in the web; the slit, which may be of
any length, if noticeable, must be closed. This can be done whilst the
weaving is in progress by a method of interlocking the two wefts as they
meet, or else by stitching up at the back when the work is finished. The
latter way is called fine drawing, and must be very carefully done,
especially with large tapestries.

Both methods are used; the first takes longer, but is the most durable.
Old and worn tapestries will usually be seen to have given way where
this stitching up at the back has taken place. In small pieces of work,
however, there is not much likelihood of strain, so the oversewing at
the back answers fairly well. The two ways can be used in conjunction.
Supposing a border, owing to its being of a different colour, had to be
joined the entire length of the work, the interlocking stitches might be
made at intervals of about half an inch, and when the work was finished
the oversewing at the back might be taken the entire length.

[Illustration: Fig. 183.]

Fig. 183 is a diagram illustrating the way in which the wefts may be
interlocked whilst the weaving goes on. Examination of the drawing will
probably be sufficient explanation; however, interlocking is effected
thus: Commencing at the base, run a weft of the darker wool to and fro,
leaving it slack at the turning point. A half pass of the
lighter-coloured woof is then run through, it is threaded in an upward
direction through the slack loop of the darker wool, waits there whilst
another weft of the darker colour is worked, and then is threaded down
through the second loop that has been formed, and returns to the
starting-point. It then comes back again and is threaded upwards through
this same loop, and waits, as before, for another to be formed, and
returns back through it--and so on. If this is done properly, no change
is visible on the right side. The joined weft will last as long as any
other part of the weaving.

The process of stitching up at the back is simply an oversewing with
silk or other strong thread. The stitches must be rather close, drawing
the edges just sufficiently together, and they must not show through to
the right side. The stitching together should be done while the work is
on the loom, since the web would then be in less danger of pulling out
of shape.

[Illustration: Fig. 184.]

Shading in tapestry weaving is carried out by a hatching process which
is most simply explained by a diagram (fig. 184). The difficulty is not
in the working, but in getting the form of the shadow or light correctly
expressed. There is no need for fine gradation of colour and tone, for
the shading looks best when carried out simply and boldly, but the
drawing of it should be decided and good. The above figure gives but one
intermediary tone in shading from one colour to another, which is the
ancient method of working; at the present day the weavers in the
_Manufacture des Gobelins_ employ several other intermediary tones, thus
allowing of finer gradation; possibly however these fine gradations are
not of such great importance, and so need not have an unnecessary amount
of attention and time devoted to their accomplishment.

The student will do well to examine fine examples and make careful
drawings from them, since this will teach the right way of going to work
better than anything else can. Fig. 185 is simply a shaded leaf taken at
random from a piece of weaving; the same leaf was shown in outline in
fig. 180, so the two show the commencement and completion of the same
piece. It will be noticed upon studying tapestry that usually all the
light parts of a work are hatched with the same colour, often a buff
shade, those of rich tapestries with gold thread. This sameness of
colour throughout gives unity to the work.

[Illustration: Fig. 185.]

Sometimes after the weaving is completed a few finishing touches can be
satisfactorily put in by means of single stitches taken through the
fabric with a sharp-pointed embroidery needle. The dots representing the
seeds upon a strawberry could be stitched in afterwards in this way, for
to insert them while the work is going on would be very tedious. This
kind of thing must not be overdone, however, for the stitches are apt,
unless very deftly treated, to have a laid-on look, and care must be
taken not to mar the evenly ribbed effect, which is one of the
characteristics of tapestry.

[Illustration: Fig. 186.]

This weaving is a most fascinating kind of work, as will be found upon a
trial. The simplest patterns look very interesting when woven, and, on
the other hand, the work can be carried to any degree of complexity that
the worker desires. For a first trial a piece might be done with no
attempt at shading; even one such as that illustrated at fig. 186 would
be suitable. This example happens to be a form particularly easy for
carrying out in weaving. The worker should begin at the lower right-hand
corner and work the successive flights of steps diagonally, as shown by
the unfinished portion of the diagram.

In the way of actual technique there is in the art of tapestry weaving
not nearly as much to be learnt as there is in embroidery, for there are
no varieties of methods and of stitch to be acquired; still for a person
to become a skilled weaver, capable of carrying out large wall hangings,
is a thing very difficult of attainment--indeed it is said that it takes
as long as fifteen years of constant application to acquire the
necessary knowledge and skill. To carry out designs of less magnitude
and intricacy is a very different matter; success in this smaller way is
far more easily attained, and is well within the reach of unprofessional
people.




NOTES ON THE COLLOTYPE PLATES


PLATE I.--_A Detail from a XIVth Century English Cope._--The figure of
Christ which is shown in this plate is taken from a central group,
representing the coronation of the Virgin, in a famous cope in the
possession of Colonel J. E. Butler-Bowdon. The ground is of rich red
silk velvet; the face, hands, and linings of the draperies are worked in
silk in split stitch; the drapery, crown, and surrounding architectural
decoration are in gold thread couched by the early method. The twisted
column with oak leaves and the five lobed arch are both characteristic
of English work of this period. Note the use of pearls in the lion's
head and in the acorns, also the charmingly drawn bird. An interesting
technical point displayed in this example is that the work is done
directly on to the velvet ground, instead of being first worked upon
linen and afterwards as a completed piece of embroidery applied to the
velvet. The method in use here, if at all possible, is always the most
satisfactory.

Size of detail, about eleven inches by six.


PLATE II.--_Two Heads from a XIVth Century English Cope preserved at
Steeple Aston, Oxfordshire._--The cope is not now in its original state,
for it has been divided into two parts and used for the decoration of
the altar. The background is composed of a thin greyish white silk
backed with a stronger material. The white may have been originally some
other colour; it is, however, in its present state, very beautiful and
harmonious. The drawing of the features in this cope is remarkably
refined and true to nature (the reproduction does not do full justice to
the original). The ancient method, of working the faces in split stitch
commencing with the middle of the cheek and continuing spirally round,
then afterwards pressing the centre down by some mechanical means, is
plainly to be observed here. The effective drawing of the tresses of
hair in alternate lines of two colours is well seen in the left-hand
example. The gold thread which is freely made use of all over the cope,
upon the draperies, nimbi, and surrounding foliage, is marvellously
bright and sparkling, although nearly six hundred years old. The
manufacture of untarnishable gold for embroidery purposes seems beyond
present day enterprise.

Width of nimbus, two and a half inches.


PLATE III.--_A small portion of a Quilted Coverlet, probably of Sicilian
work. Date about 1400._--In this interesting example of quilting, which
is exhibited in the Victoria and Albert Museum, the ground is composed
of a buff-coloured linen. The raised effect is obtained by an
interpadding of wool. The background is run over irregularly with white
thread, in order to keep it more or less flat, and the design, which is
in fairly high relief, is outlined with brown thread. The entire
coverlet is embroidered with scenes from the life of Tristan. Tristan
frequently engaged in battle against King Languis, the oppressor of his
country. This detail represents "How King Languis (of Ireland) sent to
Cornwall for the tribute."

Size of detail, two feet by three.


PLATE IV.--_A portion of an Altar Cloth Band, embroidered in coloured
silk threads upon a white linen ground._--This is a piece of German XVth
century work exhibited in the Victoria and Albert Museum. It is
embroidered almost entirely in one stitch, which might be described as a
variety of herring-bone. The design is made up of two motives which
repeat alternately along the band--a square shaped tree and a circle,
the latter decorated with floral sprays and, in the centre of it, a
group of emblems. Down the middle of the design runs a series of names
in fine Gothic lettering--"Ursula" and "Augustinus" being the two that
occur in this plate.

Width of embroidered band, four and a half inches.


PLATE V.--_A portion of a late XVth century Orphrey, embroidered with
the arms of Henry Stafford, Duke of Buckingham._--The ground is of red
velvet, and is embroidered with gold thread and coloured silks. The two
shields here represented bear the arms of the families of de Bohun and
Fitzwalter. Each shield has for supporters two swans, and is surrounded
by floral sprays. The Stafford knot unites the sprays between the
shields. The chasuble upon which this orphrey is placed is made of a
lovely brocaded silk decorated with falcons, peahens, and roses.

Width of embroidered orphrey, about eight inches.


PLATE VI.--_A detail of Foliage taken from a late XVIth century
Embroidered Picture representing the story of Daphne._--The picture is
worked in coloured wools and silks in cross stitch upon canvas, and is
an admirable example of this kind of work, and this particular detail is
a good illustration of a very satisfactory treatment of foliage. The
whole panel measures about seven feet by two, and is exhibited in the
Victoria and Albert Museum.

Height of detail, ten and a half inches.


PLATE VII.--_An Embroidered XVIIth or XVIIIth century Wool-work
Curtain._--This curtain, the property of Miss Killick, is a pretty
example of a small crewel-work hanging. The design is of a type that was
often used upon hangings of that period. It is embroidered with brightly
coloured wools upon a white linen ground, and is in a good state of
preservation. Much ingenuity as well as variety of stitching are shown
in the execution of the work.

Size of curtain, about five feet by three.


PLATE VIII.--_A portion of a large XVIIth century Linen Hanging
embroidered with coloured wools._--In both design and execution this
curtain is remarkably fine. The entire hanging is about eighteen feet in
width by seven in height. It is embroidered with a conventional
representation of a forest; in the branches of the trees lodge all kinds
of birds and beasts. The type of design shown in this plate and in the
last is derived from Eastern work; its introduction into England was due
to the increase of trade with oriental nations, which developed about
this time.

Size of detail, about six feet by four.


PLATE IX.--_Cutwork Lettering taken from a XVIIth century English
Sampler._--The letters and surrounding decoration shown in this example
of cut or open work are built up on a square network of warp and weft
threads that were left at regular intervals throughout the space, when
the unnecessary threads were withdrawn, and then covered with a kind of
darning stitch. The letters are worked in buttonhole stitch, each fresh
line being taken into the heading of the last one. The other parts of
the work are carried out in either buttonhole or overcast stitch. The
complete sampler is a long narrow strip of linen, across which run
specimen bands of various kinds of work. It is exhibited in the Victoria
and Albert Museum.

Width of cutwork detail, six inches.


PLATE X.--_An Embroidered Sampler._--The work is carried out in coloured
silks in minute cross-stitch and occasional rows of satin stitch, upon a
ground of fine single-thread canvas. It is dated 1798, and was worked by
Alice Knight, the author's great-grandmother. The birds, trees, and
flowers, the charming little border patterns, and the comical cats
standing on either hillocks or housetops, are all characteristic of
sampler work. Working the sampler was once the regular introduction to
mending, marking, and embroidery, and one was done by almost every
XVIIIth century child as a part of education, indeed the practice of
working samplers was continued some decades into the XIXth century.

Actual size of original, eighteen inches by twelve.


PLATE XI.--_An Example of Persian Embroidery._--Formerly in the
collection of Lord Leighton, and now in that of the London County
Council's Central School of Arts and Crafts. The embroidery is carried
out almost entirely in chain stitch with brilliantly coloured silks,
upon a fine semi-transparent ground. The flowers that appear dark in the
reproduction are worked in a bright rosy red, others are yellow and
orange, and the leaves are in pale grey green outlined with a dark
myrtle shade of the same.

Size of panel, about five feet by four.


PLATE XII.--_A Detail from an Embroidered Tablecloth._--The entire
surface of this fine white linen cloth is strewn with a profusion of
beautiful flowers, worked in floss silk in bright colours. The flowers
were all drawn directly from nature by the worker, Mrs. W. R. Lethaby.


PLATE XIII.--_An Embroidered Altar Frontal, executed by Miss May Morris,
designed by Mr. Philip Webb._--The work is carried out with floss silk
in bright colours and gold thread, both background and pattern being
embroidered. The five crosses, that are placed at regular intervals
between the vine leaves, are couched in gold passing upon a silvery silk
ground.


PLATE XIV.--_Two Pieces of Ancient Weaving taken from Tombs in
Egypt._--These are exhibited in the Victoria and Albert Museum. The
upper example is about five inches square, dated IIIrd to VIIth century,
Egypto-Roman work, and is said to have decorated a child's tunic. It is
woven in coloured silks upon a green ground; the colours are still
wonderfully fresh and bright. Weavers may see various interesting
technical as well as other points in this early work. For instance, how
the difficulty of the narrow detached vertical lines, necessitated by
change of colour in the weft, has been overcome by using surface
stitching instead, the easier horizontal lines being woven in the usual
way. A good deal of this surface stitching can be seen in the ancient
weaving; sometimes an entire pattern is picked out by this method, the
ground having been first woven all over in some plain colour.

The lower border pattern is a band of weaving about two inches in width,
Saracenic work. It is woven in coloured silks and linen thread upon the
actual warp threads of the garment that it decorates. The weft threads
were probably omitted for the space of one and a half inches when the
fabric was being made in order that some ornamentation might be put in,
in this way. Some of the weft threads have perished, leaving the warp
exposed to sight; this enables the student to understand better the
manner in which it was carried out.


PLATE XV.--_An Example of a Tapestry Field strewn with Flowers._--This
kind of decoration is characteristic of many tapestry grounds, for the
style is particularly suited to the method of work, and very happy in
result. The detail shown in this plate is taken from a piece of late
XVIth century Flemish work; it carries on, however, a much earlier
tradition. The ground is of a dark blue colour, and the flowers varied
as in nature.


PLATE XVI.--_A Tapestry Bag, woven in coloured silk and gold thread by
the Author._--The ground is woven with black silk, decorated with gold
at the top and base. The centre panel is carried out in brightly
coloured silks and gold thread. The various compartments are filled with
representations of flowers, birds, and fishes, upon an alternating
purple and blue background. The dividing lines are of gold thread.

Size of bag, ten inches by six.




THE COLLOTYPE PLATES

[Illustration: Plate I.--A detail from a XIVth Century English Cope.]

[Illustration: Plate II.--Two Heads from a XIVth Century English Cope
preserved at Steeple Aston, Oxfordshire.]

[Illustration: Plate III.--A small portion of a Quilted Coverlet,
probably of Sicilian work. Date about 1400.]

[Illustration: Plate IV.--A portion of an Altar Cloth Band, embroidered
in coloured silk threads upon a white linen ground.]

[Illustration: Plate V.--A portion of a late XVth Century Orphrey,
embroidered with the arms of Henry Stafford, Duke of Buckingham.]

[Illustration: Plate VI.--A detail of Foliage taken from a late XVIth
Century Embroidered Picture, representing the story of Daphne.]

[Illustration: Plate VII.--An Embroidered XVIIth or XVIIIth Century
Wool-work Curtain.]

[Illustration: Plate VIII.--A portion of a large XVIIth Century Linen
Hanging, embroidered with coloured wools.]

[Illustration: Plate IX.--Cutwork Lettering taken from a XVIIth Century
English Sampler.]

[Illustration: Plate X.--An Embroidered Sampler.]

[Illustration: Plate XI.--An example of Persian Embroidery.]

[Illustration: Plate XII.--A detail from an Embroidered Tablecloth.
Designed and executed by Mrs. W. R. Lethaby.]

[Illustration: Plate XIII.--An Embroidered Altar Frontal, executed by
Miss May Morris, designed by Mr. Philip Webb.]

[Illustration: Plate XIV.--Two pieces of Ancient Weaving taken from
Tombs in Egypt.]

[Illustration: Plate XV.--An example of a Tapestry Field strewn with
Flowers.]

[Illustration: Plate XVI.--A Tapestry Bag, woven in coloured silk and
gold thread by the Author.]




INDEX


Altar-cloth band (Plate IV.)

Altar frontal (Plate XIII.)

Appliances, 34

Appliances and materials for tapestry weaving, 315

Applied embroidery, 174

Applied work, 172


Background, the, 46

Bag, tapestry (Plate XVI.)

Beads, 50

Bobbins, 321

Braid work, 166

_Broderie anglaise_, 222

Bullions, 235, 256


Canvas work, 147

Coat-stave, 333

Collotypes, descriptive notes on, 356

Colour, 72

Comb, 322, 344

Cope at Steeple Aston (Plate II.), 357

Cope, detail from XIVth century English (Plate I.), 356

Cord, 40, 271

Cord-making appliance, 39, 273

Cotton, 49

Couching, 164

Couching gold, ancient method of, 238

Couching gold, usual method, 250

Coverlet, quilted Sicilian (Plate III.), 358

Crewel work, 103

Curtain, XVIIth century (Plate VIII.), 361

Curtain, XVIIth century wool-work (Plate VII.), 361

Cutwork, 213, 221


Darned netting, 210

Darning, 196

Darning, pattern, 197

Design, 30, 51

Design for tapestry, 311

Designing, pattern, 51

Directions, practical, 292

Drawn thread work, 213

Dressing the coat-stave, 333


Egyptian weaving (Plate XIV.), 364

Emblems, 270

Embroidery frame used as a loom, 323

Embroidery, washing, 297

Embroidery with gold and silver threads, 229


Figure work, 69

Fine drawing, 346

Flax threads, 49

Foliage, detail of (Plate VI.), 360

Frames, embroidery, 35

Frame work, 301

Fringes, 280


Garniture of work, the, 271

Gold and silver threads, embroidery with, 229

Gold thread embroidery, 229


Heraldry, 268


Inlaid work, 180

Interlocking stitch, 347


Knife, 43

Knots, 118, 286

Knotted cord, 277

Knotted thread, 119


Laid work, 168

Lettering, 259

Lettering, cutwork, XVIIth century (Plate IX.), 362

Linen, 47

Loom, 315


Madeira work, 222

Marking, 262

Materials, 44

Materials and appliances for tapestry weaving, 315

Materials for gold work, 233

Methods of work, 164

Monograms, 259


Needles, 35, 322


Objects to work, 31, 314

Open-work fillings, 201

_Opus plumarium_, 101

Orphrey, XVth century (Plate V.), 359


Past work, study of, 28, 53

Paste, embroidery, 295

Patch work, 183

Pattern darning, 197

Pattern designing, 51

Pattern tracing, 328

Patterns, transference of, 42, 292

Persian embroidery (Plate XI.), 363

_Petit point_ pictures, 149

Picots, 143

Piercer, 43

Practical directions, 292

Precious stones, 50

Pricker, 42

Puckered work, cure of, 298

Purls, 256


Quilting, 189


Raised gold work, 253

Raised work, 192


Sampler, embroidered (Plate X.), 362

Samplers, 148

Satin, 48

Scissors, 35

Shading, 68, 348

Silk, 48, 327

Silk threads, 49

Silver and gold threads, embroidery with, 229

Spindle, 43

Stands, embroidery frame, 37

Stitches, 75

Stitch, back, 107

Stitch, basket, 131

Stitch, braid, 88

Stitch, bullion, 121

Stitch, buttonhole, 107

Stitch, cable chain, 90

Stitch, chain, 77

Stitch, chequered chain, 84

Stitch, Cretan, 134

Stitch, cross, 152

Stitch, double back stitch, 127

Stitch, feather stitch, 129

Stitch, fishbone, 131

Stitch, French knot, 120

Stitch, Gobelin, 154

Stitch, herring-bone, 126

Stitch, Holbein, 159

Stitch, insertion, various, 139

Stitch, interlocking, 347

Stitch, Irish, 155

Stitch, knot, 124

Stitch, knotted chain, 92

Stitch, long and short, 99

Stitch, open chain, 86

Stitch, overcast, 106

Stitch, plait, 156

Stitch, rococo, 162

Stitch, rope, 86

Stitch, Roumanian, 136

Stitch, satin, 95

Stitch, split, 94

Stitch, stem, 101

Stitch, stroke, 159

Stitch, tailor's buttonhole, 109

Stitch, tambour, 77

Stitch, tent, 153

Stitch, twisted chain, 85

Stitch, two-sided Italian, 156

Stitch, zigzag chain, 83


Tablecloth, embroidered (Plate XII.), 364

Tambour frame, 39

Tapestry bag (Plate XVI.), 365

Tapestry, example (Plate XV.), 366

Tapestry weaving, introduction to, 307

Tassels, 283

Tarnish of gold and silver threads, 237

Thimbles, 35

Threads, 49, 299, 327

Threads, gold and silver, 229

Tools, 34

Tools for tapestry weaving, 315

Tracing patterns, 42, 328

Tracing patterns on warp, 336

Transferring patterns, methods of, 292

Transferring patterns, requisites for, 42


Velvet, 48


Warp, 326

Warping the loom, 328

Washing embroidery, 297

Weaving, 339

Weaving, Egyptian (Plate XIV.), 364

Weaving, tapestry, 305

Work, garniture of, 271

Work, methods of, 164

Work, preparations for, 328

Work, protection and preservation of, 292

Wools, 49, 327


Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & CO.
Edinburgh & London




       *       *       *       *       *




EMBROIDERY MATERIALS

GEORGE KENNING & SON, GOLDSMITHS, GOLD LACEMEN, AND EMBROIDERERS, are
the actual manufacturers of all materials that are best for Embroidery
of any and every description.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

The following are a few articles from the great variety they
manufacture: Threads, Tambours, Braids, Laces, and Cords in Gold,
Silver, Tinsel, and Aluminium; also Spangles, Sequins, Ornaments, and
Beads of every possible variety.

Please insist on your Draper or Fancy Warehouseman supplying only
materials manufactured by GEORGE KENNING & SON.

MANUFACTORY: 1/4 LITTLE BRITAIN, E.C.

_And at Liverpool, Glasgow, and Manchester._

RIBBON WEAVING FACTORY, COVENTRY


       *       *       *       *       *


J. MAYGROVE & CO. LTD.

_MILLS_--          _WAREHOUSE_--
ST. ALBANS.       51 ALDERSGATE STREET, LONDON, E.C.

_Manufacturers of Silks for Weaving and Embroidery._

_For REALLY RELIABLE BOILING and UNFADING DYES._

MAYGROVE'S DUCHESSE FLOSS.

    MAYGROVE'S TWISTED EMBROIDERY.

        MAYGROVE'S FILOSELLE, &c.

UNEQUALLED FOR LUSTRE, PERMANENCE, AND ARTISTIC GRADUATIONS OF COLOUR.

READY FOR USE.


FOR WEAVING.

CHINA TRAM                 1000 Shades.
TUSSAH TRAM AND ORGANZINE   500 Shades.
ORIENTAL FLOCHE             500 Shades.
WORSTED YARNS--COTTON YARNS.


_STOCKED READY FOR DYEING._

Organzines, Sewings, Flosses, Twists, and SPUN SILKS.
WORSTED Cords, Genappes, Mohairs, &c. &c.


       *       *       *       *       *


PLASTER CASTS

LETTERING FOR LETTER CUTTERS BY A. E. R. GILL

Plaster Casts of the Stones shown on the Collotype Plates, numbers 13,
14, and 15, in the Portfolio, "Manuscript and Inscription Letters," by
Edward Johnston, price 3s. 6d. net, are obtainable from the Publisher,
or direct from Messrs. C. SMITH & SONS, Moulders, 15 Kentish Town Road,
London, N.W., at the following prices:--

_Roman Capital Letters (Incised)._        }
_"Lower-case" Italics, &c. (Incised)._    }  12s. _net per set of three._
_"Raised" Letters, Capitals, &c._         }

PACKED--DELIVERED FREE IN LONDON--CARRIAGE FORWARD FOR COUNTRY

These Casts being facsimiles of the actual stones make the best kind of
models for Letter Cutters and Sculptors, and all who have to do with
Inscriptions. Being small, they are easily handled.

The Portfolio, "Manuscript and Inscription Letters," by Edward Johnston,
is intended as a working supplement to his handbook, "Writing and
Illuminating, and Lettering," price 6s. 6d. net. It contains 16 plates
in all, measuring 9-7/8 × 12-3/8 inches, with full descriptions and
notes.

JOHN HOGG, _Publisher_, 13 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, E.C.


       *       *       *       *       *


ROBERT S. RONALD

Decorator and Upholsterer

[Illustration]

Loom Maker to the Royal School of Art, South Kensington

Table or Pedestal Looms to Order

Prices on Application

Office and Works--
ST. ANN'S HILL, WANDSWORTH,
LONDON, S.W.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE ARTISTIC CRAFTS SERIES


BOOKBINDING AND THE CARE OF BOOKS. By DOUGLAS COCKERELL. Third Edition.
122 Drawings by NOEL ROOKE. 8 Pages Collotype Reproductions. 352 pp. 5s.
net.

EXTRACT FROM _The Times_.

  "... A capital proof of the reasoned thoroughness in workmanship,
  which is the first article in the creed of those who ... are
  attempting to carry into practice the industrial teaching of Ruskin
  and William Morris."


SILVERWORK AND JEWELLERY. By H. WILSON. Second Edition. 280 Diagrams by
the Author. 32 Pages of Collotype Reproductions. 500 pp. 6s. 6d. net.

Containing special chapters, fully illustrated, based on demonstrations
and with notes by Professor UNNO BISEI and Professor T. KOBAYASHI,
of the Imperial Fine Art College at Tokyo, giving the traditional method
of Casting, Damascening, Incrustation, Inlaying, Engraving, and
Metal Colouring still practised in Japan, also on Niello, the Making
of Boxes and Card Cases, with chapters on Egyptian and Oriental
methods of work.


WOODCARVING: DESIGN AND WORKMANSHIP. By GEORGE JACK. 79 Drawings by the
Author. 16 Pages of Collotype Reproductions. 320 pp. 5s. net.

EXTRACT FROM _The Builders' Journal_.

  "Undoubtedly the best guide to Woodcarving extant.... A practical
  work, written with clearness and literary power by a practical man
  ... of great artistic talent.... The illustrations are excellent."


STAINED GLASS WORK. By C. W. WHALL. 73 Diagrams by Two of His
Apprentices. 16 Pages of Collotype Reproductions. 392 pp. 5s. net.

EXTRACT FROM _The Scotsman_.

  "It provides an exposition at once instructive and interesting of
  the workshop practice of the craft ... of Stained Glass, animated
  throughout by an encouraging and cheerful sense of the dignity and
  the elevating influence of such an occupation."


EMBROIDERY AND TAPESTRY WEAVING. By Mrs. A. H. CHRISTIE. 178 Diagrams
and Illustrations by the Author. 16 Pages of Collotype Reproductions.
320 pp. 6s. net. (_Third Edition._)

EXTRACT FROM _The Pall Mall Gazette_.

  "Mrs. Christie has performed her task to admiration, ... and her
  lucid explanations of various kinds of stitches ... should be of
  value to all workers at embroidery or tapestry weaving and to
  novices anxious to learn."


WRITING AND ILLUMINATING, AND LETTERING. By EDWARD JOHNSTON. 227
Illustrations and Diagrams by the Author and NOEL ROOKE. 8 Pages of
Examples in Red and Black. 24 Pages of Collotype Reproductions. 512 pp.
(_Fifth Edition._)

EXTRACT FROM _The Athenæum_.

  "... This book belongs to that extremely rare class in which every
  line bears the impress of complete mastery of the subject. We
  congratulate Mr. Johnston on having produced a work at once original
  and complete."


HAND-LOOM WEAVING. By LUTHER HOOPER. 125 Drawings by the Author and NOEL
ROOKE. Coloured and Collotype Reproductions. 368 pp. 6s. net.

EXTRACT FROM _The Morning Post_.

  "... Every phase and process in weaving is described with so clear
  and careful an exactitude, that, helped as the text is by the
  Author's sketches and diagrams, the reader should have no difficulty
  in conquering with its aid the rudiments of the craft."


PORTFOLIOS (in the Series) already issued.

SCHOOL COPIES AND EXAMPLES. Selected by W. R. LETHABY and A. H.
CHRISTIE. 12 Drawing Copies (1 in colours), with Descriptive
Letterpress. 3s. 6d. net.

MANUSCRIPT AND INSCRIPTION LETTERS. For Schools and Classes and the Use
of Craftsmen. By EDWARD JOHNSTON. With 5 Plates by A. E. R. GILL, 16
Plates in all. Full Notes and Descriptions by the Author. 3s. 6d. net.
(_Second Edition._)


NEW VOLUME IN THE PRESS

HERALDRY FOR CRAFTSMEN AND DESIGNERS

BY

W. H. ST. JOHN HOPE, M.A.

_Further Volumes and Portfolios in preparation._


ON WORKMANSHIP

A LECTURE BY H. WILSON

AUTHOR OF "SILVERWORK AND JEWELLERY"

1s. 6d. net


JOHN HOGG,
13 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMBROIDERY AND TAPESTRY WEAVING***


******* This file should be named 20386-8.txt or 20386-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/3/8/20386



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

