The Project Gutenberg EBook of The American Practical Brewer and Tanner, by 
Joseph Coppinger

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The American Practical Brewer and Tanner

Author: Joseph Coppinger

Release Date: February 25, 2007 [EBook #20663]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRACTICAL BREWER AND TANNER ***




Produced by Robert Cicconetti and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






              THE AMERICAN PRACTICAL BREWER AND TANNER:

                        IN WHICH IS EXHIBITED

                        THE WHOLE PROCESS OF


Brewing without boiling.

Brewing strong Beer with the extract only of the Hop, leaving out the
substance.

A simple method of giving new Beer all the qualities of age, thereby
fitting it for the bottle before it is three weeks old.

A simple method of preventing Beer bursting the bottle.

An economical mode of constructing Vats above ground, possessing the
temperature of the best cellars and thus rendered fireproof.

An economical mode by which every Housekeeper may brew his own Beer.

A method of brewing good Beer from Bran and Shorts, and of preserving
it.

The Bordeaux method of making and preparing Claret Wine for shipping,
which may be successfully applied to the wines of this country,
particularly those of Kaskaskias.

The best method and season for malting Indian Corn, from which alone
good Beer can be made, a process highly important to Brewers.

The best mode of raising Hops.

The best mode of preparing Seed Barley for sowing.

Best construction and aspect of Breweries and Malt Houses in this
country.

The French mode of tanning the heaviest Soal Leather in twenty-one
days, and Calf Skins in three or four. (Highly important.)



                         BY JOSEPH COPPINGER.
                           Practical Brewer.



                              _NEW-YORK_:
                   PRINTED BY VAN WINKLE AND WILEY,
                          No. 3 Wall Street.


                                1815.




Transcriber's Note: Part of the last sentence in Footnote 6 is
illegible and has been marked [remainder of text is illegible]. In
addition, the Contents were moved from the rear to the front of this
text for the convenience of the reader.




CONTENTS.


                                                         Page.

Advertisement                                               3

Preface                                                     5

The best position for placing a brewery and malt
    house, also the best aspect, with different
    arrangements of the vessels                            11

A description of the form and plan of a brewery,
    distribution of the vessels; the most judicious and
    convenient manner of placing them, with a view
    to economy, cleanliness, and effect                    13

Malt house, the best construction of, with proper
    barley lofts, dropping room, and flooring, how,
    and in what manner made, and best likely to last       18

Wooden kilns, how constructed                              23

A new and economical construction of vats for
    keeping beer, which, in this way, may be rendered
    fire proof, whilst at the same time possessing
    the temperature of the best cellars, although
    above ground                                           29

Grinding, how substituted for                              31

Malting                                                    33

Plain practical process of malting                         44

Malting winter barley                                      50

Malting oats                                               ib.

Malting rye                                                ib.

Malting wheat                                              ib.

Indian corn, how malted                                    51

Fermentation                                               54

Hops, how cultivated                                       99

Barley cultivation                                        109

Table beer                                                112

Small beer for shipping                                   113

Keeping table beer                                        114

Small beer of the best kind                               116

Another method to brew small beer                         118

Another process for brewing small beer                    120

Single ale and table beer                                 123

Strong beer                                               126

Table beer, English method of brewing it                  129

Unboiled beer                                             131

Strong beer, brewed with the extract of hops,
    leaving out the substance                             134

Table beer for housekeepers, well worth their
    attention                                             136

Fermenting and cleansing in the same vessel               138

Plate of the worker                                       139

A new method of fermenting strong beer, that will
    produce a pure and good liquor                        140

Process of brewing Windsor ale, on a small scale          142

Reading beer, how brewed                                  145

Two-penny amber beer, as brewed in London                 147

London ale, how brewed                                    149

Windsor ale, on a large scale                             151

Welsh ale, how brewed                                     154

Wirtemberg ale                                            156

Hock                                                      158

Scurvy grass ale                                          160

Dorchester ale                                            162

Porter                                                    165

Porter process No. I.                                     167

Porter process No. II.                                    170

Porter process No. III.                                   172

Porter malt                                               174

Porter colouring                                          176

Strong beer                                               182

Filtering operation (with a Plate)                        189

Returned beer, how to make the most of                    193

To Bring several sorts of beer, when mixed,
    to one uniform taste                                  194

Finings, the best method of preparing them                195

Heading                                                   197

Bottling beer                                             198

Brewing coppers, the best method of setting them          202

Pumps, the best construction of, and how freed
    from ice in winter                                    205

Cleansing casks                                           208

To make mead wine                                         210

To make ginger wine                                       212

To make currant wine                                      213

Yest, how prepared to keep good in any climate            214

To make a substitute for brewer's yest                    217

Another method                                            218

Another method                                            220

Process of making and preparing claret wine
    for shipping, as practiced in Bordeaux and
    its neighbourhood                                     221

Brewing company                                           227

The author's notice about plans and sections of
    elevation for breweries and malt houses               230

French mode of tanning                                    232



_Errata._

In the Advertisement, 4th page, 6th line, first word, for _wine_ read
_vine_; and in the next line, first word, for _it_ read _its produce_.

In page 25, 25th line, the last word should be omitted, and read thus,
_malt or grain intended to be dried on it, requiring less fuel_, &c.

In page 36, 25th line, first word, for _proportion_ read _preparation_.




SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW-YORK, _ss._


BE IT REMEMBERED, that on the fourteenth day of September, in the
fortieth year of the independence of the United States of America,
Joseph Coppinger of the said district, has deposited in this office
the title of a book, the right whereof he claims as proprietor, in the
words and figures following, to wit:

"The American Practical Brewer and Tanner: in which is exhibited the
whole process of Brewing without boiling; Brewing Strong Beer with the
extract only of the Hop, leaving out the substance; a simple method of
giving new Beer all the qualities of age, thereby rendering it fit for
the Bottle before it is three weeks old; a simple method of preventing
Beer bursting the Bottle; an economical mode of constructing Vats
above ground, possessing the temperature of the best Cellars, and thus
rendered fireproof; an economical mode by which every Housekeeper may
brew his own Beer; a method of brewing good Beer from Bran and Shorts,
and of preserving it; the Bordeaux method of making and preparing
Claret Wine for shipping, which may be successfully applied to the
vines of this country, particularly those of Kaskaskias; the best
method and season for malting Indian Corn, from which alone good Beer
can be made, a process highly important to Brewers; the best mode of
raising Hops; the best mode of preparing Seed Barley for sowing; best
construction of Breweries and Malt Houses in this country; the French
mode of tanning the heaviest Soal Leather in twenty-one days, and Calf
Skins in three or four--highly important.
By Joseph Coppinger, Practical Brewer."

In conformity to the act of the Congress of the United States,
entitled "An act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the
copies of maps, charts, and books to the authors and proprietors of
such copies, during the times therein mentioned;" and also to an act
entitled "an act, supplementary to an act, entitled an act for the
encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of maps, charts, and
books, to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the times
therein mentioned, and extending the benefits thereof to the arts of
designing, engraving, and etching historical and other prints."

THERON RUDD,
Clerk of the Southern District of New-York.




ADVERTISEMENT.


Since writing the Preface, I have been induced to make an addition to
this little work, in order to increase its usefulness, by giving the
French mode of tanning, as practised by the famous Mr. Seguine. Of such
importance did the Academy of Arts and Sciences at Paris consider this
improvement, that they thought it worth while to appoint a committee of
their own members to go down to one of the provinces where this
gentleman resides, and there, on the spot, superintend his operations,
which they did with minute attention; and it is from the journal of
their reports to the academy, that the different processes of tanning
leather in this ingenious artist's way are here given; an improvement
that can, no doubt, be successfully applied to that important
manufacture in this country, affording the tanner the opportunity of
turning his capital twelve or fourteen times in a year, instead of
once. This single advantage alone so forcibly recommends its adoption,
particularly in a country like ours, where capital is scarce, that
further comment is unnecessary. I have also added the Bordeaux method
of making and preparing claret wine for shipping, as practised in that
city and its vicinity; which practice may possibly hereafter be
successfully applied to the red wines of this country. The more so,
when it is known that in the reign of Louis XVI., the merchants of
Bordeaux presented a memorial to that monarch, praying him to put a
stop to the importation of the wines of Kaskaskias into France, as
likely, if permitted, to be injurious to the trade of Bordeaux. There
was at that time a College of Jesuits established in that country, the
superiors of which caused the wine to be cultivated with great success,
and quantities of it were at that time sent to France. As that
territory is now in our possession, and its soil and climate peculiarly
favourable to the growth of the grape, which is indigenous there, may
it not be an object well worth the attention of our government, to
encourage and improve the growth of the wine in that section of the
union; which wise measure would, probably, in a few years, supply our
own consumption, and leave a considerable surplus for exportation. To
offer an apology for giving these subjects a place in this publication,
seems wholly unnecessary, when their importance is considered.




PREFACE.


Brewing, in every country, whose soil and climate are congenial to the
production of the raw materials, should be ranked among the first
objects of its domestic and political economy. If any person doubt the
truth of this position, I have only to request him to cast an eye on
England, where the brewing capital is estimated at more than fifteen
millions sterling; and the gross annual revenue, arising from this
capital, at seven million five hundred thousand pounds sterling,
including the hop, malt, and extract duties. Notwithstanding this
enormous excise of 50 per cent. on the brewing capital, what immense
fortunes have been made, and are daily making, in that country, as well
as in Ireland and Scotland, by the intelligent and judicious practice
of this _more than useful art_. Yet how much stronger inducements for
similar establishments in this country, where we have no duty on the
raw materials, or the extract;[1] and where the important article of
hops is raised in as high perfection as in any part of Europe, and
often for one third of the price paid in England. But a still more
important consideration is the health and morals of our population,
which appears to be essentially connected with the progress of the
brewing trade. In proof of this assertion, I will beg leave to state
a well known fact; which is, that in proportion as the consumption
of malt liquors have increased in our large towns and cities, in
that proportion has the health of our fellow citizens improved, and
epidemics and intermittents, become less frequent. The same observation
holds good as respects the country, where it is well known that those
families that brew their own beer, and make a free use of it through
the summer are, in general, all healthy, and preserve their colour;
whilst their less fortunate neighbours, who do not use beer at all, are
devoured by fevers and intermittents. These facts will be less doubted,
when it is known that yest, properly administered, has been found
singularly successful in the cure of fevers. This the practice of the
Rev. Doctor Townsend, in England, places beyond all doubt, where he
states, that in fifty fever cases that occurred in his own parish,
(some of which were of the most malignant kind,) he only missed a cure
in two or three, by administering yest. Having considered the produce
of the brewery as it is connected with health, we may, with equal
propriety, say it is not less so with morals; and its encouragement and
extension, as an object of great national importance, cannot be too
strongly recommended, as the most natural and effectual remedy to the
too great use of ardent spirits, the baneful effects of which are too
generally known, and too extensively felt, to need any particular
description here. The farmer and the merchant will alike find their
account in encouraging and improving the produce of the brewery. The
farmer can raise no crop that will pay him better than hops; as, under
proper management, he may reasonably expect to clear, of a good year,
one hundred dollars per acre. Barley will also prove a good crop,
if proper attention be paid to seed, soil, and time of sowing. The
merchant will alike find his account in encouraging the brewery, from
the many advantages derivable from an extensive export of its produce
to the East and West Indies, South America, the Brazils, but
particularly to Russia, where good beer is in great demand; large
quantities are annually sent there from England, at a much higher rate,
it may be presumed, than we could afford to supply them from this
country. All these considerations united seem forcibly to recommend
giving the breweries of the United States every possible encouragement
and extension. Here, it is but justice to state, that the brewers of
New-York deserve much credit for the high improvement they have made in
the quality of their malt liquors within a few years, which seem to
justify the hope that they will continue these advances to excellence,
until they realise the opinion of Combrune and others, that it is
possible to produce a "_malt wine_."

      [1] Save five per cent. on brewery sales--a war tax.

[Illustration:

A  Malt House.
B  Kiln.
C  Dropping Room.
D  Mill House.
E  Brewery.
F  Working Store.
G  Vat House and Dry Store.
H  Bed Room.
I  Office.
K  Dwelling House.
L  Hop Room.
M  Stable.
N  Brewing Yard.
O  Cooper's Shed.
P  Steep.]




THE AMERICAN PRACTICAL BREWER AND TANNER




_The best position for placing a Brewery and Malt house, also the
best aspect, with different arrangements of the Utensils._


Cleanliness being as essential in the brewery as in the dairy, it is of
the greatest importance, never to lose sight of it in every part of the
operations, and particularly in selecting the ground and soil to place
a brewery on. The situation to be preferred should be an elevated one,
and the soil either sand or gravel, as it is of great importance in the
preservation of beer that the cellars be dry and sufficiently
ventilated by windows properly disposed. If the cellars of the brewery
be under ground, it would be very desirable to have them kept sweet and
clean by properly constructed sewers, without which, pumping by a hand
or a horse power is a poor substitute, as by this means (which we find
too common in breweries) the washings of the cellars have time to
become putrid, particularly in summer, emitting the most offensive and
unwholesome effluvia, contaminating the atmosphere, and frequently
endangering both the health and lives of the workmen. This is a serious
evil, and should in all cases, as much as possible, be avoided. It is
true, there are times, when a choice of situation cannot be made; in
that case, circumstances must be submitted to, and people do the best
they can. The cellars and coolers of the breweries in this country
should have a northern aspect, and the cellars principally ventilated
from east to west. The windows on the south side of cellars should be
always close shut in summer, and only occasionally opened in winter;
the floors of cellars should be paved with either tile or brick, these
being more susceptible of being kept clean than either pavement or
flags, and not so subject to get out of order. Supposing the brewery to
have all its cellars above ground, which I conceive to be not only
practicable, but, in many cases, preferable to having them under, as
more economical, and more cleanly, particularly where vats for keeping
strong beer are constructed on the plan herein after recommended, in
which it is expected the temperature necessary for keeping beer will be
as securely preserved above, as under ground, and the erections so
constructed, as not only to be air, but fire proof. (See description of
these vats.)




_A description of the form and plan of a Brewery, distribution of the
Vessels, the most judicious and convenient manner of placing them, with
a view to economy, cleanliness, and effect._


The best plan of a well-constructed brewery I conceive to be that of a
hollow, or oblong square, where all is enclosed by one or two gateways,
(the latter the most complete,) parallel to each other. The first
gateway, forming the brewery entrance, to pass through the dwelling
house; the second, or corresponding gateway, to pass through the
opposite side of the square, into an outer yard, well enclosed with
walls and sheds, containing cooper's shop, &c. where all the empty
casks might be securely preserved from the injury of wind and weather.
This yard should be further sufficiently large to afford room for a hay
reek, firewood, dung, &c. The brewery office should be placed in the
passage of the outer gateway, so that every thing going in and out
might be seen by those who are in the office. The dwelling house, vat
house, and working store, to form one side of the brewery. The malt
house, another. The kiln house, dropping room, and stable, a third
side. The brewery, mill house, and hop room, to form the fourth side;
thus completed, it would form a square, and afford security to whatever
was contained within it, when the gates are locked. The sky cooler is,
generally, the most elevated vessel in the brewery, and when properly
constructed, is of great importance in facilitating both brewing and
malting operations, as it usually supplies the whole quantity of water
wanted in both. It commands the copper, and, of course, all the other
vessels of the brewery: it may be so constructed as to form a complete
roof to the mill loft, and in that situation be most conveniently
placed for being filled from the water cistern, which should be placed
contiguous to the mill walk, and so raised to the sky cooler by one or
more pumps worked by the mill, with a one, two, or three horse power,
according to the length of the lever, and the diameter of the mill.
Sky, or water coolers, in general, are square vessels, made of the best
two inch pine plank, properly jointed, from twenty to twenty-five feet
square, laid on strong joists sufficiently close, and trunneled down
(after pressing) with wooden trunnels from end to end, to prevent
starting or warping; the joists are supported by a couple of strong
beams, equally spaced; the sides of these coolers are generally raised
from eighteen inches to two feet; in Europe they are generally leaded
on their inside, but this expense may be saved, if they are properly
made at first, and afterwards kept constantly full of water. In
constructing these coolers, all the joints should be paid with white
paint before laying, and the sides bolted, and screwed down; the better
and easier to effect which, the thickness of the sides may be three
inches after the saw; there should be a roofing all round the sides, to
protect them from the weather; the bottom of the sky cooler should
command the copper back, which should be made to form the cover of the
copper, and to hold a complete charge of the same. These vessels, when
properly constructed, are extremely useful in preventing waste and
accidents by boiling over, also affording to the brewer, the
opportunity of boiling his wort as fiercely as he pleases--a very
important advantage in brewing porter and strong beer. A description of
this back is not necessary, as every set cooper, who knows his
business, is well acquainted with the proper construction of this
vessel. The stuff it is made of should be two inches thick, well
seasoned, and of the best pine plank. Thus placed on the copper, it
should form a complete cover, water and steam tight, so that when the
copper boils over, it will run into the back, and return again by a
plug hole into the copper. The copper cock should be sufficiently
elevated to command the hop cooler; the latter the wort coolers, No. 1
and 2. By thus running the worts from one cooler to another, you afford
them the opportunity of depositing in each their feculencies, and
coming nearly fine to the fermenting tuns, which should be sufficiently
elevated above the troughs and casks to be filled, so that the
operation of cleansing may be easily performed by one or more leaders,
to communicate with a two or three piped tun dish, capable of filling
two or three casks at a time. The mill stones, or metal rollers, should
be sufficiently elevated to grind into the malt bin, placed over the
mash tun, which bin should be sufficiently capacious to hold the whole
grist of malt when ground; this bin is generally constructed in the
form of a hopper, with a slide at the bottom, to let the malt into the
mash tun when the water is ready, by being cooled down to its proper
temperature. I would recommend making the mash tun shallow, so that the
diameter shall be three times as long as the staff of the sides, above
the false bottom. To the mash tun there should be a cover, in two or
more pieces, according to size. The receiver, or underbank, which is
placed under the mash tun, should be sufficiently elevated above
ground, so as to enable the dirty or washing water to run off from its
bottom by a plug hole. The fermenting tuns should be placed in a room
where there is a fireplace, so as to raise the temperature in cold
weather; each tun should be cribbed on its sides, with a stationary
cover on the top. The cribs should be made to answer the sweep of the
vessel, and to be put on or off as occasion, or the temperature of the
season, may require. In one corner of the working store, I would
recommend to have placed a set of drains, two in number, one over the
other; the lower drain should be sufficiently elevated to get a bucket
under it, so as to draw off its contents by a plug hole, placed at one
corner of each drain. These drains will soon pay for themselves, by the
quantity of yest that will be deposited on them, at each time of
drawing them off, while the liquor will get fine, and may be applied in
a variety of ways, to answer the purposes of the brewer, what in
filling, starting in the tun, vatting, &c.




_Malt House, the best construction of, with proper Barley Lofts,
Dropping Room, and Flooring, how, and in what manner made, and best
likely to last._


Malt houses intended to be annexed to breweries, should not be on a
less scale than sixty feet long, by twenty-five feet wide. Unless there
be a proper proportion of flooring to work the grain kindly and
moderately, good malt is not to be expected. Two-floored houses are
generally preferred to any other construction; would recommend placing
the steep outside the house, to be communicated with from the lower
floor by means of an arch way or window; the steep so placed should be
covered with a tight roof; the best materials for making a steep are
good brick, well grouted; the wall should be fourteen inches thick at
least; this kind of steep will be found far superior to wood, as not
liable to leak, or be worked on by rats; the sides and ends of this
steep should be carefully plastered with tarrass mortar; the bottom may
be laid with flag, tiles, or brick.[2] Two barley lofts, the whole
length of the malt house, will be found highly convenient, as affording
sufficient room to different large parcels of barley, and screening the
same from loft to loft as it descends into the steep over wire screens;
a contrivance I have found of great advantage in the malting operation,
as finishing the cleaning of the barley before getting into the steep,
a precaution that should never be omitted. The bottom of the screen
should be cased with wood, communicating from loft to loft with a sack
fastened to hooks at the lower end to receive all the dirt and
screenings that may pass through the screens. The Dutch and German
maltsters generally prefer having their lower or working floor under
ground; but this I take to be a bad plan, unless in elevated
situations, or where the soil is dry and gravelly; for if any spring of
water or damp arises in the malt-house floor, or walls so placed, the
injury to the malt is very great, and should be carefully guarded
against. It is also very important to lay a solid foundation for your
lower floor with stones, brick bats, or coarse gravel, which should be
solidly compacted by ramming for the whole length, then levelled off by
stakes, with a ten-foot level, to the thickness you would wish to give
your floor--say three or four inches: the former thickness, say three
inches, will be found sufficient. Lay your first coat on two inches
thick with hair mortar; when this coat becomes sufficiently stiff,
which will happen within twenty-four hours, you are to begin to lay
your second or last coat of one inch thick over the first, to be
prepared as follows: Take Roche, or unslaked lime, one part, by
measure; fine pit sand, one part; clinker, or forge dust, finely
powdered, two parts; clay or lome, by measure also, one part: let these
different ingredients (taking the precaution of first slaking the Roche
lime) be well mixed together, and then screened by a wire screen,
carefully keeping out of the mixture all lumps and stones; the whole
may be then worked up with a due proportion of water, observing that
this kind of mortar cannot be too much worked or mixed together, nor
too little wetted, just sufficient to work freely with the plastering
trowel; the whole floor should, if possible, be laid in one day, and
for this purpose several hands should be employed; in which case it
will dry more equally and firmly. As soon as the floor begins to set,
and that it will bear a board on it, without sinking in, you should
begin to pound it in all directions, from end to end, with pounders
made of two-inch plank, sixteen inches long, and from nine to twelve
inches wide, with a long handle reaching breast high, and to be placed
in the middle of this board; thus the operation of pounding will
proceed without stooping or much labour. One or two men, with
plastering trowels, should follow the pounders, wetting it with skimmed
milk as they go, and set the floor as even and close as possible. If
these two operations be well conducted there will not be found a single
crack in the whole floor from end to end, which is of great importance
to secure the making of good malt. Each loft should have uprights under
the centre of all the beams from end to end of the house; this
precaution is necessary to prevent the swagging or cracking of the
upper floor. Trap doors should be placed at proper distances in the
upper malt-house floor, to facilitate the shovelling of the couches
from the lower to the upper floor. A well constructed kiln is of great
importance to insure a successful result to the malting operation, and
if large enough to dry off each steep at _one cast_ so much the better.
The most approved covering for malt kilns in England (although not the
most economical) is hair cloth, as it is asserted, it dries the palest
and sweetest malt. Many prefer tiles, as less expensive and more
lasting; others dry on boarded floors, and if this construction be well
managed, I take it to be as good as any, and much cheaper than either
tiles or hair cloth. (See description page 23.) The dropping room for
receiving the malt as it comes off the kiln may be constructed
different ways; but I take it that a ground floor covered with a two
inch plank well jointed, and properly laid, is preferable to a loft for
keeping malt, and in this situation might be heaped to any depth
without injury or danger of breaking down. Malt thus kept, if well
dried before coming off the kiln, is never in danger of heating or
getting slack. The common mode of keeping malt is in bins situated on
upper lofts, often injured by leaks from the roof, and at all times
liable to the depredations of rats, which in the other way can be
effectually guarded against, and is a highly important object of
precaution to be taken by the brewer. Should weevils at any time get
into, or generate in your malt, which is common when held over beyond
twelve or eighteen months, the simplest and easiest way of getting rid
of them, is to place four or five lobsters on your heap of malt, the
smell of which will soon compel the weevils to quit the malt, and take
refuge on the walls, from which they can be swept with a broom into a
sheet or table cloth laid on the malt, and so taken off. It is
asserted, that by this simple contrivance not one weevil will remain in
the heap. Malt intended for brewing should be always screened before
grinding; and for this purpose it is a good contrivance to screen it by
means of the horse mill, as it runs from the hopper to the rollers or
stones to be ground, the expense of which apparatus is comparatively
nothing when compared to the advantages arising from it.

      [2] By some this construction of a steep may be thought too dear;
      in that case, a rough wooden one may be substituted, which,
      instead of placing outside the house, I would place on the upper
      floor of the malt house, so as to afford the opportunity of
      getting down its contents to the lower floor by means of a plug
      hole, which will save the labour of shovelling; but in summer,
      when this steep is not employed, it should be filled with lime
      water to prevent leaking, and to keep it sweet.




_Wooden Kilns, how constructed._


The best form for these kilns is the circular. I will suppose the
diameter sixteen feet; you construct your fire-place suitably to the
burning of wood at about ten feet outside your kiln house, sufficiently
elevated on iron bars to secure the draft of the fire place, from which
runs a proportionate sized flue into the kiln, communicating with a
circular flue which is close covered at top, and rounds the kiln on the
inside at the distance of two feet from the wall; on both sides of this
circular flue holes are left, at the distance of twelve or sixteen
inches apart, on both sides, to let out the smoke and heat; the
platform or floor of this kiln is raised about four or five feet above
the top of the flue, and is made of three quarter inch boards, tongued
and grooved, supported by joists two inches broad, and nine inches
deep, placed at proportioned distances, to give solidity to the floor.
The floor or platform of this kiln should be carefully laid, and well
nailed; in this floor should be placed a wooden chimney, nine inches
square, on the most convenient part of the inside next the wall, with a
wooden register at a convenient distance: this chimney is intended to
let off the great smoke that arises in the kiln at first lighting fire,
particularly if the wood be moist or green. When this has gone off, and
the fire burns clear, the register may be shut within a few inches, in
order to keep up a small draft. It would have been proper to state that
joists, intended to support the floor of this kiln, should be levelled
off to one inch, top and bottom, so as give the fire a better chance to
act upon the malt; these joists should be further paid as soon as, or
before, laying down, with a strong solution of alum water; as also the
bottom face of the boards laid on them, which should be first planed;
the inside of the chimney and register should be also paid with the
alum solution. On the top of the kiln should be placed a ventilator to
draw off the steam of the malt, this may be done by means of a loover
or cow; the latter turns with the wind, the former is stationary.

There should be skirting boards, nine inches deep, to lie close to the
floor and walls of the kiln, plastered with hair mortar on the top.
This construction of kiln has been introduced by the Dutch, and will be
found the most economical of any, joined to the peculiar advantage of
being capable of drying malt with any kind of fuel, without danger of
communicating any sort of bad flavour to the grain, while the heat can
be securely raised to 120 degrees without any danger of ignition or
burning; a higher heat is not wanted to dry pale malt. Of this,
however, I have some doubts, as wood is a non-conductor of heat, and
possibly is not susceptible of transmitting such a heat to the malt
without danger of ignition. I should think that thin metal plates, one
foot square, cast so as to lap on each other, or tiles, of the same
make or form, would be a better covering; they certainly would convey
the heat more rapidly and securely to the malt or grain intended to be
dried on it, never requiring less fuel than the wooden covering, and
precluding all danger of fire.

[Illustration:

A A A A A ground section of the vats.
B the section of elevation.]




_A new and economical construction of Vats for keeping Beer, which,
in this way, may be rendered fire proof, whilst, at the same time, it
secures a temperature for the liquor equal, it is expected to the best
vaults: it further affords the convenience of having them above
ground._


These vats may be constructed in different forms, either square, oval,
or round; the latter I should prefer, as stronger, and less liable to
leak. These circular vats, to save expense, may be bound with wood
hoops instead of iron ones the splay to be given them as little as
possible barely sufficient to have the hoops tight, and the vessel
staunch. The bottoms of these vats should be elevated at least three
and a half, or four feet from the ground, and solidly bedded in clay,
earth, or sand; the clay, if convenient, to be preferred. As the earth
rises, at every five or six inches, around these vats, it should be
firmly pounded down and compressed, as in the case of tanners' vats;
and this mode of surrounding the vats with dry earth well pounded and
rammed is continued to the top; a stout, close, well-fitted cover of
two inch plank is then placed on each vat, with a hole sixteen inches
square, to let a man down occasionally; this hole should have a short
trunk of an inch and a half plank firmly nailed to its sides, and about
fourteen inches high; then a covering of earth, twelve inches deep,
should be placed all over the tops of these vats, and this earth well
rammed and compacted together; and when levelled off, covered with
composition or a floor of tiles. Each of the trap doors should have a
well-fitted, wooden cover on the top, with a ring of iron in the
centre; this cover should be made fire proof on the outside. The brick
wall in front of these vats need not, I apprehend, exceed fourteen
inches thick, if of brick, just sufficient to resist the force of
pressure from ramming the clay; vats thus placed, with their contents,
may be considered fire proof, and possessing as cool a temperature as
if placed fifteen feet under ground; joined to this, they will last six
times as long as those in cellars or vaults, although bound in iron, at
a considerable higher expense. Two ranges of these vats may be placed
in one house, leaving a sufficient space for a passage in the centre,
with a window at each end to light it. I have never before either heard
or read of this construction; but I have little hesitation in saying it
will in many cases be found preferable to the present mode of placing
vats--it being more convenient, cleanly, economical, and secure, and,
to all intents and purposes, as effectual in point of temperature as
those expensively placed deep under ground. Under the inside of the
head of these vats, and across the joints, should run a piece of
scantling six inches wide, and four inches deep, with an upright of the
same dimensions in the centre, in order to support the covering on the
head, and to prevent sinking, or swagging, from the weight of the
covering that will be necessarily placed over them, which will be from
six to ten inches thick.




_Grinding, how substituted for._


Malt, for brewing, may be prepared in three different ways, by
grinding, bruising, or pounding; modern practice, however, almost
universally gives the preference to bruising between metal rollers.
This preference, where malt is of the very first quality, may be
justified; but where it is of an inferior quality, which is but too
generally the case, grinding with stones is preferable, as more capable
of producing a fine grist, which, with indifferent malt, is important,
as it will always produce a richer extract, by being finely, rather
than coarsely ground; and it is more soluble in water of suitable
temperature than that malt which is only bruised or cracked, and for
this simple reason, that all imperfect-made malt has a great proportion
of its bulk unmalted, and, of course, in a crude hard state, which will
partially dissolve in water if ground fine, but will not dissolve at
all if only cracked or bruised. A further object of the brewer's
attention should be to prevent the dispersion, or waste, of the finer
parts of the malt, so apt to fly off in the grinding, if not prevented
by having the malt bin close covered, as well as the spout leading into
it from the stones; trifling as this precaution may seem, it is well
worth the brewer's attention. Here it may not be improper to observe,
that in all cases of horse, or cattle mills, where the shaft of the
main wheel is perpendicular, no better ingredient can be placed in the
chamber of the lower box than quick silver, which is far superior to
oil or grease, and will not require renewing for a long time. The brass
of a mill, managed in this way, might be expected to last twenty years,
and the movement smoother and easier. This economical substitute for
oil and grease can, with equal advantage, be applied to water mills,
whether their shafts be horizontal or perpendicular; in a word, to all
kinds of machinery, where the preservation of the gudgeons and brasses
are an object.




_Malting._


The production of good malt is, without question, the key-stone of the
arch of brewing; therefore the brewer's attention should be invariably
directed to this point, as the most difficult and important part of his
operations. The process of making malt is an artificial or forced
vegetation, in which, the nearer we approach nature in her ordinary
progress, the more certainly shall we arrive at the perfection of which
the subject is capable. The farmer prefers a dry season to sow his
small grain, that the common moisture of the earth may but gently
insinuate itself into the pores of the grain, and thence gradually
dispose it for the reception of the future shower, and the action of
vegetation. The maltster cannot proceed by such slow degrees, but makes
an immersion in water a substitute for the moisture of the earth, where
a few hours infusion is equal to many days employed in the ordinary
course of vegetation, and the grain is accordingly removed as soon as
it appears fully saturated, lest a solution, and, consequently, a
destruction of some of its parts should be the effect of a longer
continuance in water, instead of that separation, which is begun by the
introduction of watery particles into the body. Were it to be spread
thin after this removal, it would become dry, and no vegetation would
ensue; but being thrown into the couch, a kind of vegetative
fermentation commences, which generates heat, and produces the first
appearance of a vegetation. This state of the barley is nearly the same
with that of many days continuance in the earth after sowing, but being
in so large a body, it requires occasionally to be turned over and
spread thinner; the former, to give the outward parts of the heap their
share of the acquired warmth and moisture, both of which are lessened
by exposure to the air; the latter, to prevent the progress of the
vegetative to the putrefactive fermentation, which would be the
consequence of suffering it to proceed beyond a certain degree. To
supply the moisture thus continually decreasing by evaporation and
consumption, an occasional, but sparing, sprinkling of water should be
given to the floor, to recruit the languishing powers of vegetation,
and imitate the shower upon the cornfield; but this should not be too
often repeated; for, as in the field, too much rain, and too little
sun, produces rank stems and thin ears, so here would too much water,
and, of course, too little dry warmth, accelerate the growth of the
malt, so as to occasion the extraction and loss of such of its valuable
parts as, by a slower process, would have been duly separated and left
behind. By the slow mode of conducting vegetation here recommended, an
actual and minute separation of the parts takes place; the germination
of the radicles and acrospire carries off the cohesive properties of
the barley, thereby contributing to the preparation of the saccharine
matter, which it has no tendency to extract, or otherwise injure, but
to increase and meliorate, so long as the acrospire is confined within
the husk; and by as much as it is wanting of the end of the grain, by
so much does the malt fall short of perfection; and in proportion as it
is advanced beyond, is that purpose defeated.

This is very evident to the most common observation, on examining a
kernel of malt, in the different stages of its progress. When the
acrospire has shot but half the length of the grain, the lower part
only is converted into that mellow saccharine flour we are solicitous
of, whilst the other half exhibits no other signs of it than the whole
kernel did at its first germination: let it advance to two thirds of
the length, and the lower end will not only have increased its
saccharine flavour, but will have proportionably extended its bulk, so
as to have left one third part unmalted. This, or even less than this,
is contended for by many maltsters, as a sufficient advance of the
acrospire, which, they say, has done its business, so soon as it has
passed the middle of the kernel. But we need seek no further for their
conviction of error, than the examination here alluded to.

Let the kernel be slit down the middle, and tasted at either end whilst
green, or let the effects of mastication be tried when it is dried off;
when the former will be found to exhibit the appearances just
mentioned, the latter to discover the unwrought parts of the grain, in
a stony hardness, which has no other effect in the mash tun, than that
of imbibing a large proportion of the liquor, and contributing to the
retention of those saccharine parts of the malt which are in contact
with it; whence it is a rational inference, that three bushels of malt,
imperfect in their proportion, are equal but to two of that which is
carried to its utmost perfection. By this is meant the farthest advance
of the acrospire, when it is just bursting from its confinement, before
it has effected its enlargement. The kernel is then uniform in its
internal appearance, and of a rich sweetness, in flavour equal to any
thing we can conceive obtainable from imperfect vegetation. If the
acrospire be suffered to proceed, the mealy substance melts into a
liquid sweet, which soon passes into the blade, and leaves the husk
entirely exhausted. The sweet thus produced by the infant efforts of
vegetation, and lost by its more powerful action, revives, and makes a
second appearance in the stem, but is then too much dispersed and
altered in its form to answer any of the known purposes of art.

The periods of its perfect appearance are in both cases remarkably
critical. It is at first perfect at the instant the kernel is going to
send forth the acrospire, and form itself into the future blade; it is
again discovered perfect when the ear is labouring at its extrication,
and hastening the production of the yet unformed kernels; in this it
appears, the medium of nature's chemistry, equally employed by her in
her mutation of the kernel into the blade, and her formation thus of
other kernels, by which she effects the completion of that circle to
which the operations of the vegetable world are limited. Were we to
inquire by what means the same barley, with the same treatment,
produces unequal portions of the saccharine matter in different
situations, we should perhaps find it principally owing to the
different qualities of the water used in malting, some of which are so
much better suited to the quality of the grain than others, that the
difference is truly astonishing. Hard water is very unfit for every
purpose of vegetation, and soft will vary its effects according to the
predominating quality of its impregnations. Pure elementary water is in
itself supposed to be only the vehicle of the nutriment of plants,
entering at the capillary tubes of the roots rising into the body, and
here depositing its acquired virtues, perspiring by innumerable fine
pores at the surface, and thence evaporating by the purest distillation
into the open atmosphere, where it begins anew its rounds of collecting
fresh properties, in order to its preparation for fresh service. This
theory leads us to the consideration of an attempt to increase the
natural quantity of the saccharum of malt by adventitious means; but it
must be observed, on this occasion, that no addition to water will rise
into the vessels of plants, but such as will pass the filter, the pores
of which appearing somewhat similar to the fine strainers of absorbing
vessels employed by nature in her nicer operations; we by analogy
conclude, that properties so intimately blended with water as to pass
the one, will enter and unite with the economy of the other, and vice
versa.

Supposing the malt to have obtained its utmost perfection, according to
the criterion here inculcated, to prevent its further progress, and
secure it in that state, we are to call in the assistance of a heat,
sufficient to destroy the action of vegetation, by evaporating every
particle of water, and thence leaving it in a state of preservation fit
for the present or future purpose of the brewer. Thus having all its
moisture extracted, and being by the previous process deprived of its
cohesive property, the body of the grain is left a mere lump of flour,
so easily divisible that, the husk being taken off, a mark may be made
with the kernel, as with a piece of soft chalk. The extractable
qualities of this flour are saccharum, closely united with a large
quantity of the farinaceous mucilage peculiar to bread corn, and a
small portion of oil enveloped by a fine earthy substance, the whole
readily yielding to the impression of water, applied at different
times, and different degrees of heat, and each part predominating in
proportion to the time and manner of its application. In the curing of
malt, as nothing more is requisite than a total extrication of every
watery particle, if we had in the season proper for malting a sun heat
sufficient to produce perfect dryness, it were practicable to produce
beer nearly colourless; but that being wanting, and the force of custom
having made it necessary to give our beers various tinctures and
qualities resulting from fire, for the accommodation of various tastes,
we are necessitated to apply such heats in the drying as shall not only
answer the purpose of preservation, but give the complexion and
property required; to effect this with certainty, and precision, the
introduction of the thermometer is necessary, but the real advantages
of its application are only to be known from experiment, on account of
the different construction of different kilns, the irregularity of the
heat in different parts of the same kiln, the depth of the malt, the
distance of the bulb of the thermometer from the floor; for though
similar heats will produce similar effects in the same situation, yet
the distribution of heat in every kiln is so irregular, that the medium
spot for the local situation of the thermometer as a standard, cannot
be easily fixed for ascertaining effects upon the whole. That done, the
several degrees, necessary for the purposes of porter, amber, pale
beers, &c. are easily discovered to the utmost exactness, and become
the certain rule of future practice.

Though custom has laid this arbitrary injunction of variety on our malt
liquors, it may not be amiss to intimate the losses we often sustain,
and the inconvenience we combat in our obedience to her mandates.

The further we pursue the deeper tints of colour by an increase of
heat, beyond that which simple preservation requires the more we injure
the valuable qualities of the malt. It is well known that scorched oils
turn black, and that calcined sugar assumes the same complexion;
similar effects are producible in malts, in proportion to the increase
of heat, or the time of their continuing exposed to it. The parts of
the whole being so intimately united by nature, an injury cannot be
done to the one without affecting the other; accordingly we find that
such parts of the subject as might have been severally extracted for
the purpose of a more intimate union by fermentation, are, by great
heat in curing, burned and blended so effectually together, that all
discrimination is lost--the unfermentable are extracted with the
fermentable, the integrant with the constituent, to the very great loss
of spirituosity and transparency. In paler malts the extracting liquor
produces a separation, which cannot be effected in brown, where the
parts are so incorporated, that unless the brewer is very acquainted
with their several qualities and attachments, he will bring over with
the burned mixture of saccharine and mucilaginous principles, such an
abundance of the scorched oils, as no fermentation can attenuate, no
precipitants remove; for being themselves impediments to the action of
fermentation, they lessen its efficacy; and being of the same specific
gravity with the beer, they remain suspended in, and incorporated with,
the body of it--an offence to the eye, and nausea to the palate, to the
latest period. From this account it is evident the drying of malt is an
article of the utmost consequence concerning the proper degree of heat
to be employed for this purpose. Mr. Combrune has related some
experiments made in an earthen pan, of about two feet diameter, and
three inches deep, in which was put as much of the palest malts, very
unequally grown, as filled it to the brim. This being placed over a
charcoal fire, in a small stove, and kept continually stirred from
bottom to top, exhibited different changes according to the degrees of
heat employed on the whole. He concludes, that true germinated malts
are charred in heats between one hundred and seventy-five, and one
hundred and eighty degrees, and that as these correspond to the degrees
in which pure alcohol, or the finest spirit of the grain itself boils,
or disengages itself therefrom, they may point out to us the reason of
barley being the fittest grain for the purpose of brewing.

From these experiments, Mr. Combrune has constructed a table of the
different degrees of the dryness of malt, with the colour occasioned by
the difference of heat. Thus, malt exposed to one hundred and nineteen
degrees, is white; to one hundred and twenty-four, cream colour; one
hundred and twenty-nine, light yellow; one hundred and thirty-four,
amber colour; one hundred and thirty-eight, brown; one hundred and
fifty-two, high brown; one hundred and fifty-seven, brown, inclining to
black; one hundred and sixty-two, high brown speckled with black; one
hundred and seventy-one, colour of burned coffee; one hundred and
seventy-six, black. This account not only shows us how to judge of the
dryness of malt by its colour; but also, when grist is composed of
several kinds of malt, what effect the whole will have when blended
together by extraction. Experience proves that the less heat we employ
in drying malt, the shorter time will be required before the beer that
is brewed from it is fit to drink, and this will be according to the
following table:

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
_A table giving the heats of different coloured malts, and the time
beer takes to ripen when brewed from them._
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
124 Degrees 1 Month.  | 138 Degrees 6 Months.  | 152 Degrees 15 Months.
130 Degrees 3 Months. | 143 Degrees 7 Months.  | 157 Degrees 20 Months.
134 Degrees 4 Months. | 148 Degrees 10 Months. | 162 Degrees 32 Months.




_The plain practical process of Malting pale Malt, according to the
most approved English method._


Suppose you are about to malt spring or summer barley, and that your
steep contains sixty bushels. The time generally allowed for this kind
of grain to remain in steep is from forty to forty-eight hours, taking
care to give two waters; the first water is to continue on the grain
twenty-four hours, then run off, and fresh water put on. This
precaution is essentially necessary, in order to make clean bright
malt, and should never be omitted. It is further right, at each
watering, to skim off the surface of the water the light grain, chaff,
and seed weeds, that are found floating on it; all this kind of trash,
when suffered to remain in the steep, is a real injury to the malt, and
considerably depreciates its value when offered for sale, and not less
so when brewed. The depth of water over the barley in the steep need
not exceed two or three inches, but should not be less. When the barley
has remained in steep the necessary time, the water is let off by a
plug hole at the bottom of the steep, with a strainer on the inside of
the hole; when the barley is thus sufficiently strained, it should be
let down by a plug hole in the bottom of the steep into the couch frame
on the lower floor, (or adjoining to it, which would be the better
construction,) which is no more than a square or oblong inclosure of
inch and a half boards ledged together, and about two feet deep, of
sufficient capacity to hold the contents of the steep, and so placed,
in upright grooves, as to ship and unship in this frame. The steeped
barley is to remain for twenty-four hours in the frame, when it should
be broke out, and carefully turned from the bottom to the top, nearly
of the same thickness it was in the frame, not less than sixteen or
eighteen inches, where it should be suffered to remain twenty-four
hours longer, or until the germination begins to appear: but this will
be always shorter or longer, according to the temperature of the
season, and is generally ascertained by sinking your hand towards the
middle of the heap, and bringing up a handful of the grain, which, if
regularly germinated, will make its appearance in every grain of
barley, by appearing white at one end; at this stage of the process,
(supposing the temperature of your malt house sixty degrees,) the heap
should be extended on the floor, to the thickness of eight inches;
after which it should be turned three or four times a day, according to
the season, and the progress of vegetation; gradually reducing the
thickness of the couch to four or five inches; but it should be
remarked, that as soon as the root begins to dry and wither, the
watering pot is to be used; the judicious management of which is one of
the most important parts of the process of malting, and should be paid
particular attention to. One watering, well applied, will, in most
cases, answer the purpose. Two thirds of the whole quantity of water
should be given to the upper surface of the couch, then turn it, and
give the remaining third of the water to the couch when turned. The
whole quantity of water to be used for sixty bushels of American spring
barley, may be averaged at fifty-four gallons; this quantity will,
consequently, allow thirty-six gallons to be as evenly distributed over
the surface of the couch for the first water, as possible; the
remaining eighteen gallons to be put on in the same way: when the couch
is turned after this last watering, the whole couch should be turned
back again; thus, in every turning, the bottom and top should always
exchange places. In this stage of the process, care should be taken to
turn the couch frequently, to prevent the growth of the root, in order
to give the greater facility to the growth of the blade, it being
essentially requisite to keep that of the root stationary, to prevent a
waste of strength in the grain. Three or four days after watering, is
generally found a sufficient time for the blade to grow fully up to the
end of the grain; farther than which it should not be suffered to
proceed. The couch should be now checked in its growth, and thrown on
the second or withering floor, where it should be laid thin, and
frequently turned; this continued operation will bring it dry and sweet
to the kiln, to which it may be committed without further delay.
Although the common practice is to throw it up into what is commonly
termed a sweet-heap, and so remain from twelve to twenty-four hours, or
until you can hardly bear your hand in it; then, and not before, is it
considered fit to go on the kiln. This is a practice that cannot be too
much condemned, or too generally exploded, as producing the very worst
consequences; a few of which I will mention. Green malt, thus treated,
becomes in a manner decomposed; and beer brewed from such malt will
never keep long, acquiring a disagreeable, nauseous flavour, rapidly
tending to acidity, beside becoming unusually high coloured. Although
the malt, before grinding, will have all the appearance of pale malt,
this quality can be easily accounted for by the high heat the malt is
suffered to acquire in the heap before putting it on the kiln. What I
have here mentioned will, I trust, suffice to recommend a more
judicious mode of practice. Forty-eight hours for malt to remain on the
kiln is enough, as pale malt can be completely dried in that time, if
frequently turned, and properly attended to. It is further worthy of
remark, that barley malt should in no case exceed fifteen or sixteen
days from the steep to the kiln, and is often more successfully
effected in twelve or thirteen days. The common practice of maltsters
is to allow twenty one days, which generally brings the green malt in a
mouldy state to the kiln, to the great injury of flavour and
preservation in beer brewed from such malts; whereas, the grain should
be brought as sweet and dry as circumstances will allow of to this last
and important operation of malting, every part of which requires minute
and continued attention. When you suppose your malt sufficiently dry,
make a round space in the centre of your kilncast by shovelling the
malt to the extremities; after which, sweep this space, and shovel back
again your malt from the walls and angles into it; make a round heap of
the whole on the centre of your kiln, sweep your kiln all round the
foot of your heap; so let it stand two hours, then throw it off; this
last operation is performed to give every chance for equal drying. The
practice of many maltsters is to take seventy two hours to dry their
pale malt, keeping all the time a very slow and slack fire, this is
another capital error, and should be corrected with the former ones.
Various are the opinions entertained, as to the best mode of preserving
malt after coming off the kiln: some are of opinion that the
circumambient air should have a free access to it; this opinion, I
admit, might have weight if such malt was to be immediately brewed; but
where it is allowed to remain in heap for four or five months, and
gradually become cool, the less air admitted to have access to it the
better; this has been the practice and opinion of the most judicious
maltsters I have been acquainted with, and, consequently, is what I
would recommend, except in the case of immediate use, where exposure
becomes necessary, particularly after grinding, as malt so treated will
bear a higher liquor, and yield a more preserving extract.




_Winter Barley._


To avoid useless and unnecessary repetitions, it is enough simply to
state, that winter barley, being a weaker bodied grain than summer,
requires less watering, consequently, a less time in steep, say 36 to
40 hours, and about 32 gallons of water to sixty bushels will be
sufficient on the floor; the other treatment the same.




_Oats the same_,


with about 24 gallons of water on the floor, for sixty bushels, divided
as directed in the case of summer and winter barley; the remaining part
of the process the same.




_Rye Malt._


Rye may be steeped 48 hours, with 48 gallons of water on the floor; the
remainder of the process the same, quantity of grain sixty bushels.




_Wheat._


The above time in steep, and same proportion of water on the floor,
will answer to make wheat malt, suppose 60 bushels, varying somewhat
according to season, the time of steeping, and bringing to the kiln;
the remainder of the process the same.




_Indian Corn Malt, a valuable auxiliary to Brewing materials._


This species of grain well managed, and made into malt, will be found
alike useful to the brewer and distiller, but it is peculiarly adapted
to the brewing of porter; further, it is known to possess more
saccharine matter than any other grain used in either brewing or
distilling, joined to the advantage of not interfering with the season
for malting barley, as this should commence when the former ceases. The
summer months are the fittest for malting this kind of grain, and can
be only very defectively made at any other season, as it requires a
high temperature to force germination, and cause it to give out all its
sweet. The following process, it is expected, will be found to answer
every purpose wished for: suppose your steep to contain sixty bushels,
after you have levelled it off, let on your water as directed in
malting barley; you should give fresh water to your steep at the end of
twenty-four hours. If it is southern corn you are malting, it will
require to remain in steep seventy-two hours in the whole; if it be
northern corn, it will require ninety-six hours, there being a
considerable difference in the density of these two kinds of grain; the
hardest, of course, requires the most water; and, in all cases, the
fresher Indian corn is from the cob the better it will malt. When you
have accomplished the necessary time in your steep, you let off your
water; and, when sufficiently drained, let it down in your couch frame,
where it will require turning once in twelve hours, in order to keep it
of equal temperature; the depth of the grain should be about two feet
and a half in the frame; as it begins to germinate and grow, open your
frame, and thin it down at every turning, until you reduce its
thickness to six or seven inches; thus extending it on your lower
floor, turning it more frequently, as the growth is rapid. The
vegetation of the grain, together with the turning, will by this time
make the watering pot necessary; the criterion by which you will judge
of its fitness for the water, is as soon as you perceive the root or
acrospire begins to wither. Two thirds of your water is to be
distributed over the surface of your couch for the first watering,
which will require thirty-two gallons, and when turned back again,
sixteen gallons for the second watering, making in the whole
forty-eight gallons of water to sixty bushels of corn. This water
should be put on with a gardener's watering pot, as equally as
possible. Supposing this pot to contain four gallons, it will make
eight pots for the first watering, and four for the second. In this
stage of the operation the turnings on the floor should be very
frequent, in order to keep the grain cool, as the heat of the weather,
at this season, will be sufficient to promote and perfect the
vegetation. The second day after the first watering, if the blade is
not sufficiently grown, water again, but in less quantity, say one
half. It will be now four or five days more before the couch is ready
for the kiln, which will be ascertained by the blade becoming the full
length of the corn. After this it should be thrown on the upper floor,
and suffered to wither for a couple of days, turning it frequently; by
this time the blade will have a yellow appearance, the grain will
become tender, and, if tasted, be found uncommonly sweet; in this state
it may be committed to the kiln, and dried in the usual way.

N. B. It will generally take ten days after it is out of the steep to
perfect the malting of southern corn, and twelve days for northern.




_Fermentation._


Notwithstanding that progress of improvement in the doctrine of
fermentation has, in the last twenty years, far surpassed any thing in
the same period that preceded it, we have still much to learn.
Fermentation is the instrument or means which nature employs in the
decomposition of vegetable and animal bodies, or reduction of them to
their original elements, or first principles. Fermentation is,
therefore, a spontaneous separation of the component parts of these
bodies, and is one of those processes that is conducted by nature for
their resolution, and the combination and fermentation of other bodies
out of them; therefore, it is one of these operations in which nature
is continually present, and going on before our eyes; this may be one
reason that a very critical observance of it has escaped our attention.
Fermentation brings us acquainted with this unerring axiom; that
nothing in nature is lost; or that matter, of which all things are
composed, is indestructible. For instance, the vinous process of
fermentation, succeeded by distillation, produces ardent spirits, or
alcohol, the elements of which are here described. If we pass this
alcohol, or spirits of wine, through a glass, porcelain, or metallic
tube, heated right hot, provided with a suitable condenser and
apparatus to separate and contain the parts or products, it will be
decomposed and resolved into its primitive elements, carbonic acid gas,
or fixed air, and hydrogen gas, or inflammable air; the oxygen being
decomposed and united with the oxygen, or vital air, into carbonic acid
gas; the water of the spirit of wine being also decomposed, or resolved
into its first principles as herein is stated, forms a part of the
produce before mentioned.

Hence spontaneous fermentation, vinous, acetous, and putrefactive, is
the natural decomposition of animal and vegetable matters, to which a
certain degree of fluidity is necessary; for where vegetable and animal
substances are dry, as sugar and glue for instance, and are kept so, no
fermentation of any kind succeeds.

There can be no doubt that spontaneous fermentation first taught
mankind the means of procuring wine and other agreeable beverage;
observation and industry the means of making spirit and vinegar, the
first of which is evidently the produce of art, combined with the
operations of nature.

With nature for our guide, and our own ingenuity, fermentation has been
made subservient to the various products we now obtain from saccharine
and fermentable matters, such as sugar, molasses, grain, with which we
have made wine, spirits, bread, beer, malt, &c.; which last has much
facilitated our practice in fermentation, but proved the tide-ending,
or point of stagnation to its further improvement. Relying too much on
malted grain in the operation of fermentation, we are presented with
some of the most pleasing and instructive phenomena of nature; the
resolutions and combinations that are formed during the process of the
vinous and acetous stages of fermentation, are interesting, beyond
comparison, to the brewer, malt and molasses distillers, vintager,
cider and vinegar maker, &c. The elastic fluids and volatile principles
that are extricated and escape, formerly so little attended to, are now
better understood. The method of commodiously saving, and
advantageously applying them, and other volatile products, to the
improvement of the fermenting and other fluids, will, I hope, not only
form a new era in the progress of fermenting, brewing, distilling, &c.
but a new source of profit, that may, in time, lead to a recomposition
of those elements from which they were produced, or, at least, the
fermentation of vinous fluids, vinegar, spirit, &c. by resorting to an
inexhaustible source supplied by nature, of these important materials,
and their application to the uses that may be made of that abundance so
easily procurable, and at present so unprofitably wasted. But to
continue our views to the business immediately before us, let us begin
with the several products, by stating that carbonic acid gas, or fixed
air, is copiously extracted from fluids in a state of vinous
fermentation, and sundry mineral and vegetable substances, easily
procurable, for which we have the testimony of our own senses; the same
may be said of hydrogen gas, oxygen gas, &c. Presuming these positions
granted, let us make a short inquiry into the composition of vinous
fluids, &c. Apprehending there are but few people to whom these
observations will be useful, but what will allow that all vinous
fluids, whether intended for beer, wine, cider, &c. are the produce of
saccharine matter, or fermentable matter obtained from the sugar cane,
grain, fruit, &c. and the part which art at present takes in this
beautiful process of nature, is to facilitate her operations in
proportion to observation and experience, in conformity to the object
in view, in making wine, beer, cider, spirit, &c.; or, subsequent to
the vinous, to forward the progress of the acetous fermentation for the
production of vinegar. The saccharine or fermentable matter of
vegetables, consists in what is chemically called hydrogen gas, or
inflammable air; carbonic acid gas, or fixed air; oxygen gas, or vital
air; which last forms nearly one third part of the whole atmosphere,
circumvolving our globe in which we breathe; or, more exactly,
thirty-seven parts of oxygen, and seventy-three of azotic gas, are the
component parts of our atmosphere, except the small proportion of
undecomposed carbonic acid gas there may be found in it.

Beer, wine, cider, malt and molasses wash, and other product by
distillation; spirit consists of these three elastic fluids or airs, in
composition with various proportions of water. Water itself is a
compound of vital and inflammable air; a proof of this, and of the
indestructibility of matter, these two elastic fluids burned together,
in certain proportions, and in a proper apparatus, reproduce water. By
another chemical process, this very water is reducible to these two
substances, vital and inflammable air; hence, we see, that all
saccharine and fermentable matter, and their products, by fermentation,
are composed of the same materials, and resolvable into the same
elements.

It is scarcely necessary to give any definition of spontaneous
fermentation, after what has been said on the subject; if it was, I
would say it is that tendency which all fermentable matter has to
decomposition, attended with intestine motion or ebullition, when
sufficiently diluted with water, under a certain temperature of the
atmosphere, the rapidity of which motion is always accompanied by an
increase of temperature, or the change to a greater degree of heat
generated within the body of the fermenting fluid, in proportion to the
rapidity or augmentation of motion or ebullition excited. Fermentation
produced by the addition of yest, or any other suitable ferment, in a
fluid duly prepared, is governed by the same laws, and under the same
influence of temperature, except when it is accelerated or protracted
by the management of the operator, or by the changes induced by the
influence of the atmosphere, rendered more or less subservient to his
purposes, and produces a similar kind of spirit by distillation,
possessing in common the properties of vinous spirit, or is converted
to vinegar by the subsequent process of acetous fermentation, but much
more productive in quantity and quality, so as to answer commercial
purposes. In both spontaneous and excited fermentation, there is a
similar escape of a large quantity of elastic fluid, or carbonic acid
gas, with a considerable proportion of spirit, and some of the water of
the fermented fluid. This gas is known to form a considerable part of
mucilaginous substances, as sugar, molasses, honey, malt, and other
saccharine and fermentable matter.

Although the doctrine of fermentation, as a science, does not enable us
to alter the spontaneous course of nature; yet if, by the assistance of
the instruments, and means recommended, we are enabled to foresee and
provide for the changes induced by the alterations of the atmosphere,
we can guard against the inconveniences in some cases, and make them
subservient to our purpose in others; so as more securely to conduct
the process in each to advantage; and that with unusual facility;
complex as it at present appears: it will not only be a great
improvement in the present mode of fermentation; but facilitate our
progress to still greater improvements in the doctrine of fermentation.
Therefore, the rule of our conduct, in these pursuits, should be to
watch the operations of nature with the closest attention, and assist
her when languid, and control her when too violent; that is, by
spurring in one instance, and bridling in the other, and accurately and
undeviatingly apply the means proposed in the manner recommended, until
experience enables us to improve it; otherwise, we shall only admire,
without improving or profiting by her choicest phenomena.

The motions of the planets, perplexed and intricate as they must have
appeared in the infancy of astronomy, are now calculated and known with
ease and precision.

Attenuation is a term not unaptly applied to fermentation, the property
of attenuation being to divide, then dilute, and rarify thick, gross,
viscid, and dense substances, in which some degree of fluidity is
pre-supposed; it is, therefore, that kind of dilution or fluidity which
is promoted by agitation, and very aptly applied to mark the progress
of fermentation, which is itself the process of nature, for decomposing
vegetable and animal substances under a convenient degree of fluidity;
it exists in intestine motion, either spontaneous or excited,
accompanied with heat, which, under certain limits, is proportioned to
the vigour of the fermentation, which ends in the decomposition of one
class of bodies, and the composition of another; and which may be
instanced in the resolving saccharine substances into hydrogen, oxygen,
and carbon, and the combining them into inflammable spirits, or
alcohol, and inflammable acids or vinegar; to which may be added, the
lower you attenuate, the lighter and more spiritous the fermenting
fluid becomes; and that attenuation, which is the offspring of
fermentation, like the parent process, has its bounds, and can only be
conducted with certainty and advantage by the use of the hydrometer,
thermometer, &c. In this only lies the difference between the old word
fermentation, and the new word attenuation, every thing used as a
ferment, or to promote fermentation, is attenuant. The tendency of the
vinous process of fermentation is to evolve or disentangle the hydrogen
of the fermenting fluid, and unite it, with the carbon and oxygen of
the same fluid, into ardent spirit, wine, beer, or alcohol, which last
is well known to be inflammable. The tendency of the acetous process of
fermentation, is to involve or entangle the hydrogen and carbon of the
fermented fluid, with a greater proportion of oxygen, into vinegar,
which is uninflammable. The fixed air, or carbonic acid gas, so
abundantly extricated during the vinous process of fermentation, which
every one concerned in the process is presumed to be acquainted with,
is either composed of hydrogen and oxygen, or is a composition of
carbon and oxygen, on which philosophers are divided in opinion. As the
result is the same with respect to the formation of wine, beer, and
spirit, I shall enter into no controversial reasoning on this head,
instead of which, I shall endeavour to point out the most effectual
mode of saving and profitably applying it, and the other elements, in
the composition of wine, beer, spirit, and acid.

As in fermentation, spontaneous or excited, there is a sensible escape
of carbonic acid gas, or fixed air, it may not be improper to note,
that fermentable, or saccharine matter, consists of about twenty-eight
pounds of carbon, eight pounds of hydrogen, and sixty-four pounds of
oxygen, reducible into fixed, inflammable, and vital air, weighing one
hundred subtile pounds in toto, or that every one hundred subtile
pounds of saccharine matter consists of such proportions of these airs
and gasses.

Attenuation is the result of a due resolution of the fermentable matter
produced by excited fermentation, which divides mucilages, resolves
viscidities, breaks down cohesions, generates heat and motion,
extricates the imprisoned gasses, and, by frequent commixture, promotes
the action and re-action of the component particles on each other, and
by continually exposing a fresh surface and opposition of matter,
brings them within the sphere of each other's attraction.

As their original attraction is weakened by heat and motion, their
expansion is increased by repulsion; and as they revolve, and recede
from each other in this way, they are fitted, by the change in their
modification, to involve each other, and from new attractions combining
with each other into new substances, according to affinity, under
changes induced in their nature conducive to this end, which not being
exactly known, cannot at present be fully defined. In every brewing, or
preparation of saccharine fluid for fermentation, the following
phenomena occur: first, _heat_ is either disengaged or fixed: secondly,
an _elastic fluid_ is either formed or absorbed in a nascent state:
these two indisputable facts form the uniform and invariable phenomena
of fermentation, and may be admitted as an established _axiom_, that
the proportions, extrication, and action of heat, with the fermentation
and fixation of elastic fluids, during the process, are the foundation
of the vinous products of the fermenting fluid. In conformity to so
rational a theory, I have for many years regulated my practice, the
result of which is the object of these papers. These, therefore, are
the three great objects which should engage our attention; not only
in fermentation, but in every similar process in chemistry, and are
the fundamental principles of our doctrine. FERMENTATION being not
only a decomposition of the fermentable matter, but of the water of
the fluid also; and the fixed air formed during the process being
composed of the hydrogen and oxygen of the fermentable matter, and
the water of the fluid also, there is a perpetual decomposition and
recomposition of that water, which gives fluidity to the whole mass,
taking place during the continuance of the process, part of the
hydrogen and oxygen of which escapes under the form of fixed air, for
want of a proper substance being presented of affinity enough to
absorb and combine with it into wine, beer, or spirit, or some other
necessary assistance in heat, light, motion, oxygen, hydrogen, carbon,
&c. or an intermedium to facilitate the formation of wine, beer, or
spirit, in preference to fixed air. Fixed air, or carbonic acid gas,
consists of about twenty-five parts of oxygen, and nine of carbon,
devested of the mucilage and yest that rises with it. It should be
recollected, that the decomposition of pyrites, the formation of
nitre, respiration, fermentation, &c. are low degrees of combustion,
and though it is the property of combustion to form fixed and
phlogisticated airs, both the modes of doing it, and the quantity of
the products, depend on the manner of oxygenating them in the changes
brought about by the different modes of combustion, or fermentation in
the vinous, acetous, and putrid process, which show the affinity
between them.

Fermentation is a subsequent _low combustion_ of the vegetable oxydes
or grain, that has undergone a previous, but partial combustion,
something like the slightly charring, or oxydating of wood or
pit-coal, by which the oxygenation is incomplete in both, and rendered
more complete in the former. An ultimate combustion of the fermentable
matter employed, is found only in the putrid process of fermentation,
which is a final or total decomposition of vegetable and animal
substances, in the actual combustion or burning of wood, charcoal, or
bones.

In the vinous process we have seen the escape of carbonic acid gas; in
the acetous process there is a great escape of azotic gas, or
phlogisticated air, from the decomposition of the air of the atmosphere
consumed in this process, which consists of about two-thirds of azotic
gas, and one third of oxygen gas,[3] the oxygenous part being absorbed
in the acetous process, and azotic set free with more or less hydrogen
and acetic gas, proportioned to the existing heat. If the heat is
beyond a certain degree, a portion of the ethereal part of the
new-formed acid escapes also.

      [3] Twenty-seven parts of oxygen gas, and seventy-three of azotic
      gas.

In the putrid process, the hydrogen escapes under the acriform shape of
inflammable air and azotic gas, and nothing more remains than mere
earth or water, or both, as the case may be, which is exactly similar
to other combustions, of which nothing remains, (if we except
phosphorus) but earth or ashes, with what small portion of alkaline or
other salts they may contain. This alkaline matter being present during
the formation of carbonic and azotic gas, absorbs, to saturation, a due
proportion of them, and generates _tartar_.

Experience has taught us the truth or justness of this definition, and
though it has brought us acquainted with the results of those three
stages of fermentation, combustion, or decomposition, we have certainly
overlooked the means of applying them with all the advantage they admit
of in the business which is the subject of these papers, and which a
little time and close observation must convince us of; and how much has
been hitherto lost, with the means of saving it in future, shall be
presently explained, and particularly pointed out.

In the prosecution of this design, where I may not be able to give an
unexceptionable demonstration, I hope always to be provided with a
practical proof, which may prove equally beneficial.

Let us now see what passes in a state of low combustion, such as may be
the result of fermentation in vegetables, arising from heat, moisture,
and motion, when impacted together. The most obvious occurrence of this
nature is found in new hay, which, under these circumstances, for want
of care and attention, often spontaneously takes fire, particularly in
wet seasons.

Fermentation, being one of the lowest degrees of combustion, is here
the spontaneous effect of the moist hay being impacted together, and
not properly made, that is, without the superfluous juices being dried
out of it, by which it retains a sufficient degree of fluidity or
moisture to begin a fermentation, in which heat and motion are
generated, and light, in a nascent state, extricated; these appearances
accumulated and accelerated by incumbent pressure, the redundant
moisture being soon exhausted, and the heat and motion increasing, the
actual combustion of the mass takes place, which is much facilitated by
a decomposition of the water of this moisture, and the air of the
atmosphere, unavoidably insinuated between the interstices formed by
the fibres of the hay, as they are impacted together into cocks, or
stacks, breaks out into actual flame, or _light visible_. These are no
novel appearances, but such as fall within the observation of every
one; and the candid maltster will acknowledge, that from the same
cause, though differently produced, similar effects may, and sometimes
do, happen in the malt house, in the preparation of that modern
article of luxury, by which we are enabled to make malt wine; and
these instances are sufficient to prove fermentation to be a low
degree of combustion, and to both simplify and explain the justness of
this doctrine. The malting of corn is the first stage of vegetation,
low combustion, and fermentation.

From observation and reasoning on what passes before our eyes, we
discover the low species of fermentation, in which the malting of corn
consists, to be a low degree of combustion, which, for want of due
attention, may break out into actual flame. We were always acquainted
with the _effect_: now reasoning on the subject brings us to a
knowledge of the cause.

To any one well acquainted with the nature of fermentation, it must be
manifest, that the malt distillers have paid more attention, and made
greater progress in the improvement of the process than any other class
of men interested in the success, though far from having arrived at
their _ne plus ultra_.

The introduction of raw or unmalted corn; the close compactness of
their working tun, or fermenting backs; the order and progressive
succession with which they conduct the process; and the pains they
necessarily take to arrive at a perfect attenuation, by a long
protracted fermentation, with the early conviction of a reward
proportioned to their diligence, and the success attending their best
endeavours, when not frustrated by intervening causes, must be stronger
inducements with them to delight in this instructive process of
nature's formation, than with the brewer, who has not these immediate
tests to encourage his labours, which the others daily derive from
distillation, and which so quickly and uniformly terminates their
hazards and success. The principal object in their view being a high
and deliberate attenuation, with a full vinosity, without any further
regard to the quality or flavour of their mash, as the combination of
these qualities alone produces the required strength, in the cleanest
manner.

The brewer's cares are many, and of longer duration: he is the vintager
of our northern climates: his porter or ale should be an agreeable malt
wine, suited to the palate of the district or neighbourhood he lives
in, or, ultimately, to the taste of his customers. The time he has
allotted himself for attenuation was first founded in error, derived
from ignorance of the subject, and slavishly continued by that
invincible tyrant, custom. Hurry marks the progress of his fermentation,
which can only be corrected by his speedy mode of _cleansing_, and the
consequent but necessary perishing of a part. He must begin with more
accuracy at the mash tun than the malt distiller, as it is there he
must not only regulate the strength, but, partially, the flavour and
transparency of his malt wine. His object does not end with the malt
distiller's, nor, like his, concentre in one focal point, the solution
of the whole of the farina of the plant or grain employed, regardless
of milkiness or transparency; he must carefully take the heats of his
liquor, so as to solve and combine the qualities he has in view; which,
if he misses in the first mash, is partly irremediable in the succeeding
ones. His cares do not end here; independent of the minutiæ of
fermentation and cleansing, he has the flavour, fining, and bringing
forward of his _malt wines_, nearly as much as the strength, to consider
and employ his attention.

It will scarcely be supposed that I would make these observations
merely with a view of drawing this comparison, though even it might
throw some light on the subject, without an attempt at supplying the
defects pointed out, and remedying the evils represented.

When the carbonic acid gas, or fixed air, so often mentioned in these
papers may be rendered subservient to part of the improvements I have
in view, and which is the constant, abundant, and uniform result of low
combustion, or vinous fermentation, in proportion of thirty-five pounds
weight to every hundred of saccharine or fermentable matter, fermented
in a due proportion of liquor, or water; from the decomposition of
which last, and the absorption of its oxygen, it is principally
obtained.

We have previously seen that one hundred pounds of fermentable matter
consists of eight pounds of hydrogen, twenty-eight of carbon, and
sixty-four pounds of oxygen; we have also seen that about thirty-five
pounds of carbon is extricated and detached from this quantity of
fermentable matter, properly diluted in water during fermentation;
allowing the usual quantity of spirit at the same time to be formed by
the process of this superfluous carbon, (as it now appears) must come
principally from that decomposition of the water of dilution, and not
from saccharine matter employed, which contains altogether but
twenty-eight pounds of carbon, the whole of which must necessarily go
to the formation of the fifty-seven pounds of dry alcohol produced.

But not to descend too deeply into particulars that might lead into
discussions not absolutely necessary in this place, let us take the
produce of ten gallons of ardent spirit, at one to ten over proof. We
here find that much more carbon has been generated, and given to the
atmosphere, than went to the composition of this quantity of spirit,
independent of the large quantity of alcohol dissolved in, and carried
off by it, in its flight as before observed.

Allowing the average quantity of fermentable matter in a quarter of
malt, barley, or other grain, to be only seventy-five pounds, then four
quarters will be equal to three hundred subtile pounds of raw sugar; or
eighty quarters of the one will be equal to six thousand pounds of the
other, or three tuns weight of unadulterated molasses.

If we estimate the superfluous carbonic acid gas of this quantity of
materials at only twenty-eight pounds per hundred, that will be sixteen
hundred and eighty pounds dissipated during the fermentation, which is
a loss, on every brewing of this quantity of materials, of upwards of
forty-one gallons of spirit, of the strength of one to ten.

What is computed here in spirit, may easily be applied to wine, porter,
beer, ale, sweets, &c. In barrels allowing three gallons and three
quarts of spirit per barrel to the former, and four gallons per barrel
to the latter, which gives eleven barrels and three quarters of the
one, and ten barrels and a quarter of the other, lost on each brewing
of eighty quarters of malt, or the average of that quantity of other
materials, by the mismanagement of the fermentation in one point only.

It must appear evident to every person capable of investigating this
calculation, that every six or seven pounds of carbon, fixed upon each
quarter of malt, or other materials, there will be an augmentation of
gravity or strength on this number of quarters, of ten or twelve
barrels each brewing; that is, every six or seven pounds of this
fugitive carbon that we arrest and fix in the fermenting fluid, as a
component part of the subsequent produce, by presenting the requisite
portion of oxygen and hydrogen, for the purpose within the sphere of
each others attraction, we increase our strength in the before-mentioned
_ratio_. It is of little moment whether this redundant gas comes from
the water of dilution or from the fermentable matter, as under, if we
can by any means turn it to account.

We have presumed the average quantity of fermentable matter at
seventy-five pounds per quarter; this must be evidently on the best
goods; this will give us a length of three barrels per quarter of malt
of eight bushels, of twenty-five pounds per barrel, specific gravity.
Suppose the apparent attenuation of these goods to be nineteen pounds,
the transparent gravity will be six pounds per barrel, viz.

    Gravity of the worts in the cooler just before letting
      down into the guile-tun, per barrel,                     25 lb.
    Apparent attenuation per barrel,                    19 lb.
    Transparent gravity per barrel,                      6
                                                       ---     25 lb.

    Or take it as it really is, viz. specific gravity
      per barrel,                                              25 lb.
    Real attenuation per barrel,                  13 lb. 8 oz.
    Yest and lees,                                 5     8
                                                  --------
                                                  19 lb.
    Gravity per barrel, when transparent,          6
                                                 ---           25 lb.

It may be said that nineteen pounds is the real attenuation, and the
yest and lees produced is part thereof, as the fluid, or beer, in a
state of transparency is but six pounds per barrel specific gravity,
and it may, in some degree, be allowed to be so, as there is really so
much gravity lost during the process of fermentation. If we multiply
thirteen pounds eight ounces, which I have called the real attenuation,
by four, we shall find the result to be fifty-four pounds, which is
nineteen pounds more of superfluous gas upon four barrels of worts, of
twenty-five pounds gravity each, than is extricated from an equivalent
quantity of saccharine matter; that is, from one hundred pounds of raw
sugar or one hundred and twelve pounds of molasses, and their
respective waters of dilution, when the yest and lees do not exceed
five pounds eight ounces per barrel. This may be truly called an
analysis of the fermentable matter, giving the component parts
tolerably exact; though much depends on the management of the
fermentation, and the subsequent cleansing. By this analysis it
appears, that the mucilage of malt, or grain, gives out more gas than
the mucilage of sugar; and leaves a doubt on the mind whether to
adjudge the superfluous gas to the fermentable matter, or to the water
of dilution, or partly to both; but so it is, that these are the
products, whatever source we derive them from, and there is no denying
facts. The yest first added is not brought into this account.

There is a great similarity of appearance between the two species of
low combustion, fermentation and respiration. Fermentation, like
respiration, is the spontaneous effort of involuntary motion to
decomposition; and in the fermenting mass, as in the animal system, it
raises the temperature of both above that of the surrounding
atmosphere: that is, it is the cause of heat and involuntary motion,
both in the fermenting mass and in the animal system; and, like slow
combustion, consumes both, and resolves them into their first
principles, from which tendency the latter is constantly withheld by
the ingesta, fuel, or food, thrown in. I am well aware I must not carry
this reasoning any further.

Deep investigation may be thought not to be the object of our research;
but we must always have two things in view in inquiries of this nature;
indeed, in every pursuit of useful knowledge, where, like the present,
it is connected with the first principles, to pursue the winding path
of nature, through all her meanderings, up to the ultimate source of
these elements, which are the instruments of her operations; and when
we are favoured with a knowledge of these, either as the reward of
laboured assiduity and attention, or the result of chance, to copy the
original as close as we can.

I know I shall be justly accused with tautology. I must plead guilty to
the charge, not having leisure to apply the pruning hook of correction.
The misfortune is, that new doctrines must appear in a new dress, by
which they wear the garb of novelty, though, with respect to first
principles, there is nothing new under the sun; yet the application of
these principles might have remained in oblivion for ever if not called
into action. The man who in an age calls them into action, and
beneficially applies them for the good of that community of which he is
a member, may be virtually, though not literally, called the discoverer
of a principle. The man that projects, and the man that executes a
voyage of discovery, have superior claims to the man at the mast head
who first cries out land. The new turn that the discoveries of modern
philosophers has given to natural philosophy, requiring a change of
names as well as system; unusual words are unavoidably introduced to
express new terms of science, which gives a different character and
fashion to the whole, that I should have great pleasure in avoiding,
were it possible, which it obviously is not, finding it easier to glide
down the stream than oppose its torrent.

Notwithstanding that I have calculated upon nineteen pounds only of
twenty-five pounds per barrel of fermentable matter being attenuated,
and have even in that quantity included five pounds eight ounces of
lees and yest, (the least quantity produced,) such calculation must not
be admitted to preclude the practicability of attenuating almost every
particle of fermentable matter, and replacing it with an equivalent
particle of spirit, if that spirit which is now carried off by the
avolation of the fixed air, is, agreeably to my proposal, either
arrested in its flight, or filtered, after its escape from the guile
tun and cleansing vat, by the proper apparatus.

Having in a former part of these papers observed, that attenuation may
be carried too far, it may be necessary for me to reconcile these
seemingly opposite positions, which should be understood in this way:
When the quantity of fermentable matter, suspended in a barrel of
worts, intended for beer, or ale, is from five to ten pounds more than
twenty-five pounds per barrel, every particle of it may be safely
attenuated, as the quantity of spirit generated will be sufficient to
preserve the beer, or ale, for any requisite length of time, provided
it has been properly hopped, &c., or in lieu thereof, received certain
other additions to improve its vinosity, strength, and keeping; when
the quantity of fermentable matter in worts is from five to fifteen
pounds per barrel less than twenty-five pounds, the height of the
attenuation ought to be limited on keeping beer and ale; the spirit
generated being insufficient to preserve so much fermented fluid in a
drinkable state for any length of time, with the usual additions only,
even during the summer heats of our own climate; and if so, it is
totally unfit for either exportation to warm latitudes, or for keeping
at home.

For the right understanding of these observations, we should consider
that the unattenuated fermentable matter is perpetually furnishing a
gradual supply of fixed air and spirit, by means of the imperceptible
fermentation always going on in vinous liquors.

Weak beers and ales fret and spoil very soon in warm weather, which
proceeds from the development and avolation of their fixed air; strong
beers and ales have their limits under the same influence of heat,
time, change of the atmosphere, &c., and owe their preservation to two
things, viz. to a due proportion of fermentable matter unattenuated, or
the quantity of spirit they contain; as under these circumstances they
are either preserved by the spirit already formed, or that continually
supplied by the spontaneous decomposition of the fermentable matter
they contain, slowly developing and yielding a fresh supply of air and
spirit; hence beer and ales, not too highly attenuated, derive strength
and spirituosity from age, when properly stored or cellared, and duly
secured from the changes of the atmosphere.

These observations are applicable to sweets, or made wines, and to
those which are the produce of the grape, the progress of fermentation
and attenuation being (or ought to be) interrupted in them by racking
off, which is similar to cleansing in beers and ales: and in Madeiras,
and other dry wines, the incipient acidity is corrected and restrained,
by proper additions introduced in the early part of the process, and
with others of similar effect when the wines are making up, either for
use or exportation.

We may gather from these observations, that worts attenuated for beer
or ale, to the decomposition of all their fermentable matter, that is,
attenuated so high, or so low, that their specific gravity is reduced
to the standard of common water, and from that to the degree of levity
spirit is known to give to water, in the proportion to the quantity
added, and left to the preservation of the spirit formed, they have
little or no auxiliary assistance from their original products, already
exhausted by the highest or completest attenuation obtainable; an
important circumstance, always to be attended to, particularly by those
who affect an unnecessarily high attenuation!

The intelligent brewer may, by the assistance of these observations,
form a most accurate rule for the regulation of his future conduct in
the management of fermentation, according as his beer or ale is to
be weak or strong, or for present use or long keeping; for the
accomplishment of which, the use of the hydrometer and thermometer
claim his peculiar attention, and will undoubtedly answer his
expectations, when joined to the certainty he is now at, of knowing
when he is, or is not, to expect the development of fixed air and
additional spirit, by which he can govern himself accordingly.

These observations lead to a removal of the difficulties that lay in
the way, and, at the same time, suggest a mode of applying the present,
or of constructing a future _hydrometer_, for ascertaining the strength
or the quantity of the vinous spirit in beer, wine, ale, and other
fermented fluids, which has long been a desirable object.

The distiller, having none of these niceties to attend to, is governed
by the ultimate extent of the attenuation the worts, or wash, is found
capable of, and which is both assisted and protracted by its superior
density, in its progress from specific gravity to specific levity, if
such an expression is admissible.

Fermentation, begun in a fluid more or less saturated with saccharine
or fermentable matter, the process is finished sooner or later, and
usually in proportion to the degree of saturation, and the being
conducted with more or less vigour under a well regulated temperature;
for the more a fluid abounds with this matter, the grosser and denser
it must necessarily be, and the longer will the attenuation be
protracted; the longer it is protracted, in air-tight vessels, and in a
healthy and vigourous state of decomposition, the more spiritous and
strong will that wash turn out, and the greater the produce of spirit
in distillation; hence, it is both protracted and assisted by its
density.

A languid may be truly called an unhealthy decomposition, it being
productive of diseases common to misconducted fermentation, acidity,
putridity, and lack of spirits, with a tendency to precipitate and burn
upon the bottom of the still; hence, all the decompositions are
confounded together, as in spontaneous fermentation.

The formation of acidity during the process, is not of that injury to
the distiller that it is to the brewer, nor is this recent acidity
vinegar, as has been supposed by some chemists, but the incipient state
of combination of resolving elements, whose particles are in that
juxtaposition best suited to absorb developing hydrogen in a nascent
state, and intimately to combine with it into vinous spirit, the
approximation to which is promoted by time and incumbent pressure:
these positions shall be explained as I proceed.

The reason that putridity is so rarely discovered in excited
fermentation, is, that it is usually counteracted by the previously
evolved acidity, and corrected, but not saturated or neutralized; for,
were that the case, the putrid could not immediately succeed the
acetous process in the same fluid, nor exist together, as they are
known to do in declining beer, vinegar, &c.

The reason that acidity is not more frequently observed and attended to
than it is, is because of its being sheathed or covered by the
unattenuated sweets, or fermentable matter of the wash that remains
undecomposed.

On the other hand, when acidity is very prevalent, it may be mistaken
for unattenuated fermentable matter, acidity increasing the density and
specific gravity of the fluid.

Putridity, from the avolation of its products, promotes levity, and
that in proportion as its increase surpasses that of the general acid;
and it is not until the action of the acetous becomes languid, that the
putrid process gains the ascendency, when it is then difficult to
overcome.

Although these observations may show how the hydrometer, or its use, in
unexperienced hands may be baffled, they both distinguish and explain
the value of its application; they do more--they elucidate the doctrine
of fermentation, and illustrate the goodness of Providence, who has
made nothing in vain, but provided nature with its own resources for
conducting every operation in the great plan of the universe with
uniform and unerring security.

In the decomposition of fermentable matter, either by combustion or
fermentation, (which I have defined to be synonimous,) a portion of
inflammable air, or hydrogen, is first evolved; secondly, another
portion of inflammable air, united with pure air, or oxygen gas,
evolves under the form of fixed air; this is the constant and uniform
phenomena of these decompositions, and are progressively going on from
the beginning to the end of the fermentation, while there is any
fermentable matter to attenuate. A due portion of oxygen uniting in a
nascent state with a correspondent portion of inflammable or hydrogen,
and fixed air, forms the spiritous particles dispersed through the
fermenting fluid, which create vinosity, and constitute it wine, beer,
or wash.

During which, so great is the avolation of fixed air, (as we have
seen,) that much of the ethereal part of the new formed, or, rather,
the scarcely-formed spirit, is carried off with it in a gaseous state.
This is much assisted by the agency of the atmosphere, which is the
solvent and receptacle of ethereal products, whose affinity for them
must be as great as it is perfect and immediate--which demonstrates the
necessity of having air-tight vats. When we consider the composition of
the atmosphere, and that it owes its formation and existence to this
cause, and, thereby becomes the menstruum of all created matter, we may
be better able to understand the composition and formation of vinous
spirits, and, by closely copying the original, more successfully
imitate nature. We have seen that the principal phenomena in fermenting
fluids is a brisk intestine motion of their parts, excited in all
directions with a loss of transparency, or a muddiness, a hissing
noise, the generating of gentle heat, and an exhalation of gas. This
heat, we must now observe, is always very sensible before the
extrication of any gas. We have adverted to the similarity existing
between respiration and fermentation, which is remarkably so in the
equality of heat produced in both in a healthy state of either, and
which seldom exceeds ninety-six degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer;
but there are instances of their being much higher in both, without
producing much injury to either. Instances of this could be adduced at
home, without referring to warmer climates of the East and West Indies,
where the temperature of the atmosphere is so much higher than with us;
and that the temperature of the fermenting fluid, when at its height,
always exceeds that of the surrounding atmosphere in these latitudes,
which makes the similarity still stronger between these two decomposing
processes. This is a general and just remark; but, in order to regulate
it by practical facts, we must name the medium standard of heat, which
rarely exceeds eighty-five degrees with the brewers; this is the medium
of seventy-four and ninety-six degrees; but the medium heat is not
unfrequently up to ninety-six degrees in the distiller's fermenting
backs of Great Britain. Much depends on the degree of temperature the
fermentation is pitched at: here, nothing is spoken of but the
cleansing heat with the brewers, and the medium heat with the
distillers.

For the maintenance of combustion, the free access of air being
necessary, an objection may be raised to air-tight vats, as unfit to
carry on this process in, to the exclusion of external air; which
objection may seem to gather force from the compression it occasions of
the fixed air on the decomposing fluid, which is allowed to extinguish
active combustion. I must acknowledge these are formidable objections
to my definition of low combustion, but I by no means find them
unanswerable.

The aptitude of new hay, malt, and other vegetable matters, to
spontaneous combustion, when impacted together by incumbent pressure,
and a certain degree of moisture, should be recollected; and that this
tendency is not destroyed by excluding the admission of external air,
but by quickly cooling and dividing the impacted hay.

The great quantity of oxygen, or vital air, both in the water of
dilution, and in the fermentable matter, with which the fluid is more
or less saturated, should be also recollected, which is about
eighty-five parts in the former, and sixty-four parts of one hundred in
the latter.

Though, in an unelastic or fixed state, it is one of the properties of
combustion to disengage and render it elastic, great part of which,
during the low combustion which it supports, and in which heat is
visible or perceptible, and light in an invisible state developed,
three parts of this oxygen, with about one third of its weight of
carbon, is converted into an elastic state, under the form of fixed
air, that separates from the decomposing mass; a circumstance attending
also on the combustion of coal and other combustible substances during
their decomposition by that process, which supported in them by the
external air of the atmosphere, where heat and light are both visible
from the intensity and velocity of the combustion; and wholly invisible
in the former, not from exclusion of external air, but from the length
of time elapsed in low combustion; the one being performed
instantaneously, and the other taking several days from its
decomposition. Although fixed air is known to extinguish a lighted
candle, and destroy animal life, that is, to be equally unfit for the
combustion of inflammable bodies, or the support of animal respiration,
it is also known to be as successfully employed as atmospheric air, or
even dephlogisticated air, to melt glass, &c., when applied to the
clear flame of a wax candle, by passing a current of it through a
blow-pipe, to direct that flame on the glass to be melted.[4]

      [4] Count Rumford on the Economy of Fuel.

This will not be so much to be wondered at, when we consider that the
proportion of vital air in fixed air is as twenty-seven to nine, and in
atmospheric air, the proportion of azotic gas or phlogisticated air, to
vital air, is as seventy-three to twenty-seven; therefore, the former
contains three fourths of vital air, and the latter little better than
one fourth; but the fixed air is in a combined, and the phlogisticated
air in an uncombined state. Among the processes made use of by nature
for the decomposition of vegetable and animal substances, fermentation,
or low combustion, is a principle one. Air, in a fixed or unelastic
state, may be as necessary here as air in an elastic state is known to
be in the active combustion of inflammable bodies. Chemists and
philosophers are no strangers to two sorts of combustion, one in
external air, and the other in close vessels.

But this is not the combustion alluded to in fermentation, where all
the requisites for complete decomposition is to be found independent of
contact with the atmosphere; here one part is oxygenated at the expense
of the other, and the other disoxygenated in favour of it.

Nor does the solution, or decomposition of metals by acids, the
combustion of inflammable and vital air for the production of water,
stand in need of external heat or fire, any more than the low
combustion in which fermentation consists for the production of spirit,
beer, or wine, than that generated by the self-operation of its own
temperature; similar to this is the self-animating principle or power
with which nature has endowed the animal body of generating its own
heat by respiration.

In fermentation, the caloric, or matter of heat, which is plentifully
disengaged by the condensation of oxygen, is prevented from breaking
out into flame with the condensing hydrogen, from the presence of
affinities in the fermenting mass, ready to absorb and fix them into
vinous spirit, ale, beer, &c., with the other component element,
carbon; by which they are too instantaneously taken up and fixed, to
amount to more than bare ebullition, and pass at once from an incipient
state of elasticity, to a fixed and non-elastic one, while the
redundant heat, which would otherwise appear, is taken up and carried
off by the abundant formation of carbonic acid gas, which requires so
great a quantity of caloric to render it permanently elastic, as not
only keeps this sort of combustion under ignition, but much below the
degree of heat at which the accumulating vinous spirit could be raised
to the evaporable or distilling point, though capable, as already
observed, of detaching a considerable portion of it with the volatile
gas, and of the water of solution, or the water of composition recently
formed from the present attractions in its most volatile and incipient
state of formation; both which we have seen ascend with the fixed air
extricated, partly in a combined, and partly in an uncombined state.

One part of hydrogen is sufficient to saturate and fix above five of
carbon, and they require nearly sixteen parts of oxygen to complete
their formation into alcohol, while the water of dilution undergoes a
proportionate decomposition and recomposition, to assist the
resolutions and combinations, and support the admirable equilibrium
preserved by nature.

At the same time that the extreme levity of the hydrogen gas accounts
for the great quantity of heat which it holds in combination, and the
high temperature requisite to effect its decomposition, and that such
is its capacity for heat, that though combined with oxygen and water,
it still possesses the property of absorbing a great deal more. It is
this property that renders aqueous vapour lighter than atmospheric air
in which it ascends; yet we have just now demonstrated the resolution
and combination of hydrogen gas, and oxygen gas, both extricated from
the fermentable matter and the water of dilution, and their formation
into spirit, &c., at a temperature not many degrees above that of the
incumbent atmosphere, and no higher than that excited by respiration in
the animal system.

In which we have shown the vegetable oxyde, (saccharine matter,) when
reduced by the admixture of water, to form the worts or wash, to be a
carbonated hydrogenous fluid, containing the elements of wine, beer,
ale, spirit, &c., and the mode of producing them under circumstances
conducive to their formation; these are motion, heat, pressure, and
mutual attraction, called into existence by a species of low
combustion, or fermentation, somewhat similar to respiration. In which
the materials, the products, and the liberation of caloric are
ultimately the same, whether the operation is attended by visible fire
from the velocity of action, or weak incalescence from the slow
progression of its motion; in which the component elements are
continually assuming a gasseous form, and as constantly losing it by
the force of mutual attraction for each other. No sooner is the
equilibrium broken, in one instance, by their gasseous appearance, than
it is restored by their condensation, and the heat liberated by the
latter taken up by the former, by which the equilibrium is preserved;
in this consists the increase of temperature above that of the
surrounding atmosphere, accompanied by the discharge of fixed air; to
fix, and advantageously apply which, shall be the next consideration;
and, by an accurate imitation of the modification employed by nature,
to render the fermenting fluid so much the stronger by such fixation.
To accomplish which, we must advert to what has been delivered in the
preceding pages, particularly to the proportions in which the
equilibrium preserved by nature consists, and exactly to her manner of
combining them in sugar, malt, and other saccharine matter, her mode of
breaking this equilibrium, or decomposing them by fermentation, and
recombining them into wine, beer, &c., and by the same process
restoring the equilibrium.

It cannot be doubted, but that, in the investigation of the acetous
process of fermentation with the attenuation we do the vinous, they
will mutually reflect light on each other; in which it will come out
that wine, beer, ale, vinegar, spirit, &c., are not the only commercial
preparation to which the doctrine of fermentation, or low combustion,
may be advantageously applied, but also to others, that are perhaps
equally important and productive.

The cleansing being at the meridian, or greatest temperature of the
heat of the fermenting fluid, and the object of that cleansing being to
reduce the heat, and thereby allay the violence of the fermentation, by
which an immediate decomposition takes place, the lighter impurities
buoyed up to the top of the fluid flows off with the yest, while the
heavier dregs descend to the bottom, and the fermentation gradually
declines as the cleansing draws to a conclusion, and the fermenting
fluid forms a turbid heterogeneous mass, very perceptibly approaching
towards a transparent homogeneous fluid in its progress to a drinkable
state.

In laying out a brewery, the air should have free access to the coolers
on all sides, under and over; cleansing vessels should be similarly
situated, and, if avoidable, the coolers should not lay immediately
over them, to raise their temperature, which should not be many degrees
above that of the atmosphere, at temperate, which is fifty-two degrees;
but the descent from the cleansing heat (seventy-five to eighty-five)
should be progressive, that is, not sudden. A sudden chill would
precipitate the grosser, and diffuse the lighter dregs throughout the
fermenting fluid, which should be thrown off from the surface in
cleansing; this would retard the fining, and empoverish the beer or
ale; while the mode recommended will be found to promote transparency,
and give strength and body, that is, fullness and spirituosity. In
general, the cleansing commences too soon for the strength and quality
of the goods, particularly for porter, since the introduction of a
greater proportion of pale malt than formerly used; a more perfect
fermentation is now requisite to keep up the genuine distinction in
that flavour of porter from ordinary beers and ales, which, since the
change of _lengths_, has much declined, though the only characteristic
quality that gives it merit over other malt liquors--an object that
deserves consideration in this great commercial branch of trade, and
source of national wealth, where the loss of distinction will be the
loss of trade. The rough, astringent, thirst-creating smack is the
produce of the brown malt, and a well conducted fermentation. The
porter now brewed can no more bear the sudden chill of a cooling
atmosphere in the barrel cleansing, without too immediate a
condensation and separation of its parts, than it is able to sustain
the quick changes of a warm atmosphere, without an immediate tendency
to acidity. As things now are, either extreme can only be avoided by a
more attentive advertence to the mode of _cleansing_, so as to prevent
a predominant tendency to either by adopting the means proposed, or
such other, on the same principles, as are equally likely to preserve
the quality, increase the strength, promote transparency, and avoid
acidity. I know it may be urged by the most able brewers, that a high
and rapid fermentation in the cleansing is a principal cause of that
flavour for which porter is distinguished; that this kind of fermentation
leads to a more perfect attenuation; and some of them may, with great
truth, add, a perfect attenuation is the genuine mode of early bringing
beer forward. This I most readily grant; it is the doctrine I wish to
inculcate. The greater gravity of keeping beers, preserves them in a
_mild state_, while their spirituosity prevents acidity. The flavour of
the colouring matter now in use, nor the change it induces, is not, by
any means, adapted to preserve the genuine flavour of porter, or
compensate for that made in the change of malt; a change I by no means
condemn, with respect to the malt; but however advantageous to the
length, we must not altogether give up flavour, while we may equally as
well, and indeed much better, preserve both by a due admixture of each
sort of malt, and with suitable additions and proper correctives in the
process or preparation of porter, both salubrious; as by the subsequent
mixture of stale and mild beer, before sending out, or, afterwards, by
drawing them from different casks into the same pot, when on draught,
to suit the palate of each respective customer.

I hope it is by this time understood, that my views are to raise the
_Process of Brewing_ above the vulgar error that tyrant custom has
entailed on it, and by the free exercise of the brewer's abilities,
both in a scientific and tradesman-like manner, so as advantageously to
preserve flavour and quality, with almost any proportions of every sort
of malt he may occasionally be obliged to use.

The world is continually exclaiming that _experience_ is better than
_theory_. This is very true; for example, he who has had a very long
experience, may, in general, perform operations with tolerable
exactness; but this he undeviatingly does by certain stated means,
without any deeper intelligence of the process. I would, with Mr.
_Chaptal_, compare such a man to a blind person who is acquainted with
the road, and can pass along it with ease, and perhaps even with the
confidence and assurance of a man who sees perfectly well, but is at
the same time incapable of avoiding accidental obstacles, of shortening
his way, or taking the most direct course, and alike incapable of
laying down any rules which he can communicate to others. This is the
state of the artist of mere experience, however long the duration of
his practice may have been, as the simple performer of operations.

Brewing, fermenting, distilling, &c., are branches of commercial
chemistry, that generally challenge the attention and secure the
protection of those governments that constitute them sources of revenue
and trade. Chemistry is as much the basis of the arts and manufactures,
as mathematics is the fundamental principle of mechanics. In the
process of brewing porter, ale, threepenny, &c., to be subsequently
treated of, the practical minutia of fermentation and attenuation shall
be circumstantially laid down in each, so as to account for, and
distinguish the variety of flavour, &c., assignable to each _cause
effected_ by the different modes of treatment.




_Hops, the best method of cultivating and raising them._


A rich, deep soil, rather inclining to moisture, is, on the whole, the
best adapted for the cultivation of hops; but it is observable that any
soil (stiff clay only excepted) will suit the growing of hops when
properly prepared; and in many parts of Great Britain they use the
bog-land, which is fit for little else. The ground on which hops are to
be planted should be made rich with that kind of manure best suited to
the soil, and rendered fine and mellow by being ploughed deep, and
harrowed several times. The hills should be at the distance of six or
eight feet apart from each other, according to the richness of the
ground. On lands that are rich, the vines will run the most; the hills
must therefore be the further apart.

At the first opening of the spring, when the frosts are over, and
vegetation begins, sets, or small pieces of the roots of hops, must be
obtained from hops that are esteemed the best.[5] Cut off from the main
stalk or root, six inches in length, branches or suckers, most healthy,
and of the last year's growth, if possible to be procured; if not, they
should be wrapped in a cloth, kept in a moist place, excluded from the
air. A hole should then be made large and deep, and filled with rich
mellow earth. The sprouts should be set in this earth with the bud
upwards, and the ground pressed close about them. If the buds have
begun to open, the uppermost must be left just out of the ground,
otherwise cover it with the earth an inch. Two or three sets to a pole
is sufficient, and three poles to a hill will be found most productive;
place one of the poles towards the north, the other two at equal
distances, about two feet apart. The sets are to be placed in the same
manner as the poles, that they may the easier climb. The length of the
poles may be from fourteen to eighteen feet, according as the soil is
rich or poor. The poles should be placed so as to incline to each
other, meet at their tops, and there be tied. This is contrary to the
European method, but will be found best in America. In this way they
will strengthen and support each other, and form so great a defence
against the violent gusts of wind, to which our climate is frequently
subject in the months of July and August, as to prevent their being
blown down. They will, likewise, form a three-sided pyramid, which will
have the greatest possible advantage from the sun. It is suggested by
experience, that hops which grow near the ground are the best. Too long
poles, therefore, are not good, and care should be taken that the vines
do not run beyond the poles, twisting off their tops will prevent it.
The best kinds of wood for poles are alder, ash, birch, elm, chestnut,
and cedar, their durability is directly the reverse of the order in
which they stand; charring, or burning the end put into the ground,
will preserve them. Hops should not be poled till the spring of the
second year, and then not till they have been dressed. All that is
necessary for the first year, is to keep the hops free from weeds, and
the ground light and mellow by hoeing and ploughing often, if the yard
be large enough to admit of it. The vines, when run to the length of
four or five feet, should be twisted together, to prevent their bearing
the first year, for that would injure them. In the months of March or
April, of the second year, the hills must be opened, and all the
sprouts or suckers cut off, within one inch of the old root, but that
must be left entire with the roots that run down;[6] then cover the
hills with fine earth and manure. The hops must be kept free from weeds
and the ground mellow by hoeing often through the season, and hills of
earth gradually raised around the vines during the summer. The vines
must be assisted in running on the poles with woolen yarn, suffering
them to run with the sun. By the last of August, or the first of
September, the hops will be ripe, and fit to gather. This may be easily
known by their colour changing, and having a fragrant smell; their seed
grows brown and hard. As soon as ripe, they must be gathered without
delay, for a storm or frost will injure them materially. The most
expeditious method of picking hops, is to cut the vines three feet from
the ground, pull up the poles and lay them on crotches, horizontally,
at a height that may be conveniently reached, put under them a bin of
equal length, and four may stand on each side to pick at the same time.
Fair weather should always be chosen to gather hops and they should
never be gathered when dew or moisture is on them, as it subjects them
to mould. They should be dried as soon as possible after they are
gathered; if not immediately, they must be spread on a floor to prevent
their changing colour. The best mode of drying them is with a fire of
charcoal and kiln, covered with hair cloth in the manner of a
malt-kiln.[7] The fire should be steady and equal, and the hops gently
stirred from time to time. Great attention is necessary in this part of
the business, that the hops be uniformly and sufficiently dried; if too
much dried they will look brown, and, of course, be materially injured
in their quality, and proportionably reduced in their price. If too
little dried, they will lose their natural colour and flavour. They
should be on the hair cloth about six inches thick after it had been
moderately warmed, then a steady fire kept up till the hops are nearly
dry, lest the moisture or sweat the fire has raised should fall back
and change their colour. After the hops have been in this situation
seven, eight, or nine hours, and have got through sweating, and when
struck with a stick will leap up; then throw them into a heap, mix them
well, and spread them again, and let them remain till they are all
equally dry. While they are in a sweat, it will be best not to move
them for fear of burning, slacken the fire, when the hops are to be
turned, and increase it afterwards. Hops are sufficiently dried, when
their inner stalks break short, and their leaves become crisp, and fall
off easily. They will crackle a little when their seed is bursting, and
then they should be removed from the kiln. Hops that are dried in the
sun lose their rich flavour, and, if under cover, they are apt to
ferment and change with the weather, and lose their strength; moderate
fire preserves the colour and flavour of the hops, by evaporating the
water, and retaining the oil of the hop. After the hops are taken from
the kiln, they should be laid in a heap, to acquire a little moisture
to fit them for bagging. It would be well to exclude them from air by
covering them with blankets. Three or four days will be sufficient for
them to be in that state. When the hops are so moist that they may be
pressed together without breaking, they are fit for bagging. Bags made
of coarse linen cloth, eleven feet in length, and seven in
circumference, which hold about two hundred pounds weight, are most
commonly used in Europe: but any size that best suits may be made use
of. To bag hops, a hole is made through the floor of a loft, large
enough for a man to pass through with ease. The bag must be fastened to
a hoop, larger than the hole, that the floor may serve to support the
bag; for the convenience of handling the bags, some hops should be tied
up in each corner of the bag, to serve as handles. The hops should be
gradually thrown into the bag, and trod down continually, till the bag
is filled. The mouth of the bag must then be sown up, and the hops are
then fit for market. The closer and harder hops are packed, the longer
and better they will keep; but they should be kept dry. In most parts
of Great Britain where hops are cultivated, they estimate the charge of
cultivating one acre of hops at forty-two dollars, for manuring and
tilling, exclusive of poles and rent of land; poles they estimate at
sixteen dollars per annum, but in this country they would not amount to
half that sum; one acre is computed to require three thousand poles,
which will last from eight to twelve years, according to the quality of
the wood used. The English growers of hops think they have a very
indifferent crop if the produce of one acre does not amount to one
hundred and thirty-three dollars, but, much more frequently, it amounts
to two hundred dollars, and sometimes so high as four hundred dollars
per acre. In this country, experiments have been equally flattering. A
gentleman in Massachusetts, in the summer of 1791, raised hops, from
one acre of ground that sold for three hundred dollars; it is allowed,
that land in this state is equally favourable to the growth of hops.
Upon a low estimate, we may fairly compute the nett profit of one acre
of hops to be eighty dollars, over and above poles, manure, and labour;
and in a good year a great deal more might be expected. There is one
circumstance further we think has weight, and ought to be mentioned: in
the English estimate the expense put down is what they can hire the
labour done for by those who make it their business to perform the
different parts of the cultivation. A great saving may, therefore, be
made by our farmers in the article of labour, for much of it may be
performed by women and children. Added to this, we have another
advantage of no small moment in this country: the hop harvest will come
between our two great harvests, the small grain and Indian corn,
without interfering with either but in England the case is otherwise:
the small grain and hop harvest come in together, and create a great
scarcity of hands, it being then the most busy season of the year. It
is found, by experience, that the soil and climate of the eastern
states are more favourable to the growth of hops than Great Britain;
they not being so subject to moist, foggy weather of long continuance,
which is most injurious to hops; and the southern and middle states are
still more favourable to the growth of hops than the eastern states, in
point of flavour and strength. The State of New-York unites some
advantages from either extreme of the union. The cultivators of land in
this state have every inducement, which policy or interest can offer,
to enter with spirit into the cultivation of hops; as we shall thereby
be able to supply our own demand, which is now every year increasing,
instead of sending to our neighbours for every bag we consume; a
circumstance the more unaccountable, as hops, are on all hands, allowed
to be one of the most profitable crops that can be raised; the culture
requires but little land, the labour may be performed at intervals, so
as not to interfere with other business of the farm, and be generally
performed by women and children. There is hardly a farmer in this state
but may, with ease, raise from one quarter of an acre, to as much as
three or four acres, the advantage of which would, in a few years, be
most sensibly felt both by the individual concerned, and the state at
large. In the city of New-York there are, at present, a number of large
and respectable breweries, and new ones, from time to time, may
reasonably be expected to be added to their number. All these
establishments are now supplied with hops from Massachusetts and
Connecticut; these considerations should certainly stimulate a few
spirited cultivators to lead the way, and raise hops; their laudable
example would soon be followed by others; so that in a few years we
should have prime hops of our own in abundance, for home consumption or
exportation. This subject will, I hope, appear sufficiently important
to recommend itself; to say more is therefore unnecessary.

      [5] Of the different kinds of hops, the long white is the most
      esteemed; it yields the greatest quantity, and is the most
      beautiful. The beauty of hops consists of their being of a pale
      bright green color. Care should be taken to obtain all of one
      sort; but if different sorts are used, they must be kept separate
      in the field, for there is a material difference in their time of
      ripening; and if mixed in the field, will occasion extra trouble
      at the time of gathering them in.

      [6] Hops must be dressed every year, as soon as the frost will
      permit; on this being well done depends, in a great measure, the
      success of the crop. It is thought by many to be the best method
      to manure the hop yard in the fall, and cover the hills entirely
      with the manure, asserting, with other advantages, that this
      prevents the frost from injuring plants during the winter. Hops
      had better be gathered before they are full ripe than remain till
      they are over ripe, for then they will lose their seed by the
      wind, or on being handled. The seed is the strongest part of the
      hop, and when they get too ripe will lose their green colour,
      which is very necessary to preserve as the most valuable part of
      the [remainder of text is illegible]

      [7] Kilns covered with the splinters of walnut, or ash, will
      answer the purpose, and come cheaper than hair cloth.




_Barley Cultivation._


However unconnected this subject may appear with a treatise on brewing,
I cannot help thinking that, in this country, it is much more
intimately connected with it than one would, at a first view, incline
to suppose, and for the following reasons; first, Because the proper
cultivation of barley is not generally known, save in the eastern
states, and but very little raised in any of the others; secondly,
Without good barley it is impossible to make good malt, consequently,
good beer--and it must be acknowledged, that a great proportion of the
barley that is raised, even in the eastern states, is but very
imperfectly suited to the purposes of the brewery, being what is termed
winter barley, and generally a poor, thin, lank grain, by no means
qualified to make good malt. This is so well known in England, that it
is very rarely met with in the barley markets, and seldom, or ever,
purchased by a brewer. The summer, or spring barley, always getting the
preference, being the largest bodied grain, and, of course, the best
suited to the purposes of making prime malt, the want of which, is
frequently severely felt by the brewers of this country, from the
impossibility they often find themselves in of procuring good barley,
being obliged to use such as they can get, which, for the most part, is
very ill suited to their purpose. It will be, then, their interest to
give every encouragement to the farmer to raise spring barley in
preference to the winter, to procure the best seed, of that
description, that he can find, to clean it well, to steep it in well or
spring water for twelve hours, stirring it frequently from the bottom
of the tub or vessel all around; and previous to each stirring, all the
floating grains, seed weeds, &c., should be carefully skimmed off: thus
nothing will remain for seed but sound and perfect grain. The first
water should be drawn off at the end of six hours, and immediately
replaced by fresh; this again drawn off at the end of six hours more;
it should be sown, broad cast, the following day, being first
previously mixed with a sufficient quantity of wood ashes to dry it as
much as will be necessary for the purpose of sowing. Thus managed, if
the ground be in proper tilth, and fitly prepared, this grain will make
its appearance the fifth or sixth day after sowing; whereas, if the
seed be sown dry, it will probably be three weeks or more before it
comes up, particularly if the season be dry. I cannot more forcibly
recommend this practice than by giving a brief sketch of an experiment
made in England, and taken from the Bath and West of England Society's
reports. A farmer selected four acres of the same field, treated and
prepared it for seeding exactly in the same way, he then divided it
into two equal parts; he sowed one part with dry seed, in the common
way, the other with steeped seed, as here recommended, and the
consequence was, that the latter produced a double crop, although the
seed in both cases was the same, save the difference of treatment. The
superior quality and condition of the crop seemed to keep pace with the
increased quantity. The beginning or middle of March, if the weather be
dry, is the best time to sow spring or summer barley. This mode of
preparing seed wheat, is highly recommended as an assured preservative
against the smut, fly, &c., insuring a sound good crop of grain. Barley
should be always cut in dry weather, yet not suffered to be too ripe
before cutting; stacking it in the field for a few weeks before
removing it to the barn, helps and prepares it for malting, by sweating
and drying it. Barley, immediately brought to the malt house from the
field, rarely makes good malt, as a great proportion of it becomes
staggy, and will not grow. Those who can corroborate the truth of these
remarks, and sufficiently appreciate them, will readily justify and
excuse this seeming departure from the original plan of this little
work.




_Table Beer._


There is no production of the brewery more important to society than
good table beer, whether it be considered as a diluent to animal food,
or a diet drink in fever cases, even of the most malignant kind, where,
to my knowledge, it has been preferred to all others, and that with the
greatest success, sanctioned by the advice of some of the most eminent
physicians. This justifies my recommending it, and giving several
processes for making this useful liquor.




_Small Beer for Shipping._


    12 Bushels of Pale Malt.
    12 Bushels of Amber Malt.
    --
    24
    --
    14 lb. of Hops.

    Cleansed 24 Barrels.

Let your malt be fine ground; first liquor 172; mash one hour, stand
one hour, run down smartly; beat of second mash 180; mash one hour,
stand two hours, boil two hours; making your length sufficiently long
to give one barrel of beer to each bushel of malt. Pitch your tun at 70
degrees, giving one gallon of solid yest; cleanse within twenty-four
hours. The fresher this beer is sent out the better: being very thin in
body and low priced, it cannot be expected to last long.




_Keeping Table Beer._


    PROCESS.

    Commenced brewing at six in the morning, heat of the air 60
    degrees, per Fahrenheit's Thermometer.

    48 Bushels of Pale Malt.
    16 Bushels of Amber Malt.
    --
    64
    --
    72 lb. of Hops.

    Cleansed 45 Barrels of Table Beer.

10 lb. liquorice ball, which was previously melted down in boiling
water, by frequent stirring, to a liquid, and then put in with the hops
when added to the worts. Ran the necessary quantity of boiling water
into the mash tun for the first mash, and when cooled down to 168,
commenced mashing, which continued three quarters of an hour, stood one
hour, ran down briskly; mashed a second time at 180, for half an hour;
stood half an hour; mixed both worts, boiled one hour and a half as
hard as possible, throwing into the copper, before boiling, half a
pound of ground ginger, with half a pound of ground mustard; pitched
these worts at 70 degrees, giving 3 gallons of solid yest; remained in
the tun 36 hours, and was headed over, before cleansing, with four
pounds of flour and one pound of salt mixed together. This kind of beer
will have attenuated sufficiently in from 30 to 36 hours.




_Small Beer of the best kind, how brewed, which, in a good cellar,
will keep as long as can be reasonably wanted._


    MATERIALS.

    15 bushels of Pale Malt.
     7 lb. Hops.

    Cleansed 10 1/2 Barrels Beer, heat of the air 50 by Fahrenheit's
    Thermometer.

Boiled the first copper; drew the fire; then ran ten inches of boiling
hot water into the keeve; added two inches of cold water, mixed both
well together, which made up at 168; then put in the malt gradually,
mashing all the time, for about half an hour; the mash being thin, did
not require a longer operation. Before mashing, rubbed the 7 pounds of
hops in a tub, sprinkling over them, when rubbed, about one quarter of
a pound of white salt, then poured on boiling water in sufficient
quantity to saturate them well, after which they were close covered;
the keeve having stood two hours, the tap was set, and ran down twelve
inches. Did not boil the second copper, but raised its heat to 184,
mashed a second time, and stood one hour, ran down as before, and
completed the length in the underbank, cleared the copper, had it
rinced out, got up the worts, put in the hops, extract and all, made up
the fire, and boiled one hour and a half as hard as possible,
previously adding to them four pounds of brown sugar that had been
dissolved in a bucket with hot water, also half a pound of ground
mustard; this beer remained on the coolers about eight hours, pitched
it next morning at 72 degrees, adding only one gallon of solid yest,
ran slowly into the tun which made up at 61 degrees; came on gradually,
remained in the tun 31 hours, and raised to 66, affording but two
degrees of attenuation. Notwithstanding this beer worked well in the
casks, yet moderately, was frequently filled at close intervals, and
was glass fine the fifth day. The sugar was added to assist the colour
as well as the strength, the mustard to give flavour.




_Another Method._


To brew small beer somewhat stronger, take 30 bushels of pale malt,
(have it ground fine,) 10 pound of hops, steep them as in the preceding
process. Turn out of your copper 16 barrels of beer, give your first
liquor at 165, your second at 175, mash, run down, stand, and boil as
before. But before you commence brewing, take five pounds of brown
sugar, put it into a metal pot with some water, set it on the fire,
keep it constantly stirring till it begins to smell strong, then take
it off the fire, and add to it, gradually, three gallons of water, at
the temperature of blood heat, stirring the water and the sugar well
together, till the whole be perfectly blended; this prepared liquor
should be added to the worts in the copper before boiling. The
fermentation, &c., to be conducted as before, save only the pitching,
yest, to be increased by half a gallon, which half gallon is not to be
added to the worts until twelve hours after the first gallon.
Attenuation should proceed until the heat rises four degrees above the
pitching heat, which should be the same as in the preceding process. In
both instances, the tuns should be covered during the period of
fermentation, but taken off for the purpose of rousing before
cleansing; these covers should be put on again, in order to prevent the
dispersion or waste of the gasses, which is always a loss of
spirituosity.




_A good sound keeping Table Beer may be Brewed from wheaten Bran and
Shorts, and, in many situations, when Malt cannot be procured, would be
found an excellent substitute. This process is well worth the attention
of housekeepers._


    PROCESS AS FOLLOWS:

    40 Bushels of Shorts.
    20 Bushels of Bran.

    16 lb. of Hops will give 25 Barrels of Small Beer.

Boil your first copper, run into your mash tun as much boiling water
as, when reduced with cold, will bring it to the temperature of 1.0,
then commence your mashing operation, putting in two bushels of shorts,
and one bushel of bran at a time; when these are well mixed with the
water, put in more, mash again, and so continue to do till all is in;
it will take from half an hour to three quarters to mash this quantity
properly; let your mash stand two hours, run down as in the preceding
processes, and give your second liquor 165; mash a second time, stand
one hour, boil your first wort one hour very hard with half your hops,
which should have been steeped, rubbed, and salted, as before directed;
boil your second wort one hour and a half in the same way, putting on
the remainder of your hops, with one pound of ground mustard, and five
pounds of brown sugar, reduced, by boiling, to a colouring matter, as
already directed in the previous process; make up your two boilings in
your tun at the heat of 65, giving three gallons of solid yest; let
your attenuation proceed ten degrees, or to 75, then cleanse, and
continue to fill your casks in the usual way. It has been found that
beer brewed from these materials has stood the summer heats much better
than beer brewed from malt alone; this may be accounted for by the
extract of malt possessing a much larger proportion of saccharine
matter than that obtainable from bran and shorts. In families, this
beer may be brewed in the proportion of one or two barrels at a time;
and in the country, where brewer's yest may not be procurable, leaven,
diluted with blood-warm water, may be substituted for brewer's yest,
and will answer, but not so well; neither will attenuation go so high,
as fermentation with leaven, when applied to liquids, is generally
languid and slow.




_Single Ale and Table Beer._


    100 Bushels of Malt.
     60 lb. of Hops.

    Heat of the air 50 degrees.

    Cleansed or tunned 30 Barrels of Single Ale; with 16 Barrels of
    Table Beer after.

First, or mashing liquor, 168, run your whole quantity of boiling
liquor into your mash tun, and when it cools down to the above point of
168, begin to run in your malt gradually from your malt bin; this
quantity will require four or five hands to mash it well, which will
generally take three quarters of an hour; when sufficiently mashed,
cover your tun, let it stand two hours; run down this first mash
smartly by two cocks within the hour; let your hops be rubbed, steeped,
and salted, as before directed; added to these worts, as they began to
boil, three gallons of the essentia bina or liquid colouring, with one
pound and a half of ground mustard, and one pound of liquorice root
finely powdered, boiled the whole two hours as hard as possible, there
being a second copper for this operation, there was liquor prepared for
the small beer and run on the keeve at the heat of 185; mashed well a
second time, and stood two hours; by this time the first wort was let
run into the hop back, and so on the cooler. After which, ran down the
small beer, got it into the small copper, adding about six hand buckets
of the hops that had been boiled on the single ale; these answered to
preserve the beer, with one pound of ground mustard to assist flavour,
and two gallons of the essentia bina to give colour; boiled the small
beer one hour smartly. The strong worts were let into the tun in three
portions, there being three coolers; the first division, at 65, had two
gallons and a half of yest given to it; the second, at 66, the same
quantity of yest; the third, at 65, was let down without yest, when all
were in the tun made up at 64; in thirteen hours the tun had a handsome
appearance of work; came on regularly, and attenuated to 76, having
gained 12 degrees within sixty hours, then cleansed and filled the
casks every three hours for the first eight fillings. Thus managed,
this single ale was fit to send out the fifth day after brewing. When
this ale is racking off the butts, to be sent out, would recommend
putting two ounces of ground rice into each barrel which will create
briskness, and much improve the beer. Ran the small beer into the hop
back of the strong beer, and so on the coolers, thereby giving it a
chance to lick up all the strong ale it met with in its progress to the
tun, which it entered at 65 with three gallons of yest, and was
cleansed within thirty-six hours. The quantity of beer here mentioned
would be much improved by the addition of six or seven pounds of brown
sugar or molasses; but if good table beer is wanted, it can be only
obtained from whole grists of malt, and is well worth the difference of
expense to those who can afford it, and appreciate quality.




_Strong Beer._


    Brewed, November, 1810, the following materials. Heat of the air 50
    degrees.

    40 Bushels of Pale Malt.
    20 Bushels of Amber Malt.
    --
    60
    --
    40 lb. of Hops, the best quality.

    Cleansed 20 Barrels of Beer.

Rubbed, salted, and steeped the hops, as already directed, in a close
vessel, ran a sufficient quantity of boiling water on the mash tun for
the first mash, which was suffered to cool down to 165; mashed well for
nearly one hour, stood two hours; ran down smartly, boiled the first
wort one hour very hard, with about half the hops; mashed a second time
at about 185: took about half an hour in the operation, ran down
smartly after two hours' standing, got up this second mash smartly into
the copper, taking the necessary precaution of rincing the copper out
clean, for the reception of the second wort, which was boiled two hours
very hard, with the remainder of the hops; these two worts were run
together on the same cooler; after standing a few hours, were run on a
second cooler, and there suffered to remain till they came down to 65;
were then let into the tun, with two gallons of solid yest, by a large
plug hole in a few minutes so as to have scarcely suffered any
diminution of their heat; in twelve hours after, there was added two
gallons more of yest, roused the tun a second time, came on gradually,
and attenuated within 56 hours ten degrees, and so was cleansed at the
heat of 75, this beer was filled every two hours, for the first
twenty-four, and in a few days more became transparently fine; this
beer should have added to it, before sending out, four ounces of
steeped hops, and two ounces of ground rice to each barrel; the five
pounds of hops wanted for this operation is previously put to steep in
a clean tub with some of the beer. This beer, if thus brewed with good
materials, and treated as directed, will be found to give satisfaction.
During the winter half year, the fermenting tun should be always
covered; in summer, only partially so; the less strong beer is
attempted to be brewed in that season the better, as it will not keep,
necessity alone should compel the brewer to work, in this country,
during the summer months; and then at small beer only.




_Table Beer, English method of brewing it._


    Take 8 bushels of Malt, and 6 lb. of Hops.

    This quantity of materials should deliver four barrels of beer.

    First liquor 161; mash the first time one hour.

    Second liquor 170; mash the second time half an hour.

    Third liquor 152; mash the third time twenty minutes.

Boil the three runnings together for two hours in a close covered
copper; three pints of good solid yest will be sufficient to pitch this
quantity, mixing it, before adding, with about one gallon of the wort,
then add this to the rest; a low attenuation for this kind of beer will
not answer, the specific gravity being too light, the fermentation
rarely exceeding 30 hours in the tun. It being generally wanted for
immediate use; it is pitched high, and worked quick. It is further
important to bung it down close as soon as it has done working. This
kind of beer may be securely and advantageously administered to fever
patients, instead of other drink: I have known it to be attended with
the happiest consequences.




_Unboiled beer, how Brewed._


The following process, I confess, I never myself tried, but, from the
manner it was spoken of by the party giving it, I would strongly
recommend a trial of it on a small scale, at first, until its
advantages and superiority was well ascertained over the old and long
established mode of boiling wort. Mash your full complement of malt, or
rather one third more, and that in the usual way, (suppose you are
brewing strong beer,) and while your mash stands, let your copper have
as much cold water run into it as will save it from burning; rouse your
fire, salt and rub your hops, as recommended in previous processes; let
their quantity be increased one third more than if brewed in the
ordinary way; and when got into your copper, cover close, and let these
hops simmer for two hours, _but not boil_; then run down your first
wort in sufficient quantity as, when added to the water and the extract
of the hops, will give you the length you contemplate; you will observe
the malt is increased to meet the quantity of water in the copper; but
this cannot be considered a loss, as the second mash will answer for
single ale, or good table beer; the hops in the same way. When you have
got your intended complement of strong wort in your copper, rouse it
well, cover close, and let your copper stand two hours more, keeping up
a moderate fire just enough to make it simmer _but not boil_; during
this time your second mash may be going on with water from your second
copper; this, as already stated, will make single ale, or good table
beer; if the latter, it may be boiled in the usual way, but not longer
than half an hour, on account of the increased quantity of hops; which
hops should be all retained in the copper after the first worts are run
off, by means of a strainer placed at the mouth of the cock hole; one
hour strong boiling will be sufficient for the succeeding wort, if
single ale be wanted; the remainder of the process for both worts is
the same as already directed for such quality of drinks. It was further
stated to me that unboiled beer will appear very turbid and unpromising
for some time after it is brewed, and will take three months at least
to come round; but that after that period it will improve rapidly, and
become transparently fine; when second worts are found too weak, they
may be assisted with good Muscovado sugar, of which eight pounds is
considered equivalent to one bushel of malt. In fact, pleasant beer
might be made from sugar alone, without any malt.




_Strong Beer, of an excellent quality and flavour, brewed from the
extract of the Hop only, rejecting the substance._


This extract was obtained by the hot infusion, in a close covered
wooden vessel set to infuse the evening before brewing; in this process
one third more hops should be allowed; these hops need not be wasted,
as they will answer well for table beer, or single ale, brewed
according to the preceding processes; but, in either case, one hour's
strong boiling will answer for single ale, half an hour for table beer
will be sufficient, on account of the increased quantity of hops.

When you have got up your first wort in your copper, that you intend to
preserve with extract, boil the first half hour without it, and one
hour with it, very hard in both instances. It should have been
mentioned that, in preparing your first, or mashing liquor, two pounds
of rice is to be added to your water in the copper before boiling,
supposing the length of your brewing 20 barrels, or in that proportion.

Strong beer brewed with the extract alone, as here recommended, has
turned out remarkably well, and if the hops are good, will be found
more delicately flavoured than other beer; supposing the malt alike
good. Pitching, cleansing, and filling, to be conducted as already
recommended in preceding processes, with the tun close covered during
the fermentation.




_Table Beer._


Table beer, of a superior quality, may be brewed in the following
manner, a process well worth the attention of the brewer, the gentleman
and the farmer, whereby the beer is altogether prevented from working
out of the cask, and the fermentation conducted without any apparent
admission of the external air. I have made the scale for one barrel, in
order to make it more generally useful to the community at large;
however, the same proportions will answer for a greater or less
quantity, only proportioning the materials and utensils. Take one peck
of good malt ground, one pound of hops, put them in twenty gallons of
water, and boil them for half an hour, then run them into a hair cloth
bag, or sieve, so as to keep back the hops and malt from the wort,
which, when cooled down to 65 degrees by Fahrenheit's thermometer, add
to them 2 gallons of molasses, with one pint, or a little less, of good
yest, mix these with your wort, and put the whole into a clean barrel,
and fill it up with cold water to within four inches of the bung hole,
(this space is requisite to leave room for fermentation,) bung down
tight, and if brewed for family use, would recommend putting in the
cock at the same time, as it will prevent the necessity of disturbing
the cask afterwards; in one fortnight this beer might be drawn, and
will be found to improve to the last.




_Fermenting and Cleansing in the same Vessel._


The following recommendation to brewers is well worth their attention,
that is, to ferment their strong, or what they call their stock beer,
in the vat they propose to keep it in, until fit to turn out; this
practice will be found advantageous to the flavour and preserving
quality of such beer, as close fermentation has a decided preference
over what is termed open. One or more workers may be placed in the side
of such vat, a few inches above the surface of the enclosed liquor;
thus the head as it rises will have the opportunity of running off;
such fermentation should further be conducted coolly and slowly, the
pitching heat, in this case, should not exceed 60 degrees of
Fahrenheit, and the yest one third in quantity less than if applied in
open vessels, but the yest should be mixed with a double quantity of
the wort at 65, in a separate vessel before pitching. When vats are
wanting, the operation may be conducted in hogsheads or butts, allowing
a tin or wooden worker to each cask. In brewing small quantities of
strong beer, this contrivance supersedes the necessity of fermenting
tuns, or troughs, no small saving of expense, whilst it makes the beer
more spiritous and preserving. The annexed plate shows the form and
application of the worker, whether of tin or wood.

[Illustration:

A  The cask in which the worker is placed.

B  The spout of the worker, which takes off the yest.

C  The plug at the angle of the worker to admit the pipe of a
   tundish, in order to fill the cask as it works.]




_Another Method of fermenting Strong Beer that might be expected to
produce a pure and excellent liquor._


Mash, run down, and boil in the usual way, suffer your worts, after
drawing your fire, to remain on your copper two hours, doors and hatch
open. If in winter, the deeper your worts lie on the cooler the better;
when they have come down to the proper heat of pitching, give your yest
to them on the cooler, mixing it gently with the whole guile, and when
properly headed with yest, which will probably happen within
twenty-four hours, run off your worts gently into barrels, leaving your
top and bottom yest on the cooler undisturbed, till all the cooler is
cleared; but previous to running your worts into the barrels, put half
a pint of good solid yest into each, and when full, clap your tin
workers into the bung holes, and so let it finish its fermentation for
about a week longer, filling the casks occasionally as they work. When
done working, bung down or vat them; if you wish to add any kind of
flavouring substance to this beer, the best time to do it is at
commencing the second fermentation, experience teaching that all
fermented liquors should have such substances added to them during, or
at the commencement of their fermentation, which is preferable to
adding these substances in the boil; I mean spices, and delicate
flavouring substances.




_Process of Brewing Windsor Ale on a small scale._


Windsor ale is a very pale, light, agreeable ale, as fine as wine, and
unquestionably the best fermented of any malt liquor sent to the London
market.

Length drawn, three barrels per quarter of eight bushels, the malt
pale, with two pounds of hops of the first quality; heat of the first
liquor 182, two barrels of which is generally allowed to each quarter
of malt, for the first mash; one barrel per quarter for the second; the
same quantity for the third is as little liquor as can be dispensed
with in three mashings; for short liquor and stiff mashes are essential
to this quality of ale, in order to leave as little as possible in the
copper for evaporation on account of the short boiling. Mash quick, run
down quick, get your wort as fine as possible into your underbank; let
your first mash stand two hours, your second one hour and three
quarters. Give your second mashing liquor at 190; if you mash a third
time, give your liquor at 175; stand half an hour; these worts should
be pitched from 52 to 60, but not higher. The mode of doing so is also
different from the generality of other malt liquor; your yest should be
fresh, smooth, and solid. Begin yesting this ale a few barrels at a
time, and when that has caught, add the remainder gradually, in about
48 hours, or from that to 60. This guile of ale will assume a close
head of yest, which should be carefully skimmed off as fast as it forms
after the first skimming: by this is not meant the first or worty head
formed soon after the yest has taken, but the close yesty head already
mentioned, which usually takes the time stated, say from 48 to 60
hours, when no more yest rises, and the guile remains quite flat; you
will find the heat you pitched at, say 56, 58, or 60 degrees will by
this time have increased to 80, or even more, and the specific gravity
of the wort diminished from 26 or 27 pound per barrel, to six or seven
pound per barrel; this attenuation will give it all the pungency and
spirituosity it stands in need of. At this time your cleansing
operation commences; after which it will work but little in the casks.
It should be filled regularly every two or three hours, after
cleansing, for the first twenty-four. After it has done working, you
should immediately start it into an air-tight vat, with about one pound
of hops well rubbed to every three barrels of ale in your brewing; if
you use spent hops, such as has been boiled on the first mash, you may
use a greater quantity, say half a pound more to each three barrels of
beer, taking the precaution that they are become quite cool. This ale,
thus treated, will be found glass fine in the course of a fortnight,
and fit to be racked off into hogsheads or barrels. It will improve by
age both in flavour and quality. But it should not be boiled more than
fifteen minutes.




_Reading Beer, how made._


Reading beer is made in a town of that name about thirty miles distant
from London; the quality of its beer is much spoken of, the mode of
brewing it is stated to be as follows:

    Scale of Brewing, suppose 22 Barrels.

    80 Bushels of Pale Malt.
    98 lb. of Hops.
     3 lb. of Grains of Paradise, pounded or ground.
     5 lb. of Coriander Seed,           do.
    14 lb. of the best brown Sugar.

Your malt should be some days ground, and if exposed on an open loft,
after grinding, so much the better. Boil your first copper, run on your
mash tun till you have your complement, then occasionally rouse your
water with your mashing oars, or dashers, till you get it down to 175:
put your malt in slowly, for fear of setting; keep mashing all the
time, which should be continued full one hour, stand two hours, run
your worts, when you set tap, as fine as you can get them into your
underbank; this you will effect by drawing off successively five or six
buckets of the first run, and throwing them over your grains in the
mash tun; when you perceive they come off glass fine, lay by your
bucket. Give your second mashing liquor at 178 degrees, mash three
quarters of an hour, stand one hour. Give your third liquor at 158,
mash half an hour, stand one hour; boil your first copper of worts,
which should take the half of your three runs, one hour as hard as you
can; your second, two hours in the same way; run the two boilings into
one cooler, and pitch at 64, giving one gallon of solid smooth yest;
skim off the yest, as in the case of Windsor ale, until the attenuation
rises to 80 degrees, which will have advanced it, from the pitching
heat of 64, sixteen degrees. Before you commence the operation of
cleansing, mix one quarter of a pound of bay salt, with half a peck of
malted bean flour, scatter this mixture over the surface of your tun,
rouse well, cleanse, and fill in the usual way.




_Two-penny Amber Beer, as brewed in London._


This beer is in great demand, and large quantities of it consumed, and
is supposed more profitable to the brewer than any other species of
malt liquor, it being generally brewed, drank, and paid for within the
fortnight.

    PROCESS.

    200 Bushels of Pale Malt.
    112 lb. of Hops.
     20 lb. of Liquorice Ball
     30 lb. of Molasses,
      4 lb. of Grains of Paradise, ground.

    Cleansed 81 Barrels.

Heat of first mashing liquor 169; mash one hour, stand two hours, run
down smartly; specific gravity of this wort 26 pound per barrel; second
mash 170, mash half an hour, stand one hour, run down as before;
specific gravity of this wort 11 pound and a half per barrel; third
mash 160, mash twenty minutes, stand half an hour; gravity six pound
per barrel; divide these three runnings into two boilings; boil the
first copper for three quarters of an hour, the second one hour, in
both cases as hard as possible; the hops and other ingredients should
be put in at the first boil, and so retained in the copper by means of
a strainer; pitch these worts at 64 degrees, giving two gallons of
solid yest at first, with two gallons more in twelve hours after:
remained in the tun about 60 hours, or until its attenuation reached 80
degrees; used over the surface of the tun, before cleansing, four pound
of ground ginger, half a pound of bay salt, and about half a peck of
wheaten flour, mixed all together, and scattered over the surface of
the tun; roused well, and cleansed 81 barrels. This quality of beer,
when brewed from good materials, and managed as directed, makes a
wholesome and a pleasant beverage; but, to do it justice, should have
more time allowed it for coming to perfection.




_London Ale, how brewed._


Ale is, of all other malt liquor, the most delicate, and will bear less
tampering with. It will therefore require your nicest care through
every part of the process. Transparency, pungency, and flavour, are
qualities that highly recommend this liquor, and should be particularly
aimed at by the brewer. Hard water is, by some, supposed to be more
favourable for making this kind of ale than soft.

    Heat of the air 60 degrees.

    200 Bushels of Pale Malt
    206 lb. of Hops.
      4 lb. of Grains of Paradise, pounded or ground.
      4 lb. of Coriander Seed,            do.
      1 lb. of Orange Powder,             do.

    Cleansed 65 Barrels of Beer.

First mash 173, mashed one hour, stood one hour, ran down smartly;
specific gravity of this wort 32 pounds per barrel; the heat appears
more favourable for obtaining the whole sweet of the mash than the
preceding one by six pounds per barrel, an object well worth the
attention of the brewer; second mash 172, specific gravity of this wort
22 pounds per barrel; mashing, standing, &c., the same as in the
preceding process; boiled the first wort one hour; the second wort two
hours, very hard in both instances; pitched the tun at 62 degrees
giving two gallons of yest at first, and two gallons twelve hours
after.

Remained in the tun about 80 hours, or until it attenuated to 74, or
twelve degrees over the heat it was pitched at; used over the surface
of the tun, at cleansing, four pound of ground ginger, half a pound of
bay salt, with half a peck of wheat flour well mixed, roused the tun
well.

You should observe, in working amber beer, to cleanse with the sweets
on, but in ale you should work it low in order to get the sweets off.
This ale should be carefully filled as it works and closely attended to
until done working; then put into each cask, if of a large size, two
handfuls of spent hops, that have been previously cooled, and but a
short time boiled; then bung down, and it will be fit to send out.




_Windsor Ale, brewed on a large Scale._


This ale has experienced so great a demand in London and its vicinity
for a few years back, as materially to affect the London pale beer
brewery; it is a liquor better calculated for winter than the summer
season. The London brewers have been induced to brew on the same
principle, and in many instances they exceed the original. Here follows
the London process for brewing this kind of beer, which, I apprehend,
will be well worth the American brewers' imitation, as good ale is a
species of malt liquor rarely met with in this country.

    200 Bushels of Pale Malt.
    224 lb. of Hops.
     40 lb of Honey.
      4 lb. of Coriander Seed, ground.
      2 lb. of the Grains of Paradise, ground.

    65 Barrels Cleansed.

Procure your hops of the best quality, rub them in one or more large
tubs, pour cold water on them in sufficient quantity to wet them all
over, and so let them infuse till the next day, which should be the day
on which you brew. When your first copper has just boiled, run a
sufficient quantity of water into your mash tun for your first mash;
and when this has cooled down to 176 degrees, run in your malt slowly,
and mash well for one hour and a quarter; after which, let your mash
tun stand two hours, run down smartly and fine; keep your mash tun
close covered from the time you have done mashing till you begin to set
tap; give your second mashing liquor at 186, mash one hour, stand one
hour, run down as before; give your third liquor for the last mash at
160, mash one hour, stand one hour run down as before; divide these
three worts into two parts, boil your first copper one hour, putting in
your ingredients with your hops, save the 40 pounds of honey, which
should be reserved to be put into the copper a few minutes before
striking off; rouse your copper well at the time of putting in the
honey, and continue the same till run off, otherwise, it will pitch to
the bottom of the copper, and likely be the cause of burning; your
second worts should boil two hours on the same hops and ingredients,
which should be retained in the copper by a strainer, pitch your tun at
62 degrees, giving two gallons of good yest at first, and two gallons
more in twelve hours after; let your fermenting heat rise to 80
degrees; thus your attenuation will have gained 18 degrees, which will
probably cause your guile to remain in the tun from 60 to 80 hours. Use
salt and bean meal flour as directed in the preceding process, and in
the same proportion, before cleansing; fill, &c., as already directed.




_Welsh Ale, how brewed._


This it a luscious and richly flavoured ale, much liked, but very heady.

    PROCESS.

    72 Bushels of Pale Malt.
    70 lb. of Hops.
    20 lb. of best brown Sugar.
     2 lb. of Grains of Paradise, ground.

Heat of the first mashing liquor 175, mash one hour and a half, putting
in your malt very gradually, and mash uncommonly well, and let it stand
two hours; second liquor at 190, mash one hour, and stand two more; run
down as before, boil these two runs together for one hour and a half,
putting in your hops, &c., save the sugar, which is to be put in but a
few minutes before striking off, at which time the rousing of the
copper should commence, and so continue until the worts are nearly run
off. Small beer may be brewed, in the usual way, after both these
worts, in which case, cold water will answer full as well as hot; pitch
your strong worts at 62, with a small proportion of good yest, and let
your fermenting heat rise to 80; thus your attenuation will proceed 18
degrees; cleanse with salt and bean flour as already directed, but in
suitable proportion in point of quantity to your malt, fill in the
usual way, and when nearly done working, use fine ale to top with,
before you bung down, putting into each barrel one large handful of
scalded hops, that have been previously cooled down.




_Wirtemberg Ale._


    BREWED AS FOLLOWS:

    128 Bushels of Pale Malt.
     32 Bushels of Amber Malt.
    ---
    160 Bushels of Malt.
    ---
    188 lb. of Hops.
     28 lb. of Honey.
     20 lb. of Sugar.
      4 lb. of Hartshorn Shavings.
      4 lb. of Coriander Seed, ground.
      1 lb. of Caraway Seed, ground.

    Cleansed 50 Barrels of Ale.

Give your first mashing liquor at 172, mash for one hour and a half,
stand two hours, run down fine, but smartly.

Second mashing liquor 180, mash one hour, stand two hours, run down as
before; get up your two worts; put in, with your hops, the other
ingredients, save the honey and sugar, which is to be put into your
copper but a few minutes before striking off, rousing your copper while
any wort remains in it. This ale should be boiled hard for one hour and
a half; pitch your tun at 62, raise your fermenting heat to 80, which
will generally rise in the course of 70 hours. Give of good solid yest
four gallons, two gallons at first, and two gallons more in twelve
hours after, rouse your tun each time.




_Hock._


This is a beer that has within a few years had a great run,
particularly in Germany.

    PROCESS AS FOLLOWS:

    112 Bushels of Pale Malt.
     48 Bushels of Amber Malt.
    ---
    160 Bushels.
    ---
    206 lb. of Hops.
      4 lb. of Cocculus Indicus Berry, ground.
      2 lb. of Fabia Amora, or Bitter Bean.
     20 lb. of Brown Sugar, of good quality.

    Cleansed 54 Barrels.

First liquor 176, mash one hour and a quarter, stand one hour and a
half; second liquor 182, mash one hour, stand two hours; when both
worts are in the copper, add your hops and other ingredients, except
the sugar, which is to be put in as already directed a little time
before striking off, boil two hours and a quarter as hard as you can.
Pitch your tun at 64, giving four gallons of solid yest at once, and
cleanse the second day, or in forty-eight hours; fill as already
directed, and put into each barrel one handful of fresh steeped hops
before bunging down.




_Scurvy Grass Ale._


This species of ale is considered a great sweetener of the blood, has
been much approved of, and is strongly recommended as a wholesome and
pleasant medicine.

    PROCESS AS FOLLOWS:

    40 Bushels of Pale Malt.
    25 lb. of Hops.
    10 lb. of Molasses.
     2 lb. of Alexandrian Senna.
     5 Bushels of Garden Scurvy Grass.

    Cleansed 14 Barrels of Ale.

Your malt should be fine ground; give your first liquor at 170, mash
one hour, stand one hour; heat of your second liquor 172, mash three
quarters of an hour, stand one hour; give your third mashing liquor at
160, mash twenty minutes, stand half an hour; these three worts should
be run into your copper together, and boil together for one hour
gently, for one quarter of an hour more as hard as you can; all your
ingredients to be put in with your hops, except the molasses, which
should only be put in a few minutes before striking off; from the time
you put in your molasses, keep stirring your copper until its contents
is nearly off. About the middle of your fermentation, procure one pound
of horse-radish, wash it well, dry it with a cloth, after which slice
it thin, and throw it into your tun, rousing immediately after; when
done, replace your tun cover, pitch your worts at 66 degrees, with
about two gallons of solid yest; cleanse the third day, with the sweets
on. This ale is drank both hot and cold.




_Dorchester Ale._


This quality of ale is by many esteemed the best in England, when the
materials are good, and the management judicious.

    54 Bushels of the best Pale Malt.
    50 lb. of the best Hops.
     1 lb. of Ginger.
    1/4 of a lb. of Cinnamon, pounded.

    Cleansed 14 Barrels, reserving enough for filling.

Boil your copper, temper your liquor in the same to 185, and when
ready, run it on your keeve a little at a time, putting in the malt and
the water gradually together, mashing at the same time; when the whole
of your malt is thus got in, continue the operation of mashing half an
hour, cap with dry malt, and let your mash stand one hour and a half.
Second liquor 190, mash three quarters of an hour, stand two hours; in
both mashes get your worts as fine as you can into your underbank; rub
and salt, before mashing, 30 pounds of your hops; infuse them in
boiling water before mashing, and let the vessel containing them be
close covered. The other twenty pounds of hops should have been rubbed
the evening before brewing, but not salted, put into another close
vessel, covered with boiling water, and there suffered to digest for
12 hours: at the time of putting the hops in your copper, the extract,
in both cases, is to be added; but the first 30 pounds of hops in
substance _only_ to be added; these, with the two extracts will be
sufficient for the brewing; the remaining 20 pounds of hops will answer
for single ale, or table beer, but should be used on the same day. Your
worts being now in the copper, with the hops and extract, boil hard for
one hour; after which, draw your fire, open your copper and ash-pit
doors, and so let it stand one hour, then strike off gently on your
cooler; when your worts are cooled down to 55, prepare your puncheons,
suppose four, containing four barrels each; see that they are dry,
sweet, and clean; take three pints of solid yest for each puncheon, to
which you should add three quarts of the wort at 65, mix and blend the
wort and yest together, putting this proportion to each cask, containing
four barrels, then fill up with the wort, at the heat of 55, already
mentioned; put in your tin workers, one into each puncheon, and when you
perceive it begins to work freely, which probably will not be till the
third or fourth day, begin to fill up your casks, and so continue doing
from time to time, till they have done working. (The tin worker is
described in page 139.) This mode of brewing appears to be peculiarly
adapted for shipping to warm climates; the fermentation being slowly
and coolly conducted: it is also well calculated for bottling.

Table beer may be made, after this strong, of good quality, with cold
water, if not over drawn; 10 pound of the steeped hops will be
sufficient to preserve this beer; one hour's boiling will be enough;
ferment as already directed, and add six pounds of sugar just before
striking off, rousing, as already directed, while any remains in the
copper.




_Porter._


In England, is a liquor of modern date, which has nearly superseded the
use of brown stout, and very much encroached on the consumption of
other malt liquors, till it has become the staple commodity of the
English brewery, and of such consequence to the government, in point of
revenue, that it may be fairly said to produce more than all the rest.
Porter, when well brewed, and of a proper age, is considered a
wholesome and pleasant liquor, particularly when drank out of the
bottle; a free use is made of it in the East and West Indies, where
physicians frequently recommend the use of it in preference to Madeira
wine: the following three processes are given under the denomination of
No. I., II., and III., the first and second of which I knew to be the
practice of two eminent houses in the trade. The third I cannot so
fully answer for. An essential object to attend to, in order to ensure
complete success to the porter process, is the preparation of the malt.
Directions for that purpose will be found at the end of these processes.




_Porter Process._

No. I.


    MATERIALS.

    186 Bushels of Pale Malt.
     94 Bushels of Brown Malt.
    ---
    280 Bushels of Malt.
    ---
    300 lb. of Hops.
     10 lb. of Gentian Root, sliced.
     10 lb. of Calamus.
     10 lb. of the essence of Gentian.

    Cleansed 121 barrels. The hops, with the other ingredients, to be
    put in with the first boil, and retained in the copper by wire
    strainers, or otherwise, for the succeeding worts.

First mashing liquor 165, mash one hour, stand one hour, run down
smartly; second mash 170, mash one hour, stand one hour, run down as
before; third mash 180, mash half an hour, stand half an hour, run down
smartly; divide these three runs into two boilings, boil your first
copper as hard as you can for half an hour, the second for three hours
as hard as possible; pitch your first wort at 65 degrees, with 10
gallons of smooth yest; pitch your second at 70 degrees, with six
gallons, both runs to mix in the same tun, as soon as the head of your
tun begins to fall and close, which will possibly happen from thirty to
forty hours, at which time it is expected the fermenting heat will rise
to 80, but in no case should it be suffered to exceed it; two pecks of
bean meal flour, with two pounds of bay salt mixed together, should be
evenly scattered over the surface of the tun, before cleansing, and
then well roused. After cleansing, this drink should be filled every
two hours, for the first twelve fillings, after which, twice a day will
be sufficient; and, in about a week after cleansing, porter so brewed,
and treated as here directed, will be glass fine, and in a week more
may be vatted. As porter is generally sent out in iron-bound hogsheads
of seventy gallons each, there should, at the time of going out, be
three half pints of finings, with as much heading mixed through the
finings at will go on a two shilling piece; this fining and heading
should be well stirred in the hogshead by means of a fining brush used
for the purpose, with a long iron handle; treated thus, porter will
fall fine in a few days. The faster draught porter is drawn off the
cask the better it will drink; for when too long, it is apt to get
flat, and sour.




_Porter Process._

No. II.


    160 Bushels of Pale Malt.
    120 Bushels of Brown Malt.
    ---
    280
    ---
    350 lb. of Hops.

    Cleansed 121 Barrels of Porter.

Heat of the first mashing liquor one hundred and seventy-two, mash one
hour, stand one hour, run down smartly; second mashing liquor one
hundred and eighty, mash one hour, stand two hours, run down as before;
third mash one hundred and sixty-four, mash half an hour, stand half an
hour, run down smartly; boil the extract of the first, with half the
extract of the second mash; boil as hard as you can for one hour and a
quarter, then strike off, retaining your hops in the copper for your
second boil, which includes half your second wort, and the whole of
your third; these should be boiled for four hours as hard as you can
make them; pitch your first wort at seventy, or so high that, when in
the tun, it will make up at sixty-four, to which give six gallons of
smooth yest; pitch your second wort at sixty-five, giving seven gallons
more of yest; when all your worts are in your tun, it should make up at
sixty-four. Thus managed, it will be fit to cleanse in thirty-six or
forty hours; the closing and falling in of the head will direct the
period of performing this operation; fill, &c., as in the foregoing
process.




_Porter Process._

No. III.


     88 Bushels of Pale Malt.
    102 lb. of Hops.
     12 Gallons of Essentia Bina, or sugar colouring.

    Cleansed twenty-seven and a half Barrels of Porter.

First mashing liquor one hundred and sixty, mash one hour, stand one
hour; second mashing liquor one hundred and seventy, mash one hour,
stand one hour and three quarters; third mashing liquor one hundred and
seventy-five, mash half an hour, stand one hour; divide these three
runs into two equal parts, boil the first one hour, the second two
hours and a half, as hard as you can in both instances; pitch your
first wort at sixty, giving two gallons of solid yest; your second at
sixty-five, giving the same complement of yest; let your fermenting
heat rise to eighty, then cleanse, first topping your tun with two
pounds of bean meal flour, and half a pound of bay salt pounded and
mixed with the flour; fill fine, and head your porter casks, as already
directed to do with hogsheads; let your finings and heading be in that
proportion with lesser casks.




_Porter Malt._


This species of malt should be made from strong, well-bodied barley,
the process exactly the same as for pale malt, until it is about half
dried on the kiln; you then change your fuel under the kiln from coak
or coal to ash or beech wood, which should be split into small handy
billets, and a fierce, strong fire kept up, so as to complete the
drying and colouring in three hours, during which time it should be
frequently turned; when the colour is found sufficiently high, it may
be thrown off; the workmen should be provided with wooden shoes, to
protect their feet from the uncommon heat of the kiln in this last part
of the process, which requires the grain to snap again from the
excessive heat of the kiln. For the better performing this part of the
process, I would recommend a wire kiln to be placed adjoining the tiled
one, from which it may be cast on the wire; this would be a better and
more certain mode of conveying the porter flavour to the malt, than if
the drying was finished on the tiled kiln. Where a wire kiln was
thought too dear, a tiled one might be made to answer.




_Porter Colouring._


In modern language, is termed _essentia bina_. This is made from brown
sugar, and is now generally substituted by the London brewers for porter
malt, as more economical, and full as well calculated to answer all the
purposes of flavour and colouring. Muscovado, or raw sugar, with lime
water, are the usual ingredients of this colouring matter. Another kind,
of inferior quality, is prepared from molasses, boiled until it is
considerably darker, bitter, and of a thicker consistence; and when
judiciously made, at the close of the boiling, it is set on fire and
suffered to burn five or six minutes, then it is extinguished, and
cautiously diluted with water to the original consistence of treacle.
The burning or setting on fire gives it the greater part of its flavour,
which is an agreeable bitterness, and burns out the unassimilating oil.
Muscovado, or raw sugar, when treated in a similar manner, and diluted
to the same consistence before it sets, obtains a bitterness that more
nearly strikes the porter flavour on the palate; it is of a deep dark
colour, between black and red. To prepare it to advantage, take three
pounds, or three hundred weight of Muscovado sugar, for every two
pounds, or two hundred pounds, of essentia bina intended to be made, put
it into an iron boiler set in brick work, so that the flue for conveying
the smoke of the fire into the chimney, rises but about two thirds of
the height of the boiler in its passage to the chimney. The boiler
should have a socket or pivot in the centre of its bottom to receive the
spindle of wrought iron, with a crank in it, above the brim of the
boiler, the upper end of which turns on a corresponding pivot in an iron
bar fixed across several feet above the boiler, with a transverse iron
arm to reach from the crank for some feet over the boiler for a man to
stand, and turn it with its scraper of iron also, which works on the
bottom of the boiler to keep the sugar from burning on the bottom before
the upper part melts; this arm may be placed in a wooden handle at the
end, and held by the man, lest it become too hot for his hand. Put one
gallon of pure water into the boiler with every hundred weight of sugar
to be employed, that is, one pint to every fourteen pounds weight of
sugar, then add the sugar, light the fire, and keep it stirring until it
boils, regulating the fire so as not to suffer it to boil over; as it
begins to lessen in quantity, dip the end of the poker into it, to see
if it candies as it cools, and grows proportionably bitter to its
consistence; mark the height of the sugar in the boiler when it is all
melted, to assist in judging of its decrease; when the specimen taken
out candies, or sets hard pretty quickly, put out the fire under the
boiler, and set the vapour or smoke arising from the boiler on fire,
which will communicate to the boiling sugar, and let it burn for ten or
twelve minutes, then extinguish it with a cover ready provided for the
purpose, and faced with sheet iron, to be let down on the mouth of the
boiler with a chain or rope, so as exactly to close the boiler.

As soon as it is extinguished, cautiously add _strong lime water_ by a
little at a time, working the iron stirrer well all the time the water
is adding, so as to mix and dilute it all alike to the consistence of
treacle; before it sets in the boiler, which it would do, as the heat
declined, in a manner that would give a great deal of trouble to dilute
it after, and be imperfectly done then, it is easy to conceive this kind
of work requires to be done in an open place, or out-house, to prevent
accidents from fire. If the _essentia bina_ is neither burned too little
nor too much, it is a rich, high-flavoured, grateful bitter, that
preserves and gives an inimitable flavour and good face to porter; to
be added in proportion as the nature and composition of the grist is
varied with a greater or less proportion of pale malt. _To convert old
hock into brown stout_, it will take three pounds of _essentia bina_ of
middling or ordinary kind, and but two pounds of the best made from
Muscovado raw sugar as directed, it should weigh ten pounds to the
gallon. The _essentia bina_ should be mixed with some finings, and
roused into the tun soon after the yesty head gathers pretty strong, in
order to undergo the decomposing power of fermentation, part of it being
prone to float on the surface of the beer under the form of a flying
lee. When employed in the usual way of colour, with this precaution, the
colouring and preserving parts unite with the beer, and the gross charry
parts precipitate with the lees, and other feculencies in the tun,
previous to cleansing, adding a firm and keeping quality to the beer.
Lime water for diluting the burnt sugar, in the proportion of _essentia
bina_: thirty pounds of lime will make one puncheon, or one hundred and
twenty gallons of lime water: put fresh lime from the kiln, previously
slaked into coarse powder, into an airtight cask, gradually add the
water, stirring up the lime to expose a fresh surface to the solvent
powers of the water, which will rarely dissolve more than one ounce troy
weight in the gallon, or retain so much when kept ever so closely
excluded from the external air. If Roche lime was first grossly pounded,
and slaked in the cask, the lime water might be made still stronger; the
reason for directing the water to be slowly and cautiously added at the
first, is for the more conveniently mixing the lime with the water,
which otherwise would not be properly wet. Do not fill the vessel within
a few gallons of the bung-hole, that it may be rolled over and over with
effect, fifteen or twenty different times before left to settle, in
order to have the water fully saturated with the lime; when settled it
should be perfectly clear. It is important, as well at necessary to
state, that when the lime water is about to be added to the _essentia
bina_ in the kettle, it should be hot, otherwise there would be danger
of cracking the cast iron, of which the kettle is composed, as well as
causing a partial explosion and waste of the sugar when coming in
contact with the cold medium of the lime water; this precaution should
be carefully attended to.




_Strong Beer._


Process for brewing strong beer, alleged to be the practice in
Switzerland, by which it is asserted that an excellent and preserving
beer will be produced. I would recommend a small experiment to be made
at first, in order to establish its character and success on a more
extended scale. At a first view, there appears to be one serious
objection to this process, and that is, that it requires but a small
quantity of oily or fatty matter to destroy the fermentation of any
guile of beer. In answer, it may perhaps be truly said, that the
precaution of skimming off the fatty matter, as it rises on the surface
of this beer while in the copper, as well as the time allowed it there
to settle, also, its straining through the hops before getting on the
cooler, gives another chance to deposite this matter in the hops, if
any should remain in the copper after the skimming off.

    PROCESS AS FOLLOWS:

     60 Bushels of Pale Barley Malt.
     20 Bushels of Pale Wheat Malt.
    ---
     80 Bushels.
    ---
    170 lb. of the best Hops, to be rubbed, salted, and steeped in
        one or more close vessels before mashing, or the evening
        before brewing, still better.
     54 lb. of lean Beef to be put into the copper with the worts,
        this will average two pounds to the barrel.
      7 lb. of Rice, also, to be put in with the Beef.
      1 lb. of ground Mustard to be put in with the Hops.

    Cleansed 27 Barrels.

These worts are to be boiled one hour without the hops, in order to
afford the greater facility of skimming the fat off the surface. After
they have boiled the first half hour, the fire is damped, the boil left
to subside, and the copper to be then carefully skimmed. (This points
out the necessity of an open copper for this operation.) After which,
the fire is started again, and the worts made to boil another half hour,
and skimmed a second time in the same way; after which the hops and
mustard are added with three gallons of the _essentia bina_, and then
boiled for one hour and a half, as hard as the copper will allow without
boiling over or wasting; the fire is then drawn, ash-pit and copper
doors left open, the copper covered, and suffered to stand two hours,
then struck off on the hop back. The temperature of the external air at
the time you brew this quality of beer should not be higher than fifty
degrees. Your first, or mashing liquor, should boil, then run your whole
complement into your mash tun, which when cooled down to one hundred and
sixty-five, begin putting in your malt, one sack at a time, and mash for
one hour and a quarter, stand one hour, run down as fine as you can, yet
smartly; second mash one hundred and eighty-five, need not boil, but
when brought to that heat in your copper, begin mashing, and mash well
for three quarters of an hour, stand two hours; boil, skim, and hop, as
already directed. It is to be understood that the produce of these two
mashes are to be boiled together, forming a clear length, when cleansed,
of twenty-seven barrels; pitch your worts at sixty, previously mixing in
a tub, fifteen gallons of your wort at seventy, with one gallon of solid
yest, some time before pitching, which will give it time to catch before
adding to the remainder of the wort. Twelve hours after another gallon
of pure yest is to be added, and the tun well roused, then covered; the
attenuation suffered to proceed to eighty degrees, _but not higher_.
This mode of pitching worts might be successfully applied to other
qualities of beer and ale, and will be found a safe and good process.




_Filtering Operation._

(With a Plate.)

[Illustration

A    The fountain.
B B  The cocks.
C    The trunk communicating with the space between the two bottoms.
D    The filtering tub.
E    The false bottom.
F    The spout for carrying off the ascending liquor.
G    The receiver of the filtered liquor by ascent.
H    The receiver of the filtered liquor by descent.]


This simple operation, if my view of its effects on malt liquors, as
well as other fermented liquors, be correct, will do more towards their
improvement and preservation, than any thing hitherto attempted to be
tried on them, after their fermentation has been completed; and for
this plain reason, that it will at once disengage them from all
fermentable matter, and render them transparently fine and preserving;
thus immediately fitting them for the bottle, or putting up into tight
casks, for home consumption or exportation, which will soon recover the
beer or ale so treated from the flatness that will necessarily be
induced by a long exposure to the air during the continuance of the
operation; further to remedy which, I would recommend putting into each
barrel, before the cask is filled with this beer, half a pound of
ground rice, then fill, bung down tight, and in a short time briskness
and activity will be restored to the liquor, whether intended for draft
or bottle. This mode might, with equal success, be applied to every
kind of fermented liquor, particularly to cider, wine, and perry, also
to river and rain water. There are two modes of filtration, one by
descent, the other by ascent; the latter operation seems to be the most
perfect, though not the most economical or expeditious.

The preparation of the filtering medium is as follows. Your filtering
vessel should be in proportion to the scale of work you intend
operating on. The vessel containing the filter, should have the form
somewhat of an inverted cone, in proportion wider at top than at
bottom; over the bottom of this vessel should be placed a false one,
about three or four inches distant from the other; this upper bottom
should be perforated with holes, rather large bored, at the angles of
every square inch of its surface; your fake bottom being laid, provide
two pieces of clean thick blanketing the full size of the vessel, lay
these pieces one over the other, over them a stratum six inches deep,
of rather coarsely pounded charcoal; this should be previously wetted
with some of the beer or ale, till brought to the consistence of coarse
mortar; over this lay another stratum of fine clean pit sand, and so
on, stratum super stratum, of sand and charcoal, till you have reached
within six inches of the top; the cover of this vessel, which is also
perforated with holes somewhat smaller than those of the bottom, is let
down in the vessel to within one inch of the filtering medium, and in
that position is well secured by buttons, or otherwise. When you filter
by descent, you run your liquor over this cover, which, by means of the
holes, will be distributed evenly over the upper surface of the filter;
and so you continue running on your liquor as fast as you see the
operation will take it.

When you wish to filter by ascent, you introduce the liquor to be
filtered between the two bottoms. As the fountain which supplies this
liquor is higher than the filtering vessel, it will naturally force its
way through the false bottom, filtering medium, &c., until it runs off
pure at spout F into the receiver G. Those persons who live on the
banks, or in the vicinity of our great rivers, such as the Missouri,
Ohio, Mississippi, &c., may purify their drinking water in this way,
with great advantage to their health, and consequent increase of
comfort to themselves and families. It is also well adapted to the use
of those who navigate these waters, particularly such as proceed in
steam-boats, where convenient room can be always found for such useful
and salutary purposes, and to them I strongly recommend its use. It may
also be advantageously applied to filtering rain water, which, to some
constitutions, may be more congenial than either spring or river water.




_Returned Beer, to make the most of, and double its value._


Suppose, for example, you have one hundred and fifty barrels of this
beer, (or in that proportion, adjust your mixing ingredients
accordingly,) put the whole into one vat that it will fill; then take
half a barrel of colouring, twenty-eight pounds cream of tartar,
twenty-eight pounds of ground alum, one pound of salt of steel,
otherwise called green copperas, with two barrels of strong finings;
mix these ingredients well together, put them into your vat, and rouse
well; after which, let the vat remain open for three days; then shut
down the scuttle close, and sand it over; in one fortnight it will be
fit for use; your own good sense will then direct its application.




_To bring several sorts of Beer which have been mixed to one uniform
taste._


EXAMPLE.

Suppose you have one hundred barrels of this description in your vat;
take six pounds of porter extract, six pounds of orange peel, ground,
one pound of heading, composed of half a pound of alum, with half a
pound of green copperas mixed, six pounds of Indian bark; mix these
ingredients with one butt of finings, rouse your vat well, let it
remain open three days, then close down your vat, and sand it over; it
will be fit in one fortnight to use.




_Finings, the best method of preparing them._


A very important object indeed, is finings in the management of porter
and brown beers, and sometimes the paler kinds need their agency before
they will become transparently fine: without this quality no beer can
be acceptable to the consumer, and should be always a particular aim of
the brewers to obtain. Take five pounds of isinglass, beat each piece
in succession on a stone or iron weight, until you find you can
conveniently shred it into small pieces, and so treat every piece until
you have got through the whole; thus shredded, steep it in sour porter
or strong beer that is very fine, then set the beer and the isinglass
on the fire, and there let it remain till you raise the heat to one
hundred and ninety, but no higher, keeping it, while on the fire,
constantly stirring; then have your hogshead of clear beer ready,
strain your dissolved isinglass through a hair sieve into it, which you
must take care to mix well; thus assimilated it will be fit for use in
twelve hours.

It is worth remarking, that at the time of sending out porter or brown
beer to your customers is the time to put in both your fining and
heading, the jolting it then gets in the carriage will assist its
fining more effectually, after it has rested a few days in the
customer's cellar.




_Heading._


Is variously composed, and differently prepared; what is here
recommended will be found safe and effectual. Porter, or brown stout,
when intended for draught, should never be sent out in the cask without
fining and heading; the usual practice is to put your heading into your
fining, and so both into the cask just before filling up and bunging
down. The proportion for one hogshead of sixty-three gallons is three
half pints of fining, with as much heading put into the fining as you
can take up upon a cent piece; the heading here recommended is composed
of equal parts of sal martus (or green copperas) and alum, both finely
powdered and mixed in equal parts, so as to be intimately blended with
each other before using. The advantages derivable from heading are
merely apparent, giving a close frothy head to the beer in the quart or
mug it is drawn in; supporting the vulgar prejudice, that such beer is
better and stronger than that where no such appearance manifests
itself.




_Bottling Beer._


This is a branch of trade, that, under proper management, might be made
very productive and profitable, whereas, in the manner it is now
generally conducted, proves a losing one, occasioned by the great
breakage of bottles, arising from the impure state of the beer at the
time of putting into bottle. In consequence of this bad management, I
have known a person, extensive in the trade, to lose on an average from
two to three dozen bottles, as well as beer, on every hogshead he put
up which happened to lie over till summer, or was bottled in that
season; this loss was too heavy to expect much profit from a business
so conducted; to obviate both these consequences, I would recommend
beer, ale, and porter, intended for the bottle, to be carefully
filtered through charcoal and sand, as directed in the operation of
filtering; being thus purified from all its feculencies and fermentable
matter, it will be in the best possible state for taking the bottle, in
that mild and gentle way that will not endanger the loss of one or the
other. It will further have the good effect of recovering the beer or
ale, thus filtered, from the flatness that will necessarily be induced
by that operation, giving the liquor all the briskness and activity
that can be wished for. If beer, porter, or ale, be intended for
exportation to a warmer climate than our own, the operation will be
found particularly suited to it. Choose your corks of the best quality,
and steep them in pure strong spirit from the evening before you begin
your bottling operation; this precaution is essentially necessary to
all beer intended to be shipped, or sent off to a warmer climate than
our own, such as the East and West Indies, South America, &c. In more
temperate climes, the simple precaution of filtering alone will be
found to answer every necessary purpose, without steeping the corks in
spirits. But suppose you bottle for home consumption, in that case you
will naturally wish to have your beer, ale, and porter, get up in the
bottle in as short a space of time as possible, in that case you should
pack away your bottles in dry straw in summer, in sawdust in winter, as
your object at that season will naturally be rather to accelerate than
retard fermentation; here you should carefully watch its progress from
day to day, by drawing a bottle from the centre of the heap, as nearly
as you can get at it; place this bottle between you and the light, and
if you perceive a chain of small bubbles in the neck of the bottle,
immediately under the cork, you may conclude your beer is up in the
bottle, then draw a few more bottles, and if the same appearance
continues in them also, it is time to draw all your bottles from the
heap they were originally packed in, and set them on their bottoms in a
square frame ten inches deep, size optional; fill up this frame with
the bottles of porter, or ale, so drawn in a ripe state, then get one
or more bushels of bay salt, and scatter it as evenly as you can over
the bottles, until the space between their necks is nearly half filled;
then another course of bottles may be sunk between these, with their
necks down through the salt, so as to form an upper tier; thus treated,
not a single bottle will be found to break from the force of
fermentation, and the salt will answer for a fresh supply of bottles,
as often as you may find it necessary to draw, or send them out, this
quantity will answer your purpose for years, if you only keep it dry;
another advantage, and no small one, derivable from a bottling
operation conducted in this way, will be, that a loft will be found
more convenient for the purpose than a ground floor, as less damp, and
more likely to preserve the salt dry, which a more moist atmosphere
would naturally dissolve. The practice here recommended may, with equal
success, be applied to cider and perry.




_Brewing Coppers, the best method of setting them._


This article, at a first view, may not appear to have much connexion
with brewing, but, when attentively considered, it has a very material
one, as also with economy, by saving nearly one half the fuel. It is a
well-known fact in brewing, that the quicker and stronger the operation
of boiling is performed, the better such beer will preserve, and the
sooner it will become fine; although this opinion is combated by many,
experience has proved it in my practice. I will suppose the copper you
are about to set to contain two thousand gallons, the diameter of its
bottom, five feet; let your fire blocks, if possible, be of soapstone,
one for each side, and one for the end, of sufficient thickness and
length, and full twelve inches deep, to the top of your sleepers; three
courses of brick, sloped off from the top of the fire stone, with the
usual quantity of mortar, and plastered over, will afford sufficient
elevation for the fire to act on the bottom of the copper, leaving a
space of about eighteen or twenty inches from the bottom to the top of
the sleepers; the breadth of the fireplace need not exceed twenty-six
inches. When the copper is about to be placed on the blocks, by
swinging, or otherwise, three feet of the bottom of the copper should
be on one side from the centre of the furnace, and but two feet on the
other; I would have but one flue or entrance for the fire to round this
copper, which flue should be placed on the three feet side, twenty-four
inches long at the mouth; distance of the brick work from the copper,
six inches, to narrow to five at the closing; the first closing to be
three feet high on the side of the copper; the second closing, to be
two feet above that, leaving twenty-one inches clear flue, allowing
three inches for the thickness of the brick and mortar; the throat of
the first flue, leading into the second; twenty-four inches distance of
upper flue from the copper, five inches closing into four and a half
inches at top. A short distance above the top of your copper should be
placed an iron register to regulate the fire, so contrived as to be
handily worked backward and forward by the brewer, or the man tending
the fire, as circumstances may direct. The furnace door should be in
two parts, one to hang on each side of the frame, and so lap over a
small round hole, with a sliding shut to it, should be fixed in one of
these doors, to admit the iron slicer to stir the fire. The clear of
the furnace frame need not exceed sixteen inches high, by eighteen
inches wide. A copper so set and proportioned, by being kept close
covered at top, might be expected to boil cold water in one hour and
fifteen minutes, perhaps in one hour, and that with a great saving of
fuel compared with the same sized copper set in the ordinary way.




_Pumps, the best and most economical construction, also the most
effectual, and least liable to fail or get out of order; how best
treated in cold weather to prevent freezing, or when frozen to remove
the inconvenience._


Freezing often retards the brewer's operations, and gives him
considerable trouble and delay. To obviate these inconveniences, I
would recommend having the rod of wood, instead of iron, so long as to
work in a brass chamber, two feet above the lower box; if the pump be
long, the rod may be made with joints of iron, and keys properly made,
so as to have it in two, three, or four pieces, capable of being taken
asunder; suppose the diameter of your chamber to be six inches, I would
have the diameter of the rod five inches, which, being so much lighter
than the column of water it displaces, will make the stroke
comparatively light and easy to the horse, and not near so great a
strain on the pump, delivering as much water or wort, it is expected,
as will be found necessary for all the purposes of a brewery. But
should it so happen, that any deficiency is found in the quantity of
water and wort so delivered, it is only necessary to reduce the
diameter of the wooden rod, from one quarter to half an inch more, and
this will proportionably augment the quantity of water and wort
delivered at each stroke. The water pumps, which in winter are exposed
to the effects of the external air, should have a casing round them of
boards from the level of the ground to half their height above it,
which casing should be stuffed with dry hay, straw, or shavings, and
well rammed; this casing should be water-tight round the pump, at the
top, and a cock placed over it on one side of the pump, to let off the
standing water; then stuff the mouth of the pump with hay or straw, and
so treated the remaining water in the pump will never freeze in the
coldest winter.

But where these precautions have not been taken, and the charge in your
pump becomes frozen, and you wish to clear it, get one quart of bay
salt, throw it into your pump, stop the mouth of it at the top, and in
the course of a few hours the salt will have dissolved the ice in your
pump, and you may go to work; this is much more effectual and less
troublesome than using hot water, which must be repeated in great
quantities before it will produce its effect.




_Cleansing Casks._


Trifling and simple as this operation may appear, it is still one that
is highly important to the brewer, and requires minute and constant
attention. Burning and steaming casks seems to be two most effectual
modes of accomplishing this important object. If your casks have been
long in use, and thereby contracted any musty or bad smell, the best
way is to open them; wash them well out with boiling water; set them to
dry, and then fire them, after which, they may be washed out again with
hot water, and, when dry, headed for use; every cask after emptying,
that is not perfectly sweet, should be treated in this way,
particularly when intended for stock or keeping beer. New casks that
have never been used, are best prepared by steaming them, and a small
boiler, containing from sixty to one hundred gallons will be best
suited to this purpose. If you have tin pipes communicating from one
cask to another, you can steam four or five at a time, and the work
goes on expeditiously. Fresh emptied small beer, and single-ale casks,
can be sufficiently cleansed by chaining them; after which, rincing
them out with hot water will be found a sufficient cleansing for such
casks, as they are generally but a short time on draught. The operation
of chaining casks is performed by putting into them, with boiling
water, a small iron chain, two or three yards long, and then tossing
your cask several times round and round so as to get the chain to rub,
and act upon every part of the inside head, &c., this will take off the
yest, &c. The smoother and evener all brewers' casks are made on their
inside the better, as they are thereby the more easily cleaned. Every
brewer should be particular in recommending to his customers carefully
to cork up every cask as drawn off--by this simple precaution they will
be preserved sweet for months, while the neglect of it will cause them
to get foul in a short time, to the great increase of trouble and
expense to the brewer before he can sufficiently purify them. It is
also a necessary precaution to keep casks, when brought home, from the
action of the sun and weather, by placing them under proper sheds;
where casks are supposed to occupy one fifth of the brewer's active
capital, they should at all times be carefully looked after.




_The following processes are given principally for the use of gentlemen
farmers, housekeepers, and others, who may occasionally wish, as well as
find their account, in brewing their Mead or Metheglin._


THE PROCESS.

For every pipe of mead allow one hundred and sixty-eight pounds of
honey. On a small scale, take ten gallons of water, two gallons of
honey, with a handful of raced ginger, and two lemons, cut them in
slices, and put them, with the honey and ginger, into the water, boil
for half an hour, carefully skimming all the time; use a strong
ferment, and attenuate high, not under seventy-eight; in the boiling
add two ounces of hops to the above ten gallons of water and two
gallons of honey. In about three weeks, or one month, after cleansing
and working off, this mead will be fit to bottle. This liquor, when
thus made, is wholesome and pleasant, and little, if any, inferior to
the best white wines. It is particularly grateful in summer, when drank
mixed with water.




_Ginger Wine._


Take sixteen quarts of water, boil it, add one pound of bruised ginger,
infuse it in the water for forty-eight hours, placed in a cask in some
warm situation; after which time strain off this liquor, add to it
eight pounds of lump sugar, seven quarts of brandy, the juice of twelve
lemons, and the rinds of as many Seville oranges; cut them, steep the
fruit, and the rinds of the oranges, for twelve hours in the brandy,
strain your brandy, add it to your other ingredients, bung up your
cask, and in three or four weeks it will be fine; if it should not, a
little dissolved isinglass will soon make it so.




_Currant Wine._


Take five gallons of currant juice, and put it into a ten gallon cask,
with twenty pounds of Havanna, or lump sugar, fill the cask with water,
let it ferment, with the bung out, for some days; as it wastes fill up
with water; when done working, bung down; and in two or three months
after it will be fit for use: two quarts of French brandy added, after
the fermentation ceases, would improve the liquor, and communicate to
it a preserving quality. Wine may be made from strawberries,
raspberries, and cherries in the same way.




_Yest, how prepared, so as to preserve sweet and good in any
climate._


This operation, I apprehend, however simple it may appear, will have
very important consequences, whether we consider it as a medicine (and
in putrid fevers there is, perhaps, no better known) or a ferment. It
will be well worth the attention of the physician, the brewer, the
distiller, the merchant, and the housekeeper, whether resident in the
temperate, or in the torrid zone.

Mr. Felton Mathew, merchant in London, obtained a patent for the
above-mentioned object, which may be found in the Repertory of Arts,
vol. V. page 73. Mr. Mathew used a press with a lever, the bottom made
with stout deal or oak timber, fit for the purpose, raised with strong
feet a convenient distance from the ground, so as to admit the beer to
run off into whatever is prepared to receive it; into the back of it is
let a strong piece of timber, or any other fit material, to secure one
end of the lever, the top of which should work on an iron bolt or pin;
when the lever is thus prepared, get your yest into hair-cloth bags,
or, if not conveniently had, into coarse canvas bags; when filled, tie
them securely at the mouth, and place one bag at a time in a trough of
a proper size with a false bottom full of holes, on this bottom should
be placed an oblong perforated shape, about the form of a brick mould;
in this oblong shape or box, without either bottom or top, is placed
the bag containing the yest, on which the press is let down, and
gradually forced, as the beer exudes, or gradually runs off; when no
more liquid runs from the shape, the press is taken off, and the bag
opened, its contents taken out, which will crumble to pieces; in this
state it should be thinly spread on canvass, previously stretched in
frames, which will permit the heated air of the kiln to pass through it
in all directions, and thus gradually finish the process to perfect
dryness, which will be completely effected by ninety degrees of heat:
at the commencement of the drying, it would be proper to pass the edge
of a board over each frame, in order to reduce the lumps of yest, and
thereby make them as small as possible. When completely dry, put it
into tight casks or bottles so as to exclude air and moisture: thus
secured, it will preserve good as long as wanted in any climate, and be
found a valuable article of domestic economy, as well as medicine. When
to be used, the necessary quantity should be dissolved in a little warm
water, at the temperature of from eighty to ninety degrees of heat,
with the addition of a proportionate quantity of sugar; the addition of
sugar is only recommended when used to raise bread, but not when given
as medicine; in the opinions of several intelligent men, this is
considered the simplest and most effectual method of preserving yest,
and, as such, is hereby strongly recommended.




_To make a substitute for Brewer's Yest._


Take six pounds of ground malt, and three gallons of boiling water,
mash them together well, cover the mixture, and let it stand three
hours, then draw off the liquor, and put two pounds of brown sugar to
each gallon, stirring it well till the sugar is dissolved, then put it
in a cask just large enough to contain it, covering the bung hole with
brown paper; keep this cask in a temperature of ninety-eight degrees.
Prepare the same quantity of malt and boiling water as before, but
without sugar, then mix all together, and add one quart of yest; let
your cask stand open for forty-eight hours, and it will be fit for use.
The quart of yest should not be added to these two extracts at a higher
heat than eighty degrees.




_Another method to make twenty-six gallons of the substitute._


Put twenty-six ounces of hops to as many gallons of water, boil it for
two hours, or until you reduce the liquor to sixteen gallons; add malt
and sugar in the proportion before mentioned, and mash your malt at the
heat of one hundred and ninety degrees; let it stand two hours and a
half, then strain it off, and add to the malt ten gallons more of water
at the same degree of heat, and mash a second time; let it stand two
hours, then strain it off as before; when your first mash is blood
heat, or ninety-eight, put to it one gallon of the preceding
substitute, mix it well, and let it stand ten hours; then take the
produce of the second mash, and add it, at ninety-eight, to the rest,
mix it well, and let it stand six hours, it will be then fit for use in
the same manner, and for the same purposes as brewer's yest is applied;
the advantages alleged in favour of this method are, that it will keep
sweet and good longer than brewer's yest, and in any reason or
temperature be fit for use.




_Brewer's Yest._


May be generated in the following way: Take one pound of leaven, made
with wheaten flour, such as the French generally use to raise their
bread, dilute the pound of leaven with water or wort, the latter to
choose at ninety degrees of heat, add it to your wort at the heat of
sixty-five, supposing your barrel to be filled with wort at this heat;
then add your leaven, diluted as mentioned, until your cask be full; to
effect which, with less waste and more certainty, it may be better to
put into your barrel the diluted leaven first, then fill up with wort
at the temperature mentioned; after a day or two the beer will begin to
work out yest, and will serve as a ferment for another brewing; thus,
after three or four brewings, your yest will become so improved that it
will be nearly equal to any brewer's yest, and the experiment in
certain situations is well worth trying, when a proper ferment is
wanted and cannot be otherwise procured.




_Process for making and preparing Claret Wine for shipping; without
which preparation such wines are considered unfit for exportation,
being in its natural state about the strength of our common Cider._


Claret wine, before the French revolution, was the staple article of
export from the great commercial City of Bordeaux, to every part of
Europe. And, it may be presumed, will soon again reassume its wanted
importance. The vintage generally begins, for making this sort of wine,
about the middle or latter end of September, and is generally finished
in all the month of October. The mode by which the juice is expressed
from the grape, is by the workmen trampling them with their bare feet in
a large reservoir or cooler, (not the cleanest operation in the world,)
which has an inclination to the point where the spout or spouts are
placed for taking off the expressed juice, which is conveyed to large
open vats, that are thus filled with this juice to within ten or twelve
inches of the upper edge; this space is left to make room for the
fermentation, which spontaneously takes place in this liquor. After the
first fermentation is over, and the wine begins to purify itself, which
is ascertained by means of a small cock placed in the side of the vat,
and takes place generally by the middle of February, or beginning of
March, in the following year; it is then racked off into hogsheads,
carefully cleansed, and a match of sulphur burned in each cask before
filling; when thus racked off, it is bunged up, and immediately bought
up by brokers for the Bordeaux merchants, and here it is made to undergo
the second or finishing fermentation, in the following manner: It may be
proper here to remark, that claret wine is generally divided into three
growths, first, second, and third; the first growths, namely, Latour,
Lafeet, and Chateaux Margo, are uniformly rented for a term of years, at
a given price, to English merchants, through whom, or their agents
_only_ is there a possibility of procuring any portion of this wine. The
second growths are shipped to the different markets of Europe, North and
South America; and the third growth principally to Holland and Hamburgh.
In order to strengthen the natural body of claret wine, and to render it
capable of bearing the transition of the sea, the first and second
growths are allowed from ten to fifteen gallons of good Alicant wine to
every hogshead, with one quart of stum.[8] The casks are then filled up
and bunged down. They are then ranged three tier high from one end of
the cellar to the other, each tier about eighteen inches, with two
stanchions of stout pine plank, firmly placed between the heads of each
hogshead, from one end of the cellar to the other, until they have
reached, and are supported by, the end walls of the building. This
precaution is necessary to guard against the force of fermentation,
which is often so strong as to burst out the heads of the hogsheads,
notwithstanding the precautions taken to secure them in the situation
during the summer heats. The wine cooper, who has the charge of these
wines, regularly visits them twice a day, morning and evening, in order
to see the condition of the casks, and when he finds the fermentation
too strong, he gives vent, and thus prevents the bursting of the casks.
The third, or inferior growth, is exactly treated in same way, with the
single exception of having Benicarlo wine substituted for Alicant in
preparing them for their second fermentation, as cheaper and better
suited to their quality; both these wines are of Spanish growth, and
brought to Bordeaux by the canal of Languedoc: they are naturally of a
much stronger body than native claret. Thus mixed and fermented, the
claret becomes fortified, and rendered capable of bearing the transition
of seas and climates. About the latter end of September, or beginning of
October, the fermentation of these wines begins to slacken, and they
gradually become fine; in this state they are racked off into fresh
hogsheads carefully cleansed, and a match of sulphur burned in each
before filling. After this operation, they are suffered to remain
undisturbed (save that they are occasionally ullaged,) till about to be
shipped, when they are racked off a second time, and fined down with the
white of ten eggs to each hogshead; these whites are well beat up
together with a small handful of white salt; after this fining, when
rested, the hogsheads are filled up again with pure wine, and then
carefully bunged down with wooden bungs, surrounded with clean linen to
prevent leaking; in this state the wines are immediately shipped. Here
it may be proper to state, that the lees that remain on the different
hogsheads that have been racked off, are collected and put into pipes of
one hundred and forty, or one hundred and fifty gallons each, and this
lee wine, as it is termed, is fined down again with a proportionate
number of eggs and salt. After which, it is generally shipped off as
third growth, or used at table mixed with water. If at any time
hereafter the method herein given of making and preparing claret wine
for shipping, as practised in Bordeaux and its neighbourhood, should
be applied to the red wines of this country, particularly those of
Kaskaskias; it may be proper here to give a description of the mode in
which these wines are racked, which will be found simple, effectual, and
expeditious; I mean for the lower or ground tiers. The upper, or more
elevated ones, rack themselves, without coercion of any kind. When you
are about to rack a hogshead of wine upon the ground tier, you place
your empty hogshead close to the full one, in which you then put your
brass racking cock; on the nozzle of which cock you tie on a leather
hose, which is generally from three to four feet long; on the other
end of this hose is a brass pipe, the size of the tap hole, with a
projecting shoulder towards the hose to facilitate knocking in this pipe
into the empty hogshead, which is then removed a sufficient distance
from the full hogshead in order to stretch the hose, now communicating
with both. The cock is then turned, and the wine soon finds its level in
the empty hogshead; then a large sized bellows, with an angular nozzle,
and sharp iron feet towards the handle, which feet are forced down into
the hoops of the cask on which it rests, in order to keep this bellows
stationary, whilst the nozzle is hammered in tight at the bung hole of
the racking hogshead; the bellows is then worked by one man, and in
about five minutes the racking of the hogshead is completed. The
pressure of the air introduced into the hogshead, by the bellows, acts
so forcibly on the surface of the liquor, that it requires but a few
minutes to finish the operation; when the cock is stopped, the hose
taken off, and a new operation commences. This mode may possibly, in
some cases, be advantageously applied to racking off beer, ale, and
cider.

      [8] Stum is a certain quantity of white wine, strongly impregnated
      with sulphur. The mode of preparing it is as follows: A hogshead
      half filled with good white wine, or what is termed in French _vin
      de grave_; from fifteen to twenty long matches of sulphur are
      successively burned to this hogshead, with the bunghole closed.
      After this operation, the white wine becomes so impregnated with
      sulphur, that it has acquired all its taste and flavour, and is
      thus used as a ferment.




_Brewing Company._


It is obvious to very slight observation, that the day is not distant
when the brewing trade in this country will, as in England, become an
object of great national importance, highly deserving the protection
and encouragement of our general government, by freeing its produce
from all duty, and thereby affording further inducements to the
speculating and enterprising capitalists of this country to embark
their funds in a trade that, above all others, is the best calculated
to make them a sure and profitable return. In addition to the pleasing
consideration that they are thereby combating and putting down the
greatest immorality our country is chargeable with, namely, the too
great use of ardent spirits, substituting in their place a wholesome
and invigorating beverage. The person, therefore, whoever he may be,
who contributes his money, or his talents, to this useful and moral
purpose, deserves to rank high among the best friends of his country.

Under these impressions it is that I beg leave to recommend to my
fellow citizens the immediate establishment of a brewing company, with
a capital of from thirty to forty thousand dollars, to be subscribed
for in shares the most likely to be made up. With either of these sums
a handsome beginning could be made, and the profits would in a few
years encourage and justify enlargement to any prudent extent that
could be reasonably wished for or required. In proof of the correctness
of this opinion, I will beg leave to state a fact that has happened in
my own time. When the mercantile house of Beamish & Crawford, of Cork,
erected a porter brewery in that city, about twenty-five years ago,
that establishment was the first of the kind in that town, and then
stood alone, and notwithstanding that many large and rich ones in the
same business have since been added, the original company have so
progressed in fame and fortune, as to be now considered one of the
first-rate breweries in Europe; and by the improved quality of their
porter have, in a great degree, excluded the English from the West
India market, their porter getting the preference there, as well as in
Bristol and Liverpool, to which places large quantities are annually
sent by that company. How much stronger inducements have we to form
similar establishments in this country, where our excise on brewery
produce bears no sort of proportion with that paid in England, and does
not here exceed five per cent. on brewery sales. This being a war tax,
it may be presumed it will not continue long. Our capacity to raise
barley and hops, in as high perfection as in any part of Europe, is
acknowledged; all then that is wanting is encouragement; afford this to
our farmers, and they will soon convince you that no assertion is
better founded. If so, the sooner a company of this description is
formed the better for those who may be concerned; and for this plain
reason, that notwithstanding the enormous excise chargeable on the raw
materials and produce of the brewery in England, large fortunes have
been, and are daily accumulating in that country by the judicious
exercise of the brewing trade, as will appear by the following
statement of the quantity of porter alone (beside other malt liquors)
brewed by the twelve first breweries in London, in one year, ending 5th
of July, 1810.

                                       _Barrels of Porter._
    Barclay, Perkins & Co.                   235,053
    Read, Mecar & Co.                        211,009
    Trueman & Hanbury.                       144,990
    Felix, Calvert & Co.                     133,493
    Whitebread & Co.                         110,939
    Amery, Meux & Co.                         93,660
    Combe & Co.                               85,150
    Brown & Perry.                            84,475
    Godwin, Skinner & Co.                     74,223
    Elliot & Co.                              57,851
    Taylor.                                   54,510
    Cloyer & Co.                              41,590
                                           ---------
    Total quantity of Barrels of Porter,   1,326,943

                    *      *      *      *      *

NOTICE.

The author informs those persons who may feel disposed to engage in
the brewing and malting trades, that he can furnish them with ground
plans, and sections of elevation, both of breweries and malt houses,
on different scales, whether intended to be erected together, or
separately, as will be found to unite, economy, convenience, and
effect, joined to a considerable saving to those who are not
themselves judges of such erections, or how they should be disposed.
An experience of twenty-five years in both businesses, accompanied by
a diligent and attentive practice, justifies these assertions.

His terms will be found reasonable, and all letters (post paid)
addressed to Joseph Coppinger, 193 Duane-street, New-York, will
receive attention.

A few copies of this work may be had by applying as above; but any
number may be had at 45 John-street.




TANNING.


The following is the French mode of tanning all kinds of leather in a
short time, highly important to the manufacturers of leather in this
country, as it points out a secure and profitable mode of turning their
capital twelve or thirteen times in a year, instead of once.




_Washing Hides._

The best method of washing hides is to stretch them in a frame, and
place them, thus stretched, in running water. If running water cannot
be conveniently had, still water can be made to answer by frequent
stirrings and agitations; the remainder of the operation of cleansing
is performed as in the common way.




_On taking off the Hair._


Begin by shaking some lime in a pit, to which put a great quantity of
water, then stir this water well, that it may become saturated with the
lime, then place your hides in the pit perpendicularly; for this
purpose, several wooden poles should be fixed across the pit; to these
poles the hides are to be fastened with strings at proper distances,
each hide being first cut in two; whilst the hides were thus placed in
the lime water, the lime itself, which had deposited on the bottom of
the pit, was frequently stirred up to increase the strength of the
water, and to make it more operative; the hair thus treated, will, in
about eight days, come off the hide with great ease. A shorter and a
better method may effect this purpose in two days; that is, to plunge
the hides, after being washed and cleaned, into a solution of tan,
which (having been already used) contains no longer any of the tanning
principle, mixed with a five hundredth, or even a thousandth part of
the oil of vitriol, commonly called sulphuric acid; this operation not
only takes off the hair, but raises and swells the hide; as, in the old
way, is generally effected by barley sourings. However, further
swelling and raising is necessary, and the hides should again be
plunged in another quantity of spent tan-water mixed with the one
thousandth part of the oil of vitriol, and thus steeped a second time;
their swelling and raising will be completed in about forty-eight
hours; after this operation the hides will acquire a yellow colour,
even to the interior part of their substance. To determine if the
swelling and raising be sufficiently completed, let one of the corners
of the hide be cut, and if it is in a proper state there will not
appear any white streak in the middle, but the hide throughout its
whole substance will have acquired a yellow colour, and
semi-transparent appearance. Mr. S---- is of opinion, that swelling and
raising hides is not necessary, and that the hides tanned without this
operation are less permeable to water. On tanning on the new principle,
as practised by Mr. S----, he places several rows of casks on stillings
sufficiently elevated above the ground to place a can or tub under
them; these casks were filled with fresh finely ground tan, then a
certain quantity of water was poured into the first of them, which
water, as it ran through the tan, exhausted and carried off the soluble
part, and as fast as it ran into the vessels below, was taken away and
poured on the second cask, and so on successively until the solution
was sufficiently saturated, and thus it may have been brought to ten or
twelve degrees of the arometer for salts. In order to exhaust the tan
of the first cask, Mr. S---- continued pouring water on the first cask
until it ran off clear; at which time the tan was deprived of its
soluble part; these liquors, as it may be easily conceived, were
carefully kept for future operations; large wooden vats are considered
the best sort of vessels for holding this solution, as well as for
making and preparing it; hogsheads, on a small scale, may be made to
answer. It is particularly in the use of this solution that Mr. S----'s
method consists; the quickness with which the solution acts is truly
astonishing, and when we see it, there is cause of surprise in thinking
why it was not found out before. As soon as the hides are taken out of
the water, impregnated with sulphuric acid, Mr. S---- puts them into a
weak solution of tan, in which he leaves them for the space of one or
two hours; he afterwards plunges them into other solutions of tan, more
or less charged with the tanning principle, in proportion to their
strength, so that in the experiments at which we were present, some
heavy hides were tanned in six or eight days, others in twenty and
twenty-five days. In placing the hides in the solutions, some
precautions are necessary; the hides should be suspended on a wheel, or
in a frame where they should be stretched, and placed one inch apart,
so as to admit the solution freely about them; Mr. S---- recommends
cutting off the head and the neck of the hide, and a slip down each
side, in which slip the feet and belly part are to be comprehended; and
the circumstance which determines Mr. S---- to cut the hide in this
manner is, that the feet, and the parts that are near the belly, are
more spongy and more easily penetrated by the tan; and as they produce
leather of an inferior quality they may be more advantageously tanned
separately, than put promiscuously into the solutions of tan with the
rest. The remaining part of the hide is to be divided into two or more
parts or pieces, so as to be easily placed in the vats or casks.




_Drying the Hides._


The hides, when taken out of the solution of tan, must be dried with
the usual precautions, that is to say, so slowly, that the skin does
not shrink on the flesh side. With respect to thinner hides, for the
upper leather of shoes, Mr. S---- begins by washing and taking off the
flesh in the manner already described, or, as is done in the common way
for strong soal leather; he then takes off the hair by means of clear
lime-water; he does not make them undergo the operation of swelling,
but puts them immediately into weak solutions of tan, the strength of
which he gradually increases, but without ever bringing it to the
degree of contraction, which he gives it when it is to be used in
tanning thick leather; two, three, or four days, are enough for tanning
the thinner kind of leather. Leather which is not sufficiently
impregnated with the tanning principle, is generally known by a white
speck or streak, which is observable in the middle of its substance. We
can affirm that those hides which were tanned in our presence, in a few
days, were completely tanned, as the above mentioned white streak was
not perceivable; we may also add, that Mr. S----'s method has the
advantage of affording the opportunity of observing and examining, from
time to time, the progress of the operation; for this purpose nothing
more is necessary but to take a slip off the hide out of the vat, and
cut off a corner of it, the white streak already spoken of will appear
more or less thick, until the tanning is completed; it has been
generally supposed, that the tan in the tanpits had no other effect
upon the leather than that of hardening and bracing the fibres of the
skin, which has been relaxed by the preliminary of tanning. Mr. S----,
however, examined the operation more closely, and discovered that there
existed in the tan a principle which was soluble in water, by which the
tanning was brought about. That this principle afterwards became fixed
in the leather in consequence of a particular combination between the
said principle and the skin; and this combination produced a substance
that was not soluble in water; all this has been demonstrated by Mr.
S----, in the most evident manner. It is well known that if leather,
which has not been tanned, is boiled in water, it is in a short time
almost entirely dissolved therein. This solution, by being
concentrated, produces a jelly, or size, which, by farther evaporation,
and being dried in the air, becomes what is called glue. Mr. S----
having, in the course of his experiments, examined the effects of a
solution of tan upon a solution of glue, observed that they were hardly
mixed together before a white felamentous precipitate took place, owing
to a combination of the glue with the tanning principle contained in
the solution of tan. This precipitate is insoluble in water, either hot
or cold, and acquires colour by being exposed to the light. The
foregoing experiment furnishes a true explanation of the process of
tanning; for it will easily be conceived that the solution of tan acts
upon the hides (from which glue is produced) in the same manner as it
acts upon glue; this is what really happens in common tanpits, and Mr.
S----'s new method, in which the solution of tan gradually penetrates
the hides, and as it penetrates combines with it, producing a gradual
change of colour that is very observable, till at last the colour of
the hide is changed throughout, and it acquires a compact texture and
marbled appearance, like that of a nutmeg: by this it plainly appears,
that a precipitation also takes place in the action of tanning,
although the hide is not dissolved, but merely swelled so as to enable
the solution to penetrate it more easily. The property which animal
jelly, or glue, possesses, of being precipitated by a solution of the
tanning principle, furnishes a means of discovering what substances may
be useful in tanning: nothing more is necessary than to make a solution
or infusion of the vegetable substance supposed proper for that
purpose, and that upon being mixed with a solution of glue, will show
by the greater or less quantity of precipitate produced, what
probability there is that such substance might be advantageously
employed in tanning.




_Another Remark._


Lime-water also offers an excellent means of discovering such
substances. If lime-water be added to a solution of tan, the mixture
instantly produces a copious precipitate; and if a sufficient quantity
of lime-water be added to neutralize the whole of the tanning
principle, then the supernatant liquor, although still possessing
colour, will not form any precipitate with glue; I mean in solution. In
like manner the liquor separated from a precipitation, caused by the
mixture of a solution of tan with one of glue, will not produce any
precipitate with lime-water, if, during the precipitation, the tanning
principle has been completely neutralized. This shows evidently that
Doctor M'Bride's method of exhausting the tan by means of lime-water is
defective, and that by so doing a loss of the tanning principle takes
place, in proportion to the quantity of it contained or combined with
the lime dissolved in the lime-water.




_Another Remark._


As in summer the solution of tan is disposed to run into the vinous
fermentation, and, of course, from that into the acetous, and have its
principal changed, no more of the solution of tan should be prepared in
the summer season than is wanted for immediate use. In winter, this
precaution in not necessary, as in that season it will keep, and may be
then prepared for exportation to any part of Europe and thus converted
into a profitable article of commerce.


_A table showing the time different hides took to be completed, in
the operations of preparing and tanning._


Ten ox hides, taken the 17th of August, were completely tanned by the
6th of September, in all, twenty days.

Washing the hides,                            2 days.
Taking off the hair,                          5  do.
Raising or swelling,                          5  do.
Second washing,                               2  do.
Tanning, (properly so called,)                6  do.
                                            ---------
                                             20 days.


Ten ox hides, taken the 19th of July, were tanned the 9th of August,
making twenty-one days.

Washing,                                      2 days.
Taking off the hair,                         10  do.
Swelling,                                     1  do.
Tanning,                                      8  do.
                                            ---------
                                             21 days.


One ox hide, taken the 3d of September, was tanned the 2d of October,
making twenty-nine days.

Washing,                                      1 day.
Taking off the hair and swelling,             3 do.
Tanning,                                     25 do.
                                            ---------
                                             29 days.


Another ox hide, taken the 5th of September, was tanned the 3d of
October, making twenty-eight days.

Washing,                                      1 day.
Taking off the hair and swelling,             2 do.
Tanning,                                     25 do.
                                            ---------
                                             28 days.


N.B. The tanning solutions made use of to these hides was less strong,
and of a cooler temperature than usual, by which the time employed in
the tanning operation was prolonged.




_Calf Skins._


Sixteen very thick calf skins, taken the 18th of July, were tanned by
the 31st of the same month.

Washing,                                      1 day.
Taking off the hair,                          8 do.
Tanning,                                      4 do.
                                            ---------
                                             13 days.
                                            ---------


Six calf skins, taken the 19th of July, were tanned the 2d of August,
making fourteen days.

Washing,                                      2 days.
Taking off the hair,                          9 do.
Tanning,                                      3 do.
                                            ---------
                                             14 days.
                                            ---------


Six dried calf skins, began the 14th of August, were tanned the 28th
of August.

Washing,                                      2 days.
Taking off the hair and swelling,            11  do.
Tanning,                                      1  do.
                                            ---------
                                             14 days.
                                            ---------


Six calf skins, began the 20th of August, were finished the 10th of
September.

Taking off the hair and washing,             20 days.
Tanning, (properly so called,)                1  do.
                                            ---------
                                             21 days.
                                            ---------


Three calf skins were brought from another tan-yard, the operation of
tanning had been begun upon them, they having been thirteen days in
the tanpit, in which it was intended they should have remained eleven
months, (which was the usual time allowed such skins in the old way of
tanning;) two of these skins were tanned in twenty-four hours, the
third was tanned in forty-eight hours.

Six other calf skins took thirteen days.

Washing and taking off the hair,              6 days.
Tanning,                                      7  do.
                                            ---------
                                             13 days.
                                            ---------


_Three salted Cow Hides_,

Began the 14th of August, were finished the 12th of September.

Washing and taking off the hair,             20 days.
Tanning,                                      9  do.
                                            ---------
                                             29 days.
                                            ---------


_One fresh Horse Hide_,

Began the 30th of August, was finished the 13th of September.

Washing,                                      1 day.
Taking off the hair,                          6 do.
Tanning,                                      7 do.
                                            ---------
                                             14 days.
                                            ---------


_Another fresh Horse Hide_,

Began the 4th of September, was finished the 19th of September.

Washing,                                      1 day.
Taking off the hair,                          7 do.
Tanning,                                      7 do.
                                            ---------
                                             15 days.
                                            ---------


_Two dried Sheep Skins_,

Began the 14th of August, were finished the 12th of September.

Washing and taking off the wool,             25 days.
Tanning,                                      4  do.
                                            ---------
                                             29 days.
                                            ---------


_Three Goat Skins_,

Began the 16th of August, were finished the 10th of September.

Washing and taking off the hair,             23 days.
Tanning,                                      2  do.
                                            ---------
                                             25 days.
                                            ---------


_Five Goat Skins_,

Began the 19th of August, were finished the 10th of September.

Washing and taking off the hair,             20 days.
Tanning,                                      2  do.
                                            ---------
                                             22 days.
                                            ---------



THE END






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The American Practical Brewer and
Tanner, by Joseph Coppinger

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRACTICAL BREWER AND TANNER ***

***** This file should be named 20663-8.txt or 20663-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/6/6/20663/

Produced by Robert Cicconetti and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
