The Project Gutenberg EBook of Marriage and Love, by Emma Goldman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Marriage and Love

Author: Emma Goldman

Release Date: March 1, 2007 [EBook #20715]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARRIAGE AND LOVE ***




Produced by Tamise Totterdell, Fritz Ohrenschall and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net
(This book was produced from scanned images of public
domain material from the Google Print project.)





Marriage and Love

BY

EMMA GOLDMAN


Price Ten Cents


MOTHER EARTH PUBLISHING ASSOCIATION

210 EAST 13th STREET, NEW YORK

1911




    AUTOBIOGRAPHY

    OF

    ALEXANDER BERKMAN

    _A Unique Contribution to Socio-Psychological Literature_

    THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY REPRESENTS THREE PHASES:

      I) The Revolutionary Awakening and its Toll--The _Attentat_

     II) The Allegheny Penitentiary: Fourteen Years in Purgatory

    III) The Resurrection and After

    _Price One Dollar Fifty_

    Send Advance Subscription to

    MOTHER EARTH PUBLISHING ASSOCIATION

    210 EAST THIRTEENTH STREET

    NEW YORK


    THE BOOK IS NEARING COMPLETION AND WILL
    BE ISSUED IN THE EARLY SPRING




Marriage and Love

BY

EMMA GOLDMAN


Price Ten Cents


MOTHER EARTH PUBLISHING ASSOCIATION

210 EAST 13th STREET, NEW YORK

1911




MARRIAGE AND LOVE


The popular notion about marriage and love is that they are synonymous,
that they spring from the same motives, and cover the same human needs.
Like most popular notions this also rests not on actual facts, but on
superstition.

Marriage and love have nothing in common; they are as far apart as the
poles; are, in fact, antagonistic to each other. No doubt some marriages
have been the result of love. Not, however, because love could assert
itself only in marriage; much rather is it because few people can
completely outgrow a convention. There are today large numbers of men
and women to whom marriage is naught but a farce, but who submit to it
for the sake of public opinion. At any rate, while it is true that some
marriages are based on love, and while it is equally true that in some
cases love continues in married life, I maintain that it does so
regardless of marriage, and not because of it.

On the other hand, it is utterly false that love results from marriage.
On rare occasions one does hear of a miraculous case of a married couple
falling in love after marriage, but on close examination it will be
found that it is a mere adjustment to the inevitable. Certainly the
growing-used to each other is far away from the spontaneity, the
intensity, and beauty of love, without which the intimacy of marriage
must prove degrading to both the woman and the man.

Marriage is primarily an economic arrangement, an insurance pact. It
differs from the ordinary life insurance agreement only in that it is
more binding, more exacting. Its returns are insignificantly small
compared with the investments. In taking out an insurance policy one
pays for it in dollars and cents, always at liberty to discontinue
payments. If, however, woman's premium is a husband, she pays for it
with her name, her privacy, her self-respect, her very life, "until
death doth part." Moreover, the marriage insurance condemns her to
life-long dependency, to parasitism, to complete uselessness, individual
as well as social. Man, too, pays his toll, but as his sphere is wider,
marriage does not limit him as much as woman. He feels his chains more
in an economic sense.

Thus Dante's motto over Inferno applies with equal force to marriage.
"Ye who enter here leave all hope behind."

That marriage is a failure none but the very stupid will deny. One has
but to glance over the statistics of divorce to realize how bitter a
failure marriage really is. Nor will the stereotyped Philistine argument
that the laxity of divorce laws and the growing looseness of woman
account for the fact that: first, every twelfth marriage ends in
divorce; second, that since 1870 divorces have increased from 28 to 73
for every hundred thousand population; third, that adultery, since 1867,
as ground for divorce, has increased 270.8 per cent.; fourth, that
desertion increased 369.8 per cent.

Added to these startling figures is a vast amount of material, dramatic
and literary, further elucidating this subject. Robert Herrick, in
_Together_; Pinero, in _Mid-Channel_; Eugene Walter, in _Paid in Full_,
and scores of other writers are discussing the barrenness, the monotony,
the sordidness, the inadequacy of marriage as a factor for harmony and
understanding.

The thoughtful social student will not content himself with the popular
superficial excuse for this phenomenon. He will have to dig down deeper
into the very life of the sexes to know why marriage proves so
disastrous.

Edward Carpenter says that behind every marriage stands the life-long
environment of the two sexes; an environment so different from each
other that man and woman must remain strangers. Separated by an
insurmountable wall of superstition, custom, and habit, marriage has not
the potentiality of developing knowledge of, and respect for, each
other, without which every union is doomed to failure.

Henrik Ibsen, the hater of all social shams, was probably the first to
realize this great truth. Nora leaves her husband, not--as the stupid
critic would have it--because she is tired of her responsibilities or
feels the need of woman's rights, but because she has come to know that
for eight years she had lived with a stranger and borne him children.
Can there be anything more humiliating, more degrading than a life-long
proximity between two strangers? No need for the woman to know anything
of the man, save his income. As to the knowledge of the woman--what is
there to know except that she has a pleasing appearance? We have not yet
outgrown the theologic myth that woman has no soul, that she is a mere
appendix to man, made out of his rib just for the convenience of the
gentleman who was so strong that he was afraid of his own shadow.

Perchance the poor quality of the material whence woman comes is
responsible for her inferiority. At any rate, woman has no soul--what is
there to know about her? Besides, the less soul a woman has the greater
her asset as a wife, the more readily will she absorb herself in her
husband. It is this slavish acquiescence to man's superiority that has
kept the marriage institution seemingly intact for so long a period. Now
that woman is coming into her own, now that she is actually growing
aware of herself as a being outside of the master's grace, the sacred
institution of marriage is gradually being undermined, and no amount of
sentimental lamentation can stay it.

From infancy, almost, the average girl is told that marriage is her
ultimate goal; therefore her training and education must be directed
towards that end. Like the mute beast fattened for slaughter, she is
prepared for that. Yet, strange to say, she is allowed to know much less
about her function as wife and mother than the ordinary artisan of his
trade. It is indecent and filthy for a respectable girl to know anything
of the marital relation. Oh, for the inconsistency of respectability,
that needs the marriage vow to turn something which is filthy into the
purest and most sacred arrangement that none dare question or criticize.
Yet that is exactly the attitude of the average upholder of marriage.
The prospective wife and mother is kept in complete ignorance of her
only asset in the competitive field--sex. Thus she enters into life-long
relations with a man only to find herself shocked, repelled, outraged
beyond measure by the most natural and healthy instinct, sex. It is safe
to say that a large percentage of the unhappiness, misery, distress, and
physical suffering of matrimony is due to the criminal ignorance in sex
matters that is being extolled as a great virtue. Nor is it at all an
exaggeration when I say that more than one home has been broken up
because of this deplorable fact.


If, however, woman is free and big enough to learn the mystery of sex
without the sanction of State or Church, she will stand condemned as
utterly unfit to become the wife of a "good" man, his goodness
consisting of an empty brain and plenty of money. Can there be anything
more outrageous than the idea that a healthy, grown woman, full of life
and passion, must deny nature's demand, must subdue her most intense
craving, undermine her health and break her spirit, must stunt her
vision, abstain from the depth and glory of sex experience until a
"good" man comes along to take her unto himself as a wife? That is
precisely what marriage means. How can such an arrangement end except in
failure? This is one, though not the least important, factor of
marriage, which differentiates it from love.

Ours is a practical age. The time when Romeo and Juliet risked the wrath
of their fathers for love, when Gretchen exposed herself to the gossip
of her neighbors for love, is no more. If, on rare occasions, young
people allow themselves the luxury of romance, they are taken in care by
the elders, drilled and pounded until they become "sensible."

The moral lesson instilled in the girl is not whether the man has
aroused her love, but rather is it, "How much?" The important and only
God of practical American life: Can the man make a living? can he
support a wife? That is the only thing that justifies marriage.
Gradually this saturates every thought of the girl; her dreams are not
of moonlight and kisses, of laughter and tears; she dreams of shopping
tours and bargain counters. This soul poverty and sordidness are the
elements inherent in the marriage institution. The State and the Church
approve of no other ideal, simply because it is the one that
necessitates the State and Church control of men and women.

Doubtless there are people who continue to consider love above dollars
and cents. Particularly is this true of that class whom economic
necessity has forced to become self-supporting. The tremendous change in
woman's position, wrought by that mighty factor, is indeed phenomenal
when we reflect that it is but a short time since she has entered the
industrial arena. Six million women wage workers; six million women, who
have the equal right with men to be exploited, to be robbed, to go on
strike; aye, to starve even. Anything more, my lord? Yes, six million
wage workers in every walk of life, from the highest brain work to the
mines and railroad tracks; yes, even detectives and policemen. Surely
the emancipation is complete.

Yet with all that, but a very small number of the vast army of women
wage workers look upon work as a permanent issue, in the same light as
does man. No matter how decrepit the latter, he has been taught to be
independent, self-supporting. Oh, I know that no one is really
independent in our economic treadmill; still, the poorest specimen of a
man hates to be a parasite; to be known as such, at any rate.

The woman considers her position as worker transitory, to be thrown
aside for the first bidder. That is why it is infinitely harder to
organize women than men. "Why should I join a union? I am going to get
married, to have a home." Has she not been taught from infancy to look
upon that as her ultimate calling? She learns soon enough that the home,
though not so large a prison as the factory, has more solid doors and
bars. It has a keeper so faithful that naught can escape him. The most
tragic part, however, is that the home no longer frees her from wage
slavery; it only increases her task.

According to the latest statistics submitted before a Committee "on
labor and wages, and congestion of population," ten per cent. of the
wage workers in New York City alone are married, yet they must continue
to work at the most poorly paid labor in the world. Add to this horrible
aspect the drudgery of housework, and what remains of the protection and
glory of the home? As a matter of fact, even the middle-class girl in
marriage can not speak of her home, since it is the man who creates her
sphere. It is not important whether the husband is a brute or a
darling. What I wish to prove is that marriage guarantees woman a home
only by the grace of her husband. There she moves about in _his_ home,
year after year, until her aspect of life and human affairs becomes as
flat, narrow, and drab as her surroundings. Small wonder if she becomes
a nag, petty, quarrelsome, gossipy, unbearable, thus driving the man
from the house. She could not go, if she wanted to; there is no place to
go. Besides, a short period of married life, of complete surrender of
all faculties, absolutely incapacitates the average woman for the
outside world. She becomes reckless in appearance, clumsy in her
movements, dependent in her decisions, cowardly in her judgment, a
weight and a bore, which most men grow to hate and despise. Wonderfully
inspiring atmosphere for the bearing of life, is it not?

But the child, how is it to be protected, if not for marriage? After
all, is not that the most important consideration? The sham, the
hypocrisy of it! Marriage protecting the child, yet thousands of
children destitute and homeless. Marriage protecting the child, yet
orphan asylums and reformatories overcrowded, the Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children keeping busy in rescuing the little
victims from "loving" parents, to place them under more loving care, the
Gerry Society. Oh, the mockery of it!

Marriage may have the power to bring the horse to water, but has it ever
made him drink? The law will place the father under arrest, and put him
in convict's clothes; but has that ever stilled the hunger of the child?
If the parent has no work, or if he hides his identity, what does
marriage do then? It invokes the law to bring the man to "justice," to
put him safely behind closed doors; his labor, however, goes not to the
child, but to the State. The child receives but a blighted memory of its
father's stripes.

As to the protection of the woman,--therein lies the curse of marriage.
Not that it really protects her, but the very idea is so revolting, such
an outrage and insult on life, so degrading to human dignity, as to
forever condemn this parasitic institution.

It is like that other paternal arrangement--capitalism. It robs man of
his birthright, stunts his growth, poisons his body, keeps him in
ignorance, in poverty, and dependence, and then institutes charities
that thrive on the last vestige of man's self-respect.

The institution of marriage makes a parasite of woman, an absolute
dependent. It incapacitates her for life's struggle, annihilates her
social consciousness, paralyzes her imagination, and then imposes its
gracious protection, which is in reality a snare, a travesty on human
character.

If motherhood is the highest fulfillment of woman's nature, what other
protection does it need, save love and freedom? Marriage but defiles,
outrages, and corrupts her fulfillment. Does it not say to woman, Only
when you follow me shall you bring forth life? Does it not condemn her
to the block, does it not degrade and shame her if she refuses to buy
her right to motherhood by selling herself? Does not marriage only
sanction motherhood, even though conceived in hatred, in compulsion?
Yet, if motherhood be of free choice, of love, of ecstasy, of defiant
passion, does it not place a crown of thorns upon an innocent head and
carve in letters of blood the hideous epithet, Bastard? Were marriage to
contain all the virtues claimed for it, its crimes against motherhood
would exclude it forever from the realm of love.


Love, the strongest and deepest element in all life, the harbinger of
hope, of joy, of ecstasy; love, the defier of all laws, of all
conventions; love, the freest, the most powerful moulder of human
destiny; how can such an all-compelling force be synonymous with that
poor little State and Church-begotten weed, marriage?


Free love? As if love is anything but free! Man has bought brains, but
all the millions in the world have failed to buy love. Man has subdued
bodies, but all the power on earth has been unable to subdue love. Man
has conquered whole nations, but all his armies could not conquer love.
Man has chained and fettered the spirit, but he has been utterly
helpless before love. High on a throne, with all the splendor and pomp
his gold can command, man is yet poor and desolate, if love passes him
by. And if it stays, the poorest hovel is radiant with warmth, with life
and color. Thus love has the magic power to make of a beggar a king.
Yes, love is free; it can dwell in no other atmosphere. In freedom it
gives itself unreservedly, abundantly, completely. All the laws on the
statutes, all the courts in the universe, cannot tear it from the soil,
once love has taken root. If, however, the soil is sterile, how can
marriage make it bear fruit? It is like the last desperate struggle of
fleeting life against death.

Love needs no protection; it is its own protection. So long as love
begets life no child is deserted, or hungry, or famished for the want of
affection. I know this to be true. I know women who became mothers in
freedom by the men they loved. Few children in wedlock enjoy the care,
the protection, the devotion free motherhood is capable of bestowing.


The defenders of authority dread the advent of a free motherhood, lest
it will rob them of their prey. Who would fight wars? Who would create
wealth? Who would make the policeman, the jailer, if woman were to
refuse the indiscriminate breeding of children? The race, the race!
shouts the king, the president, the capitalist, the priest. The race
must be preserved, though woman be degraded to a mere machine,--and the
marriage institution is our only safety valve against the pernicious sex
awakening of woman. But in vain these frantic efforts to maintain a
state of bondage. In vain, too, the edicts of the Church, the mad
attacks of rulers, in vain even the arm of the law. Woman no longer
wants to be a party to the production of a race of sickly, feeble,
decrepit, wretched human beings, who have neither the strength nor moral
courage to throw off the yoke of poverty and slavery. Instead she
desires fewer and better children, begotten and reared in love and
through free choice; not by compulsion, as marriage imposes. Our
pseudo-moralists have yet to learn the deep sense of responsibility
toward the child, that love in freedom has awakened in the breast of
woman. Rather would she forego forever the glory of motherhood than
bring forth life in an atmosphere that breathes only destruction and
death. And if she does become a mother, it is to give to the child the
deepest and best her being can yield. To grow with the child is her
motto; she knows that in that manner alone can she help build true
manhood and womanhood.


Ibsen must have had a vision of a free mother, when, with a master
stroke, he portrayed Mrs. Alving. She was the ideal mother because she
had outgrown marriage and all its horrors, because she had broken her
chains, and set her spirit free to soar until it returned a personality,
regenerated and strong. Alas, it was too late to rescue her life's joy,
her Oswald; but not too late to realize that love in freedom is the only
condition of a beautiful life. Those who, like Mrs. Alving, have paid
with blood and tears for their spiritual awakening, repudiate marriage
as an imposition, a shallow, empty mockery. They know, whether love last
but one brief span of time or for eternity, it is the only creative,
inspiring, elevating basis for a new race, a new world.


In our present pygmy state love is indeed a stranger to most people.
Misunderstood and shunned, it rarely takes root; or if it does, it soon
withers and dies. Its delicate fiber can not endure the stress and
strain of the daily grind. Its soul is too complex to adjust itself to
the slimy woof of our social fabric. It weeps and moans and suffers with
those who have need of it, yet lack the capacity to rise to love's
summit.

Some day, some day men and women will rise, they will reach the mountain
peak, they will meet big and strong and free, ready to receive, to
partake, and to bask in the golden rays of love. What fancy, what
imagination, what poetic genius can foresee even approximately the
potentialities of such a force in the life of men and women. If the
world is ever to give birth to true companionship and oneness, not
marriage, but love will be the parent.




    THE ONLY ANARCHIST MONTHLY IN AMERICA

    MOTHER EARTH

    ¶A revolutionary literary magazine devoted to
    Anarchist thought in sociology, economics, education,
    and life.

    ¶Articles by leading Anarchists and radical
    thinkers.--International Notes giving a summary
    of the revolutionary activities in various
    countries.--Reviews of modern books and the
    drama.


    TEN CENTS A COPY
    ONE DOLLAR A YEAR


    EMMA GOLDMAN             Publisher
    ALEXANDER BERKMAN        Editor


    210 EAST THIRTEENTH STREET

    NEW YORK


    Bound Volumes 1906-1911, Two Dollars per Volume




    MOTHER EARTH SERIES

    Patriotism                                 Emma Goldman  5c.

    What I Believe                             Emma Goldman  5c.

    Psychology of Political Violence           Emma Goldman 10c.

    Anarchism: What It Really Stands For.      Emma Goldman 10c.

    Marriage and Love                          Emma Goldman 10c.

    Anarchy Versus Socialism                William C. Owen  5c.

    What Is Worth While?                   Adeline Champney  5c.

    The Right to Disbelieve                       Edwin Kuh  5c.

    Anarchism and American Traditions  Voltairine de Cleyre  5c.

    The Dominant Idea                  Voltairine de Cleyre  5c.

    Anarchism and Malthus                       C. L. James  5c.

    The Modern School                     Francisco Ferrer   5c.




    NOW READY!

    Anarchism and Other Essays

    EMMA GOLDMAN'S BOOK

    A series of essays comprising a thorough critique
    of existing social institutions and conditions, and
    giving a comprehensive view of the author's opinions on
    matters educational, sexual, economic, political, and social.

    CONTENTS

    1. Anarchism: What It Really Stands For.

    2. Minorities versus Majorities.

    3. The Psychology of Political Violence.

    4. Prisons: A Social Crime and Failure.

    5. Patriotism: A Menace to Liberty.

    6. Francisco Ferrer and The Modern School.

    7. The Hypocrisy of Puritanism.

    8. The Traffic in Women.

    9. Woman Suffrage.

    10. The Tragedy of Woman's Emancipation.

    11. Marriage and Love.

    12. The Modern Drama: A Powerful Disseminator of Radical Thought.

    A biographic sketch of Emma Goldman's interesting
    career, with splendid portrait, is included
    in the book.

    Orders are to be sent, with cash, to

    MOTHER EARTH, 210 E. 13th St., New York, N. Y.

    Price, $1.00. By Mail, $1.10





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Marriage and Love, by Emma Goldman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARRIAGE AND LOVE ***

***** This file should be named 20715-8.txt or 20715-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/7/1/20715/

Produced by Tamise Totterdell, Fritz Ohrenschall and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net
(This book was produced from scanned images of public
domain material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
