The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dramatized Rhythm Plays, by John N. Richards

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Dramatized Rhythm Plays
       Mother Goose and Traditional

Author: John N. Richards

Release Date: July 10, 2007 [EBook #22035]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DRAMATIZED RHYTHM PLAYS ***




Produced by Louise Hope, David Newman, Chuck Greif and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






  [Transcriber's Note:

  The HTML version of this e-text includes all songs in two forms:
  .pdf (image), and MIDI (sound). Some sites will allow you to download
  these files individually; if so, look in the "files" directory
  associated with the HTML text.

  Text in brackets such as [inner circle] was added by the transcriber
  where changed text format created ambiguity.

  All references to "permission", "copyright" and similar are from the
  original text. They are retained solely for informational purposes.]




  DRAMATIZED RHYTHM PLAYS

  Mother Goose and Traditional


    by
  JOHN N. RICHARDS, B.P.E.
  Assistant Supervisor of Physical Education
    Newark, N.J.




    New York
  A. S. BARNES AND COMPANY
    1931




  Copyright, 1922,
    by
  A. S. BARNES AND COMPANY

_This book is fully protected by copyright and nothing
that appears in it may be reprinted or reproduced in any
manner, either wholly or in part, for any use whatever,
without special written permission of the copyright owner._


+Printed in the United States of America+




PREFACE


The following rhythmic plays compiled by Mr. John N. Richards of the
Newark Department of Physical Education have been devised to meet the
needs in the transition of Physical Education activities between the
kindergarten and the first few years of the primary school.

The physiologist tells us that the nervous organism of early childhood
is injured by the strain of strict, immobile attention required in
formal gymnastics. Therefore it is wise to hold the child's interest and
attention by means of dramatized nursery plays. These make little strain
on mental application and the child is able to dramatize in motion the
words and music which are planned to develop his motor co-ordination. In
this way the child is gradually and interestingly led from the freedom
of expression, characteristic of babyhood to the more specialized formal
activities of the third and fourth years in the school.

Mr. Richards' contribution merits widespread usage because he has
clearly and definitely described his rhythm plays so that the classroom
teacher can easily make use of them without having to draw on her
imagination or having to guess at the written explanation.

The book should be useful and welcomed too, not only by the classroom
teacher but also by the specialist and supervisor of Physical Education.

  Randall D. Warden
  Director of Physical Education, Newark, N.J., Public Schools




INTRODUCTION


The young people of to-day are most fortunate in their opportunities and
advantages. The home, the school, the shop, social life and play offer
increasing fields for service. The ever increasing number of problems
which must be faced, in this reconstruction period of our nation's life,
demands leaders of broad intellect, clear vision and sound judgment.
Coupled with these qualifications there must be developed a moral
earnestness which will make for better citizenship.

The trend of society movement is undoubtedly toward congested city
life. There is lamentable lack of playgrounds and properly equipped
gymnasiums. The school buildings are crowded to capacity and there is a
rush and hurry of life which challenges the attention of all educators
who are interested in the physical well-being of children.

The priceless assets of our communities are the boys and girls who are
growing into manhood and womanhood. We should spare neither expense nor
energy in fitting them physically, mentally and spiritually for the
great problems which will all too soon be theirs.

Exercise habits and a spirit of fair play must be a part of their
training from the early school days. There is no better way of
inculcating these lessons than through story plays and games during
their first school years.

The material contained in this book is practical. The exercise movements
have been set to music which is popular both in the schools and in the
homes. It is carefully graded and should prove to be of great assistance
to the teachers in the lower grades. It tends to bridge over the gap
between the Kindergarten and the Primary Grade activities.

There is need for a manual of this type in our Physical Training
literature and it is hoped that this material will be used generally
throughout the schools of our country.

  F. W. Maroney, M.D.
  Director of Physical Education and Medical Inspection
  Atlantic City, N.J., Public Schools




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


The author wishes to express his thanks to F. W. Maroney, M.D., formerly
Director of Physical Education of the State of New Jersey and now
Director of Physical Education and Medical Inspection of the Public
Schools of Atlantic City, N.J., for the Introduction.

To Mr. Randall D. Warden, Director of Physical Education, Public
Schools, Newark, N.J., for the Preface.

Special acknowledgment and thanks are due Miss A. E. Barth of the
Charlton Street School, Newark, N.J., for her contribution of "Rhythm
Plays" and to Miss Louise Westwood, Director of Music, Newark Public
Schools, as hereinafter stated.

Thanks are also due to McLoughlin Bros. for permission to use the words
and music of the following songs found in J. W. Elliott's book entitled,
"Nursery Rhymes, Set to Music":

  Little Jack Horner
  See Saw, Marjory Daw
  Dickory, Dickory, Dock
  Sing a Song of Sixpence
  Humpty Dumpty

To D. Appleton & Company for permission to use the words and music of
the following songs found in "Songs the Whole World Sings":

  Rock-a-bye, Baby
  Little Boy Blue

To Miss Lydia Clark, author of "Physical Training for Elementary
Schools," and to B. H. Sanborn & Company, for permission to use the
words and music of the following songs:

  Where Has My Little Dog Gone?
  Baa, Baa, Black Sheep
  Looby Loo


    J. N. Richards




ALPHABETICAL INDEX

  _Aisles of Classroom_                                     Page

  Bye O Baby Bunting                                          29
  Bean Porridge                                               37
  Dickory, Dickory, Dock, 1st and 2nd verses              25, 26
  Diddle, Diddle, Dumpling                                    39
  Fly Away Jack and Jill                                      38
  Humpty Dumpty                                               24
  Hey, Diddle, Diddle                                         32
  Jack Be Nimble, No. 1                                       22
  Jack Be Nimble, No. 2                                       23
  Jack and Jill                                               28
  Little Jack Horner                                          20
  Little Miss Muffet                                          27
  Little Boy Blue                                             30
  Pat-a-cake                                                  36
  Rock-a-bye, Baby                                            21
  Ride a Cock-horse                                           34
  Sing a Song of Sixpence, 1st and 2nd verses             40, 41
  See Saw, Marjory Daw                                        42
  The Band                                                    19
  Wee Willie Winkie                                           31
  Where Has My Little Dog Gone?                               33
  Yankee Doodle, verse and chorus                             35

  _Circle_                                                  Page

  Baa, Baa, Black Sheep                                       50
  Bean Porridge                                               51
  Dapple Grey                                                 54
  Dickory, Dickory, Dock                                      48
  Fly Away Jack and Jill                                      52
  Jack and Jill                                               47
  Little Jack Horner                                          45
  Little Miss Muffet                                          46
  Looby Loo                                                   49
  Pop Goes the Weasel, verse and chorus                       55
  Sing a Song of Sixpence, 1st and 2nd verses                 57


GRADATION INDEX

  _First Grade_

  Aisle                                                     Page
   1. The Band                                                19
   2. Little Jack Horner                                      20
   3. Rock-a-bye Baby                                         21
   4. Jack Be Nimble, No. 1                                   22
   5. Humpty Dumpty                                           24
   6. Dickory, Dickory, Dock, 1st and 2nd verses          25, 26
   7. Little Miss Muffet                                      27
   8. Jack and Jill                                           28
   9. Bye O Baby Bunting                                      29
  10. Little Boy Blue                                         30
  11. Wee Willie Winkie                                       31
  12. Jack Be Nimble, No. 2                                   23

  Circle                                                    Page
   1. Little Jack Horner                                      45
   2. Little Miss Muffet                                      46
   3. Jack and Jill                                           47
   4. Dickory, Dickory, Dock                                  48

  _Second Grade_

  Aisle                                                     Page
   1. Hey, Diddle, Diddle                                     32
   2. Where Has My Little Dog Gone?                           33
   3. Ride a Cock-horse                                       34
   4. Yankee Doodle, verse and chorus                         35
   5. Pat-a-cake                                              36
   6. Bean Porridge                                           37
   7. Fly Away Jack and Jill                                  38
   8. Sing a Song of Sixpence, 1st and 2nd verses         40, 41
   9. Diddle, Diddle, Dumpling                                39
  10. See Saw, Marjory Daw                                    42

  Circle                                                    Page
   1. Looby Loo                                               49
   2. Baa, Baa, Black Sheep                                   50
   3. Bean Porridge                                           51
   4. Fly Away Jack and Jill                                  52

_Third Grade_

  Circle                                                    Page
   1. Dapple Grey                                             54
   2. Pop Goes the Weasel, verse and chorus                   55
   3. Sing a Song of Sixpence, 1st and 2nd verses             57


INDEX OF PROGRESSION

  _Aisles of Classroom_
                                                            Page
   1. The Band                         (File Alignment)       19
   2. Little Jack Horner                  "      "            20
   3. Rock-a-bye, Baby                    "      "            21
   4. Jack Be Nimble, No. 1               "      "            22
   5. Humpty Dumpty                       "      "            24
   6. Dickory, Dickory, Dock,
        1st and 2nd verses                "      "        25, 26
   7. Little Miss Muffet                  "      "            27
   8. Jack and Jill                       "      "            28
   9. Bye O Baby Bunting                  "      "            29
  10. Little Boy Blue                     "      "            30
  11. Wee Willie Winkie                   "      "            31
  12. Jack Be Nimble, No. 2               "      "            23
  13. Hey, Diddle, Diddle                 "      "            32
  14. Where Has My Little Dog Gone?       "      "            33
  15. Ride a Cock-horse                   "      "            34
  16. Yankee Doodle, verse and chorus     "      "            35
  17. Pat-a-cake      (Open line formation, partners facing)  36
  18. Bean Porridge      "    "     "          "       "      37
  19. Fly Away Jack and Jill. "     "          "       "      38
  20. Sing a Song of Sixpence,
        1st and 2nd verses    "     "          "       "  40, 41
  21. Diddle, Diddle, Dumpling      "          "       "      39
  22. See Saw, Marjory Daw.   "     "          "       "      42

  _Circle_

  (Outer aisles of classroom)
                                                            Page
   1. Little Jack Horner                                      45
   2. Little Miss Muffet                                      46
   3. Jack and Jill                                           47
   4. Dickory, Dickory, Dock                                  48
   5. Looby Loo                                               49
   6. Baa, Baa, Black Sheep                                   50
   7. Bean Porridge                                           51
   8. Fly Away Jack and Jill                                  52
   9. Dapple Grey                                             54
  10. Pop Goes the Weasel, verse and chorus                   55
  11. Sing a Song of Sixpence, 1st and 2nd verses             57




SUGGESTIONS FOR THE TEACHING OF THE GYMNASTIC ACTIVITY

1. Teach the words of the rhyme to the class, keeping in mind the
rhythm.

2. If in presenting the action, the movement is based upon certain words
as cues, present by imitation the activity as applied to the words,
_i.e._, Little Jack Horner; Little Miss Muffet, etc.

3. If the movement is based on a time element (rhythm), present the
activity content, line by line, _i.e._, Yankee Doodle; Pat-a-cake, etc.

4. Be sure the rhyme and activity has been thoroughly mastered before
adding the song element.

5. If a dancing movement is involved, present same to the class as a
unit before combining with other movements, _i.e._, Fly Away Jack and
Jill; Diddle, Diddle, Dumpling, etc.

_The author wishes to express thanks to Miss Louise Westwood, Director
of Music of the Newark Public Schools, for the following suggestions as
to the teaching of the song element:_

_1. Pitch-pipes:_

No song under any condition should be sung without the pitch of the
first word being given; using the pitch-pipe to get the key in which the
song is written.

_2. Range of Songs:_

All songs should be sung not lower than the first line E or higher than
the fifth line F of the staff. If songs are scored in another range,
transpose the song by changing the pitch of the _first_ word.

_3. Quality of Tone:_

All singing should be in a soft, light, head tone. Half-tone quality.

  _No loud singing should be allowed at any time._


PROCEDURE IN TEACHING

  1. Teach the rhyme.
  2. Combine rhyme with the gymnastic activity.
  3. Teach the song.
  4. Combine No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3.


COMMANDS USED TO PRESENT THE GYMNASTIC ACTIVITY AND SONG

  1. Determine key in which the song is written and find starting note.
  2. Teacher sounds keynote of first syllable or word.

    Command:-- Pitch-- Sing!

_Examples:_

(_a_) Yankee Doodle. The first syllable of the word, "Yankee," which is
"Yank," is sung to establish the pitch.

(_b_) Oh, where, oh where has my little dog gone? The first word, "Oh,"
is sung to establish the pitch.

3. In order to insure united action, the following command is used:

    Ready-- Begin!




RHYTHMIC STEPS

_1. The Point Step, Forward:_

Point foot forward with outside edge of toes touching the floor; the
heel is raised and turned inward toward the other foot. (No weight
transference, the weight being on the stationary foot.)

_2. Closing Step, Sideward:_

Step sideward, right, maintaining the weight equally to both feet (1).
Close left foot to right (2).

NOTE.-- Counterlike for movement in the forward and backward direction.

_3. Chasse or Gliding Step, Sideward:_

Raise heels and slide sideward, right, immediately closing left to
right. A light, quick movement requiring only one count for completion.

_4. Step Throw or Step Hop Swing, Sideward:_

Step sideward, right (1). Hop on right, and swing left leg diagonally
forward across (2). (Knee slightly flexed with ankle extended.)

_5. Schottische Step, Sideward:_

Step sideward, right (1). Cross step left to rear of right (2). Step
sideward, right (3). Hop on right, swinging left leg diagonally forward
across (4). (Knee slightly flexed with ankle extended.)

_6. Two Step or Change Step, Forward:_

Step forward, right (1). Close left instep to right heel (and) Step
forward, right (2).

_7. The Step Dip, Sideward:_

Step sideward, right, with transference of body weight to the right foot
(1). Place left toe behind right heel (heel raised) with the knee turned
sideward (and) Bend and stretch right knee slightly with trunk bending
sideward, left (2).

Hand clapping occurs on counts _one_ and _two_.

_8. Encircle to left with partner kneeling._ (_Partners._)

_Stationary pupil._-- Pupil extends leg backward, lowering knee to
floor. The trunk is erect; left hand on hip with the right arm stretched
upward, supporting encircling partner's left hand.

_Dancing pupil._-- The encircling pupil grasps with the left hand the
kneeling partner's right hand and performs the dance movement in given
direction.




DIAGRAMMATIC FORMATIONS

  [All diagrams are in the "files" directory associated with the html
  version of this e-text. They are named in the form "page15a1".]

Classroom

  [Illustration: Standing in the right aisle facing front of room.
  Six rows of seats; six pupils per row.]

Classroom

  [Illustration: Standing in the right aisle in OPEN LINE FORMATION,
  partners facing.
  Seven rows of seats; six pupils per row.
  NOTE:-- When executing partner plays, children in extreme row on the
  right (odd row) form in partner formation in open area.]


Circular

SINGLE

  [Illustration: Facing, line of direction.
  _Counter-clockwise_]

  [Illustration: Facing, inward.]

  [Illustration: Facing, reverse line of direction.
  _Clockwise_]

DOUBLE

  [Illustration: Facing, line of direction.]

  [Illustration: Facing, reverse line of direction.]

  [Illustration: Partner formation, facing each other.]


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


CLASSROOM

Aisle Alignment:-- Single and partner formation.

  [Transcriber's Note:
  The above line was printed in the center of an empty page. It was
  probably intended that teachers use the blank space to draw in their
  own classroom arrangement.]

NOTE:-- May also be used to advantage in any open area or gymnasium with
exception of several in the First Grade which are essentially classroom
in type. (Desks are used as part of the rhythmic action.)


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


THE BAND

[Music:
  Oh I can play on a big bass drum,
  And this is the way I do it.
  Boom, Boom, Boom goes the big bass drum,
  Boom, Boom, Boom goes the big bass drum,
  And this is the way I do it.]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth.+

Formation;-- Children seated in their seats.


1st Line;-- Oh I can play on a big bass drum,

  Interpretation;-- No activity.

2nd Line;-- And this is the way I do it.

  Inter.;-- No activity.

3rd Line;-- Boom, Boom, Boom goes the big bass drum,

  Inter.;-- Beat hands vigorously upon top of desks, suiting action
  to the words.

4th Line;-- Boom, Boom, Boom goes the big bass drum.

  Inter.;-- Repeat the activity of the third line.

5th Line;-- And this is the way I do it.

  Inter.;-- Repeat the activity of the fourth line.


Introduce the following activities, suiting the action to the words in
imitation of the suggested activity.

  Little Snare Drum ("Trum")
  Big Brass Horn ("Toot")
  Little Gay Flute ("Whistle")


[Illustration: OH I CAN PLAY ON A BIG BRASS HORN]




LITTLE JACK HORNER


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Little Jack Horner sat in a corner,
  Eating a Christmas pie;
  He put in his thumb, and pulled out a plum,
  And said, "What a good boy am I!"
  Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum!]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Children remain seated and move to the right side of seat.


1st Line;-- Little Jack Horner sat in a corner,

  Interpretation;-- Upon the word, "sat," pupils move to the left side
  of seat.

2nd Line;-- Eating a Christmas pie;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "eating," pupils encircle imaginary plate
  with the left arm and imitate eating with the right hand.

3rd Line;-- He put in his thumb, And pulled out a plum,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "put," pupil imitates the action of putting
  thumb in pie and pulling out a plum, making the action vigorous upon
  the word, "pulled," stretching the arm overhead. Looks at the plum.

4th Line;-- And said, "What a good boy am I!"

  Inter.;-- Proudly pats the chest with the left hand.

Conclusion;-- Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum!

  Inter.;-- Lowers plum until it disappears in the mouth, imitating
  eating, tapping his chest the while.


[Illustration: HE PUT IN HIS THUMB, AND PULLED OUT A PLUM]




ROCK-A-BYE, BABY


_Permission to use words and music:-- D. Appleton and Co._

[Music:
  Rockabye, baby in the tree top,
  When the wind blows the cradle will rock;
  When the bough breaks the cradle will fall,
  And down will come baby cradle and all.]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Rock-a-bye, baby in the tree top,

  Interpretation;-- Hold baby in the arms, looking down at it, and sway
  gently to and fro. (Right; left; right and left.)

2nd Line;-- When the wind blows the cradle will rock;

  Inter.;-- Rock more vigorously.

3rd Line;-- When the bough breaks the cradle will fall,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "breaks," children clap hands overhead--
  partially dropping the baby.

4th Line;-- And down will come baby, cradle and all.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "down," children spring into the air and
  immediately assume deep knee bending position.

Position.


[Illustration: ROCKING THE BABY]




JACK BE NIMBLE-- No. 1


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Jack be nimble, Jack be quick;
  Jack jump'd over the candle stick.]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Jack be nimble, Jack be quick;

  Interpretation;-- Marking time, in place. (Seven counts.)

2nd Line;-- Jack jumped over the candle stick.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "jumped," the children face to the left and
  vault over their own seats; finish facing the front of room with hands
  on hips.

Repeat rhyme and activity back to former aisle.


[Illustration: JACK JUMPED OVER THE CANDLE STICK]




JACK BE NIMBLE-- No. 2

Music-- _See Jack Be Nimble-- No. 1_


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Jack be

  Interpretation;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left.

nimble

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right. (Front.)

2nd Line;-- Jack be

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right.

quick;

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left. (Front.)

3rd Line;-- Jack

  Inter.;-- One-quarter turn to the left, placing hands on the near
  edge of desk and back of seat, bending knees slightly.

jumped over

  Inter.;-- Vault over the seat; replace hands to hips and execute
  1/4 turn to the right (Front.)

4th Line;-- The candle stick.

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place, three counts. (Left; right and left.)

Repeat back to original position.




HUMPTY DUMPTY


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,
  Humpty Dumpty had a great fall;
  All the King's horses and all the King's men,
  Couldn't put Humpty Dumpty together again.]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,

  Interpretation;-- Upon the word, "sat," pupils sit upon own desks;
  feet hanging in aisle.

2nd Line;-- Humpty Dumpty had a great fall;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "fall," pupils jump into the right aisles;
  bending knees deeply, facing the front of the room.

3rd Line;-- All the King's horses and all the King's men,

  Inter.;-- Assume position of attention with arms stretched forward
  holding imaginary reins, at the same time "marking time" (ten counts),
  raising knees waist high.

4th Line;-- Couldn't put Humpty Dumpty together again.

  Inter.;-- Shaking the head in sorrow; right, left, right and front.
  Hands are placed upon hips during this movement.


[Illustration: HUMPTY DUMPTY SAT ON A WALL]




DICKORY, DICKORY, DOCK


_First Verse_

_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Dickory, dickory, dock;
  The mouse ran up the clock;
  The clock struck, One.
    The mouse ran down;
  Dickory, dickory, dock.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Dickory, dickory, dock;

  Interpretation;-- Hands clasped overhead; swaying right, left and
  erect.

2nd Line;-- The mouse ran up the clock;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "ran," stand in own seats with the arms
  stretched sideward.

3rd Line;-- The clock struck, One,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "One," clap hands overhead and lower arms
  sideward.

The mouse ran down;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "ran," jump into the left aisle with hands
  clasped overhead.

4th Line;-- Dickory, dickory, dock.

  Inter.;-- Swaying right, left and erect.

Repeat activity to the right, bringing all pupils back to former aisles.


[Illustration: THE PENDULUM]


_Second Verse-- Music on Page 25_


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Dickory, dickory, dock,

  Interpretation;-- Hands clasped overhead; swaying right, left and
  erect.

2nd Line;-- "Why scamper," said the clock.

  Inter.;-- Place hands on hips; execute six running steps forward.
  (Seven counts.) (Left; right; left; right; left; right; close left
  to right, completing the movement.)

3rd Line;-- You

scared

  Inter.;-- Execute 1/2 turn right about.

me so,

I'll

have to go;

  Inter.;-- Execute three running steps forward. (Four counts.)
  (Left; right; left, and close right to left, completing the movement.)

4th Line;-- Dickory, dickory, dock.

  Inter.;-- Hands clasped overhead; swaying right, left and erect.

Repeat to bring the class back to the original position.




LITTLE MISS MUFFET


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Little Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet,
    eating of curds and whey,
  Along came a spider
  And sat down beside her;
  And frighten'd Miss Muffet away.
  Dear me! Dear me! Dear me! Dear me!]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention. Alternate aisles
act as Miss Muffet; other aisles act as the Spider. (Count off from left
flank by twos. No. 1-- Miss Muffet. No. 2-- The Spider.)


1st Line;-- Little Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet, eating of curds and
whey.

  Interpretation;-- Upon the word, "sat," Little Miss Muffet climbs
  into her own seat, faces back of room and sits upon the right side
  of desk. Hold imaginary plate in left arm and imitate eating.

2nd Line;-- Along came a spider

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "Along," the Spider hastens over own seat
  and Miss Muffet's aisle; climbs upon seat and sits with Miss Muffet.

3rd Line;-- And sat down beside her;

  Inter.;-- Completion of second line activity.

4th Line;-- And frighten'd Miss Muffet away.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "frighten'd," children return to own seats.

Upon returning to their own seats the children sing--
  Dear me! Dear me! Dear me! Dear me!


[Illustration: ALONG CAME A SPIDER (Spiders vaulting seats)]




JACK AND JILL


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Jack and Jill went up the hill,
  to fetch a pail of water;
  Jack fell down and broke his crown,
  And Jill came tumbling after,
  Boohoo! Boohoo! Boohoo! Boohoo!]


DESCRIPTION

+Miss A. E. Barth+

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention. Alternate aisles
act as Jack. (Girls and boys.) Other aisles act as Jill. (Girls and
boys.) Count off from left flank by twos. No. 1-- Jill. No. 2-- Jack.


1st Line;-- Jack and Jill went up the hill,

  Interpretation;-- Upon the word, "up," Jack and Jill take hold of
  hands and climb into same seats. (The climbing of the hill.)

2nd Line;-- To fetch a pail of water;

  Inter.;-- No activity.

3rd Line;-- Jack fell down and broke his crown,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "fell," Jack falls (jumps) into own aisle,
  bends knees, deeply covering his face with his hands, imitating
  crying.

4th Line;-- And Jill came tumbling after.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "tumbling," Jill falls (jumps) into the same
  aisle as Jack; bends knees, deeply covering her face with her hands,
  imitating crying.


Upon completion of the song all children return to their own seats,
singing--

  Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo!


[Illustration: JACK AND JILL WENT UP THE HILL]




BYE O BABY BUNTING


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Bye O Baby Bunting,
  Daddy's gone a-hunting;
  To fetch a little rabbit skin
  To wrap the Baby Bunting in.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention.


1st Line;-- Bye O

  Interpretation;-- Hold the baby in the arms, looking down at it,
  and sway gently to the right.

Baby-

  Inter.;-- Sway gently to the left.

Bunt-

  Inter.;-- Sway gently to the right.

ing

  Inter.;-- Assume stationary position.

2nd Line;-- Daddy's gone a-hunting;

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place, seven counts; carry gun over the
  right shoulder (flex right arm; place hand on shoulder with fingers
  clenched, forefinger extended to represent barrel of gun.)

3rd Line;-- To fetch a little rabbit skin

  Inter.;-- Kneel on left knee and extend the right arm forward,
  representing the aiming of a gun. (Fingers of the right hand clenched,
  with forefinger extended; left hand resting on right upper arm.)

4th Line;-- To wrap the Baby Bunting in.

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position; bend forward and encircle body with
  arms and return hands to hips upon completion of the sentence.


[Illustration: AIMING THE GUN]




LITTLE BOY BLUE


_Permission to use words and music:-- D. Appleton and Co._

[Music:
  Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn,
  There's sheep in the meadow and cows in the corn;
  Where is the boy that looks after the sheep?
  He's under the haycock fast asleep.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


1st Line;-- Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn,

  Interpretation;-- Mark time, in place. (Four counts.) Upon the word,
  "blow," hands clenched, elbows raised high, imitate the blowing of
  the horn. Finish with hands on hips.

2nd Line;-- There's sheep in the meadow and cows in the corn;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "sheep," point to the right and look in
  direction pointed. Upon the word, "cows," replace right hand to hip;
  point to the left and look in direction pointed. Finish with hands on
  hips and eyes front.

3rd Line;-- Where is the boy that looks after the sheep?

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "where," shade the eyes with the right hand
  and look to the right. Upon the word, "looks," replace right hand to
  hip; shade the eyes with the left hand and look to the left. Finish
  with left hand on hip and eyes front.

4th Line;-- He's under the haycock fast asleep.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "under," resume seats and lower head to
  desks upon folded arms.


[Illustration: THERE'S SHEEP IN THE MEADOW]




WEE WILLIE WINKIE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Wee Willie Winkie runs thru the town,
  Upstairs and downstairs in his nightgown;
  Rapping at the window,
    Crying thru the lock:--
  Are all the children in their beds?
    Now 'tis eight o'clock.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Wee Willie Winkie runs through the town,

  Interpretation;-- Mark time, in place. (Knees waist high.) (Seven
  counts.)

2nd Line;-- Upstairs and

  Inter.;-- Heels raised.

downstairs

  Inter.;-- Bend knees deeply.

in his night-

  Inter.;-- Stretch knees, lower heels and bow.

gown;

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position.

3rd Line;-- Rapping at the window,

  Inter.;-- With hands clenched, stretch arms upward and tap imaginary
  window. (Four times.)

Crying through the lock:--

  Inter.;-- Cup hands and carry to mouth as if calling, bending knees
  deeply.

4th Line;-- "Are all the children

  Inter.;-- Turn head to the right.

in their beds?

  Inter.;-- Turn head to the left.

Now 'tis eight o'clock."

  Inter.;-- Stretch the knees and lower heels.




HEY, DIDDLE, DIDDLE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Hey, diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle,
  The cow jump'd over the moon;
  The little dog laughed to see such sport,
  And the dish ran away with the spoon.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


1st Line;-- Hey, diddle, diddle,

  Interpretation;-- Mark time, in place, five counts.

the cat and

  Inter.;-- Imitate the action of playing the fiddle. One upward stroke
  of the bow.

the fiddle,

  Inter.;-- One downward stroke of the bow.

2nd Line;-- The cow

  Inter.;-- Turn to the left; place hands on edge of desk and back of
  seat and bend knees slightly.

jumped over

  Inter.;-- Vault over the seat.

the moon;

  Inter.;-- Turn to the right (front); stretch knees, lower heels and
  place hands on hips.

3rd Line;-- The little dog

laughed to see

  Inter.;-- Bend trunk forward, hugging self, imitating great hilarity.

such sport,

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position with hands on hips.

4th Line;-- And the

dish ran away with the spoon.

  Inter.;-- Execute a complete turn to the right with seven running
  steps, terminating action upon the word, "spoon."

Stamp feet twice, in place, at the completion of the entire activity.




WHERE HAS MY LITTLE DOG GONE?


_Permission to use words and music:--
Miss Lydia Clark and Benj. H. Sanborn & Co._

Arr. by +Fannie Robertson+

[Music:
  Oh where, oh where has my little dog gone?
  Oh where, oh where has he gone?
  With his tail cut short and his ears cut long,
  Oh where, oh where has he gone?]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


1st Line;-- Oh where,

  Interpretation;-- Shade eyes with the right hand and with a jump
  execute 1/4 turn to the right.

oh where

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left. (Front.)

has my little

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left.

dog gone?

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right. (Front.)

2nd Line;-- Oh where

  Inter.;-- Replace right hand to hip; shade eyes with the left hand
  and with a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left.

oh where

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right (Front.)

has he g-

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the right.

one?

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/4 turn to the left (Front.)

3rd Line;-- With his tail cut short and his ears cut long,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "tail," bend forward, placing hands behind
  back (palms together; fingers extended.)

  Upon the words, "and his," assume erect position with hands at sides.

  Upon the word, "ears," raise arms sideward, placing thumbs in ears
  (fingers extended.)

4th Line;-- Oh where,

  Inter.;-- Replace left hand to hip; shade eyes with the right hand
  and with a jump execute 1/2 turn right about.

oh where has he

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute 1/2 turn right about. (Front.)

gone?

  Inter.;-- Replace right hand to hip, bow and assume erect position.


[Illustration: LOOKING FOR THE DOG]




RIDE A COCK-HORSE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Ride a Cock-horse to Banbury Cross,
  To see a fine lady upon a white horse,
  Rings on her fingers and bells on her toes,
  She shall have music wherever she goes.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


1st Line;-- Ride a Cock-horse to Banbury Cross,

  Interpretation;-- Stretch arms forward, holding imaginary reins;
  bending and stretching knees. (Three times.)

2nd Line;-- To see a fine lady upon a white horse,

  Inter.;-- Replace left hand to hip; shade the eyes with the right
  hand and rotate the body to the right upon the word, "To." Replace
  the right hand to hip; shade the eyes with the left hand and rotate
  the body to the left upon the word, "upon." Replace the left hand to
  hip and turn the body forward upon the word, "horse."

3rd Line;-- Rings on her fingers and bells on her toes,

  Inter.;-- Raise arms forward, palms forward, fingers and thumbs
  extended upon the word, "Rings." Bend the trunk slightly forward and
  lower arms (palms forward), looking at the toes, upon the word,
  "bells." Assume erect position with hands on hips, upon the word,
  "toes."

4th Line;-- She shall have music wherever she goes.

  Inter.;-- Wave the baton with the right hand (forefinger extended;
  thumb and remaining fingers clenched) to the left, right, left, right
  and left, upon the words, "She shall have music." (Five counts.)

  Replace the right hand to hip, bow and assume erect position upon the
  words, "wherever she goes."


[Illustration: THE SALUTE (_See page 35_)]


[Illustration: THE RIDING OF THE HORSE]




YANKEE DOODLE


[Music:
  Yankee Doodle came to town,
  A riding on a pony,
  He stuck a feather in his hat,
  And called it Macaroni.
  Yankee Doodle, Ha! Ha! Ha!
  Yankee Doodle Dandy;
  Mind the music and your step
  And round the house be handy.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips.


Verse

1st Line;-- Yankee Doodle came to town,

  Interpretation;-- Children mark time, in place. (Seven counts.)

2nd Line;-- A riding on a pony,

  Inter.;-- Stretching arms forward as if holding imaginary reins;
  bend and stretch knees (four times), finishing with hands on hips.

3rd Line;-- He stuck a feather in his hat,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "stuck," take off the hat with the left hand
  and upon the word, "in," insert the feather. Finish with hands on
  hips.

4th Line;-- And called it Macaroni.

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place. (Eight counts.)


Chorus

1st Line;-- Yankee Doodle,

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place. (Four counts.)

Ha! Ha! Ha!

  Inter.;-- Clap hands, three times. Finish with hands on hips.

2nd Line;-- Yankee Doodle

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place. (Four counts.)

Dandy.

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.

3rd Line;-- Mind the music

  Inter.;-- Wave the baton with right hand (forefinger extended) left,
  right, left and right. (Four counts.) Finish with hands on hips.

and your step

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place. (Three counts.)

4th Line;-- And round the house be handy.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "round," execute a half turn to the right
  about by jumping. Upon the word, "house," execute a half turn to the
  right about by jumping. Upon the word, "handy," jump, in place, three
  times and salute with the right hand.




PAT-A-CAKE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Pat-a-cake, Pat-a-cake, Baker's Man,
  Stir it and stir it as fast as you can;
  Roll it and prick it and mark it with "B,"
  And put in the oven for baby and me.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle at attention with hands on
hips. Count off by twos from left to right and have "ones" face to the
right and "twos" face to the left. (Open line formation; partners facing
each other.)


1st Line;-- Pat-a-cake,

  Interpretation;-- Clap own hands three times.

Pat-a-cake,

  Inter.;-- Clap partner's hands three times.

Baker's Man,

  Inter.;-- Hands hips; bow and assume erect position.

2nd Line;-- Stir it and stir it as fast as you can;

  Inter.;-- Hold imaginary bowl in the left arm (shoulder high),
  stirring with the right hand, increasing revolutions upon the word,
  "fast." Upon the word, "can," the hands return to hips.

3rd Line;-- Roll it and prick it and mark it with "B";

  Inter.;-- Upon the words, "roll it," raise hands (palms together;
  right hand on top) shoulder height, and roll it by a sliding movement.

  Upon the words, "prick it," suit action to the words and prick cake,
  using forefinger of right hand, pressing same into left palm.

  Upon the words, "mark it," join forefingers with thumbs, raising to
  eye height and form letter "B." (Deaf and dumb alphabet.)

4th Line;-- And put in the oven for baby and me.

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "put," imitate the action of placing the cake
  in the oven by extending arms forward (palms up) and bending knees.
  Assume erect position with hands on hips upon the word, "oven."

  Upon the word, "baby," bow and assume erect position.

  Upon the word, "me," raise the right arm (shoulder height) and place
  forefinger on chest.

Position.


[Illustration: PAT-A-CAKE]




BEAN PORRIDGE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Bean porridge hot,
    Bean porridge cold,
  Bean porridge in the pot,
    Nine days old;
  Some like it hot,
    And some like it cold,
  Some like it in the pot,
    Nine days old.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle in partner formation
(open line formation; partners facing), with hands on hips.

Files numbered from the left flank by twos. No. Ones face to the right;
No. Twos face to the left.


1st Line;-- Bean

  Interpretation;-- Clap hands to thighs.

porridge

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

hot,

  Inter.;-- Clap partner's hands.

Bean

  Inter.;-- Clap hands to thighs.

porridge

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

cold,

  Inter.;-- Clap partner's hands.

2nd Line;-- Bean

  Inter.;-- Clap hands to thighs.

porridge

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

in the

  Inter.;-- With right hand clap partner's right hand.

pot,

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

Nine

  Inter.;-- With left hand clap partner's left hand.

days

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

old;

  Inter.;-- Clap partner's hands.

  Description of pupil;-- Number Two. Number One;-- Counterlike.

3rd Line;-- Some

  Inter.;-- Clasp partner's hands and raise arms to shoulder height.
  Step sideward right.

like it

  Inter.;-- Close left to right.

hot, And

  Inter.;-- Step dip, right.

some

  Inter.;-- Step sideward left.

like it

  Inter.;-- Close right to left.

cold,

  Inter.;-- Step dip, left.

4th Line;-- Some

  Inter.;-- Face to the right; place right hand on hip, inner hands
  joined and raised shoulder height. Step forward, right.

like it

  Inter.;-- Step forward, left.

in the

  Inter.;-- Step forward, right.

pot,

  Inter.;-- Close left to right and place left hand on hip.

Nine days

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute a half turn right about.

old.

  Inter.;-- With a jump execute a half turn right about.




FLY AWAY JACK AND JILL


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Two little blackbirds,
  Sitting on a hill,
  One named Jack,
  And the other named Jill;
  Fly away Jack
    And fly away Jill;
  Come again Jack
    And come again Jill.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle in partner formation (open line
formation; partners facing each other); arms raised forward (shoulder
height) and clasp partner's hands.

NOTE.-- If desk width is too great have pupils place hands on hips.

"Count off" from the left flank by twos.

  No. 1:-- Jack. No. 2:-- Jill.


1st Line;-- Two

  Interpretation;-- Left file (Jack); Step sideward, left.
  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); Step sideward, right.

little

  Inter.;-- Close right to left,
  Inter.;-- Close left to right.

black-

  Inter.;-- Step sideward, left.
  Inter.;-- Step sideward, right.

birds

  Inter.;-- Close right to left.
  Inter.;-- Close left to right.

2nd Line;-- Sitting

  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); Stamp left.
  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); Stamp right.

on

  Inter.;-- Stamp right.
  Inter.;-- Stamp left.

a hill,

  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips and bend knees deeply.
  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips and bend knees deeply.

3rd Line;-- One named

  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); Stretch knees and turn to the left.
  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); No activity.

Jack,

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.
  Inter.;-- No activity.

4th Line;-- And the

  Inter.;-- No activity for either files.

other named

  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); Stretch knees and turn to the right.
  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); No activity.

Jill;

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.
  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); No activity.

5th Line;-- Fly away, Jack

  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); face to the right and execute three
  chasses to the left.
  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); No activity.

And

fly away, Jill,

  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); face to the left and execute three
  chasses to the right.
  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); No activity.

6th Line;-- Come again, Jack

  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); Three chasses to the right.
  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); No activity.

And

come again, Jill.

  Inter.;-- Right file (Jill); Three chasses to the left.
  Inter.;-- Left file (Jack); No activity.




DIDDLE, DIDDLE DUMPLING


[Music:
  Diddle, Diddle Dumpling, my son John;
  Went to bed with his trousers on.
  One shoe off and one shoe on.
  Diddle, Diddle Dumpling, my son John.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle in partner formation. Open line
formation; partners facing each other; arms raised forward (shoulder
height) and clasp partner's hands.

NOTE.-- If desk width is too great have pupils place hands on hips.

NOTE.-- Description of movement of pupil facing to the left. Movements
of partner;-- reverse.


1st Line;-- Diddle, Diddle Dumpling,

  Interpretation;-- Step throw, right and left. (Four counts.)

my son John;

  Inter.;-- Stamp feet; right, left, right and hold. (Four counts.)

2nd Line;-- Went to bed with his

  Inter.;-- Step throw, left and right. (Four counts.)

trousers on.

  Inter.;-- Replace left foot, bend knees deeply; lower arms with hands
  clenched. Stretch knees, pulling trousers on and place hands on hips.
  (Two counts per movement; four counts in all.)

3rd Line;-- One shoe off and

  Inter.;-- Arms raised forward (shoulder height) and clasp partner's
  hands. Step right sideward and close left to right and step throw,
  right. (Schottische.) (Four counts.)

one shoe on,

  Inter.;-- Step left sideward and close right to left and step throw,
  left. (Schottische.) (Four counts.)

4th Line;-- Diddle, Diddle

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, once. (Two counts.)

Dumpling

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, once. (Two counts.)

my son John.

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, three times and hold. (Four counts.)


[Illustration: SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE (_See page 40_)]




SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliot+

_1st Verse._

[Music:
  Sing a song of sixpence,
  A pocket full of Rye;
  Four and twenty Blackbirds bak'd in a Pie.
  When the Pie was open'd,
  The Birds began to sing;
  Wasn't that a dainty dish to set before a King!]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle facing each other with hands
on hips. (Open line formation; partners facing each other.)


1st Line;-- Sing a song of sixpence,

  Interpretation;-- Step to the right, place left toe behind right heel,
  bending both knees slightly. Repeat to the left. (Cues:-- Step and
  bend and step and bend.)

2nd Line;-- A pocket full of Rye;

  Inter.;-- Execute three slides to the right and bring heels together
  on the fourth count. (Cues; Slide, slide, slide and heels.)

3rd Line;-- Four and twenty Blackbirds,

  Inter.;-- Repeat the activity of the first line, starting to the left.

4th Line;-- Bak'd in a Pie.

  Inter.;-- Repeat activity of the second line to the left.

5th Line;-- When the Pie was open'd,

  Inter.;-- Pupils face forward; raise arms forward (shoulder height)
  in circle form and then extend sideward, imitating the opening of
  the pie.

6th Line;-- The Birds began to sing;

  Inter.;-- Fluttering of arms up and down, imitating the flying of
  birds.

7th Line;-- Wasn't that a dainty dish

  Inter.;-- Replace both hands to hips on the word, "dainty." Upon the
  word, "dish," stretch the right hand forward as if holding the dish
  and nod the head in approval.

8th Line;-- To set before a King!

  Inter.;-- Step sideward to the right, close feet and bow with arms
  stretched sideward.


_2nd Verse._

[Music:
  The King was in the counting house,
    Counting out his money;
  The Queen was in the parlour,
    Eating bread and honey;
  The maid was in the garden,
    Hanging out the clothes;
  There came a little Dicky Bird
    And popp'd upon her nose.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Standing in the right aisle with hands on hips, facing the
front of room.


1st Line;-- The King

  Interpretation;-- Jump, in place, with a quarter turn to the right.

was in

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, with a quarter turn to the left. (Front.)

the counting

  Inter.;-- Place left foot in seat area.

house,

  Inter.;-- Sit in seat.

Counting out his money;

  Inter.;-- Suit activity to words, holding imaginary coins in palm of
  left hand and count with the right hand.

2nd Line;-- The Queen

  Inter.;-- Stand in the right aisle; face to the left and immediately
  place hands in support on back of seat and edge of desk.

was in

  Inter.;-- Vault over seat, (Upon completion of vault, the hands assume
  normal position.)

the parlour,

  Inter.;-- Face to the right; place right foot in seat area and become
  seated.

Eating bread and honey;

  Inter.;-- Suit activity to words, encircling imaginary plate with left
  arm and imitate eating with the right hand.

3rd Line;-- The maid

  Inter.;-- Place right foot in right aisle.

was in

  Inter.;-- Stand in right aisle and place hands on hips.

the garden,

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.

Hanging

  Inter.;-- Bend trunk forward downward; stretch arms downward,
  grasping clothes.

out

  Inter.;-- Raise trunk, stretch arms upward and grasp imaginary
  clothesline.

the clothes;

  Inter.;-- Using right hand, take clothes-pin out of mouth and pin
  clothes on the line.

4th Line;-- There came a little Dicky Bird,

  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips and mark time, in place.
  (Left, right, left and right.)

And popped

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, and clap hands once.

upon her

  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips; step right sideward and close
  left to right.

nose!

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.




SEE SAW, MARJORY DAW


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

+J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Seesaw, Marjory Daw,
  Jack shall have a new master,
  He shall have but a penny a day,
  Because he won't work any faster.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Arrange class so that three aisles may work together.

Center aisle;-- Jump to stride stand with arms raised sideward.

Outer aisles;-- Face the center and grasp with both hands the
outstretched hand of pupil in center.

The center player acts as the Board; outer players as riders.


1st Line;-- See Saw, Marjory Daw,

  Interpretation;-- Center activity;-- Pupil bends trunk to the right,
  left, right and left.

Outer aisles;-- When center pupils bend to the right, the children on
  the right act as riders on board, bending and stretching knees. In
  reversing the movement, similar activity for those on the left.

2nd Line;-- Jack shall have a new master,

  Inter.;-- Center and outer aisles activity;-- Continue movement as
  described for the first line, finishing in erect position with hands
  on hips.

3rd Line;-- He shall have but a penny a day,

  Inter.;-- Outer aisles;-- Placing left hand to right elbow, shake
  index finger three times upon the words, "he shall have"; repeat
  motion with the left hand upon the words, "but a penny a day."
  Finish with hands on hips.

  Center activity;-- Nod to the right upon the words, "he shall have";
  assume erect position and nod to the left upon the words, "but a penny
  a day." Finish with hands on hips.

4th Line;-- Because he won't work any faster.

  Inter.;-- Repeat activity of first line. (Center and outer aisles.)


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


_Circle_

(Outer aisles of classroom or in open area.)

  [Transcriber's Note:
  The above lines are printed in the middle of a blank page, similar
  to the "CLASSROOM" page earlier.]

NOTE.-- The following Rhythm Plays are suitable to any open area.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


LITTLE JACK HORNER


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._

Arr. by +J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Little Jack Horner sat in a corner,
  Eating a Christmas pie;
  He put in his thumb,
    And pulled out a plum,
  And said, "What a good boy am I!"
  Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum!]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Single circle formation facing line of direction with
hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Little

  Interpretation;-- Step forward, right.

Jack Horner

  Inter.;-- Step forward, left.

sat in a

  Inter.;-- Step forward, right, turn to the left, closing left foot to
  right foot.

corner,

  Inter.;-- Bend knees deeply.

2nd Line;-- Eating a Christmas pie;

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "eating," children encircle imaginary plate
  with the left arm and imitate eating with the right hand.

3rd Line;-- He put in his thumb, And pulled out a plum,

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "put," children imitate the action of putting
  thumb in pie and pulling out a plum, making the action vigorous upon
  the word, "pulled," stretching the arm overhead. Look at plum.

4th Line;-- And said, "What a good boy am I!"

  Inter.;-- Proudly pats the chest with the left hand.

Conclusion;-- Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum! Nice Plum!

  Inter.;-- Lowers plum to mouth, imitating eating, tapping the chest
  the while.


[Illustration: THE SPIDER FRIGHTENING MISS MUFFET (_See page 46_)]




LITTLE MISS MUFFET


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Little Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet,
  eating of curds and whey,
  Along came a spider
  And sat down beside her;
  And frighten'd Miss Muffet away.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Double circle formation facing line of direction with hands
on hips.

Inner circle:-- The Spider.

Outer circle:-- Miss Muffet.

Suggestion;-- In so far as possible have the boys form the inner circle
and the girls the outer circle.


1st Line;-- Little Miss Muffet sat on a

  Interpretation;-- Outer circle (Miss Muffet); starting with the right
  foot execute three steps in line of direction. (Right; left; right and
  close left to right.)

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Spider); No activity.

tuffet,

  Inter.;-- [Outer circle] Bend knees deeply.

eating of curds and whey,

  Inter.;-- Hold imaginary plate in the left hand (palm up) and imitate
  eating. Hands are replaced to hips upon the completion of the word,
  "whey."

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Spider); No activity.

2nd Line;-- Along came a spider

  Inter.;-- Outer circle (Miss Muffet); No activity.

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Spider); Starting with the left foot execute
  five running steps in line of direction. (This should bring partners
  together.)

3rd Line;-- And

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Spider); Bend knees slightly.

sat down beside her;

  Inter.;-- [Inner circle] Spring upward and upon return bend knees
  deeply and face partner. Raise hands, fingers extended and flexed.
  (Eye height.)

And

sat down beside her;

  Inter.;-- Outer circle (Miss Muffet); Turns head to the left, holds
  hands in position to ward off attack of the Spider.

4th Line;-- And

frighten'd Miss Muffet away.

  Inter.;-- Outer circle (Miss Muffet); Place hands on hips; stretch
  knees and with six running steps encircle the Spider and return to
  place.

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Spider); No activity.




JACK AND JILL


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Jack and Jill went up the hill,
  To fetch a pail of water;
  Jack fell down and broke his crown,
  And Jill came tumbling after.
  Boohoo! Boohoo! Boohoo! Boohoo!]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Double circle formation. Children bend knees deeply;
place outside hand on hip and clasp partner's hand.

Inner circle:-- Jill.

Outer circle:-- Jack.


1st Line;-- Jack and Jill went up the hill,

  Interpretation;-- Starting with the left foot marching in line of
  direction execute three steps, closing right foot to left upon
  completion of movement. As the steppings are taken, the knees are
  stretched gradually until reaching erect position.

2nd Line;-- To fetch a pail of wa-

  Inter.;-- Bend trunk forward, stretching left arm (hand clenched)
  downward, holding imaginary pail under spout of pump. Bend right arm
  (hand clenched) to thrust, grasping the imaginary pump handle. Imitate
  pumping of water (Three times.)

ter;

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position with hands on hips.

3rd Line;-- Jack fell down and broke his crown,

  Activity as applied to children representing Jack. (Outer circle.)

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "Jack," bend knees slightly; upon the word,
  "fell," pupils spring lightly upward and assume deep knee position,
  placing right hand upon the head (the crown) and left hand upon the
  floor. (The hand on floor is in the forward plane.)

4th Line;-- And Jill came tumbling after.

  Activity as applied to children representing Jill. (Inner circle.)

  Inter.;-- Upon the word, "Jill," bend knees slightly; upon the word,
  "came," spring lightly upward and assume deep knee position, covering
  face with right hand (crying) and placing left hand on floor. (The
  hand on floor is in the forward plane.)


Upon completion of the song all children gradually stretch the knees,
shaking the head in sorrow as they sing--

  Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo! Boo-hoo!

  Cover the face with the hands.

  Movement of head;--
  Right; left; right; left; right; left; right and front.


[Illustration: PUMPING A PAIL OF WATER]




DICKORY, DICKORY, DOCK


_Permission to use words and music:-- McLoughlin Bros._ +J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Dickory, dickory, dock;
  The mouse ran up the clock;
  The clock struck One,
  The mouse ran down;
  Dickory, dickory, dock.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Single circle facing line of direction with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- Dickory,

  Interpretation;-- Arms stretched overhead with hands clasped. Bend
  trunk to the left.

dickory,

  Inter.;-- Bend trunk to the right.

dock;

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position.

2nd Line;-- The

mouse ran up the clock;

  Inter.;-- Place hands on hips; turn to the left and starting with the
  left foot execute six running steps forward, closing left foot to
  right, completing the movement. (Seven counts.)

3rd Line;-- The clock

  Inter.;-- Turn right about.

struck

One,

  Inter.;-- Clap hands overhead and replace to hips.

The

mouse ran

  Inter.;-- Three running steps forward. (Left; right and left.)

down;

  Inter.;-- Step forward, right, and turn to the left, closing left foot
  to right foot.

4th Line;-- Dickory,

  Inter.;-- Arms stretched overhead with hands clasped. Bend trunk to
  the left.

dickory,

  Inter.;-- Bend trunk to the right.

dock.

  Inter.;-- Assume erect position.

Position!




LOOBY LOO


_Permission to use words and music:--
Miss Lydia Clark and Benj. H. Sanborn & Co._

Arr. by +Fannie Robertson+

[Music:
  1. Here we dance Looby Loo,
  Here we dance Looby light,
  Here we dance Looby Loo,
  All on a Saturday night,
  I put my right hand in,
  I put my right hand out,
  I give my right hand a shake, shake, shake,
  And turn myself about, Oh!]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Single circle formation, facing counter clock-wise (right),
in close order formation. Hands are placed upon the shoulders of the
pupil in front.

NOTE.-- In classroom:-- Single circle around one row of seats.


Verse

  Here we dance Looby Loo,
  Here we dance Looby Light,
  Here we dance Looby Loo,
  Every Saturday night.

  Interpretation;-- Children march in line of direction, starting with
  inside foot (left), swaying inward (left) and outward (right). Upon
  the completion of the verse, the children immediately cease the
  movement and face the center of the circle.

Chorus

  I put my right hand in,
  I put my right hand out,
  I give my right hand a shake, shake, shake,
  And turn myself about. Oh!

  Inter.;-- Imitate activity as suggested and in turning execute same by
  spinning about upon the right foot to the right. Upon completion of
  the turn immediately face line of direction, placing hands upon
  pupil's shoulders in front in readiness for the verse action.

Chorus

  2nd;-- I put my left hand in, etc.
  3rd;-- I put my right foot in, etc.
  4th;-- I put my left foot in, etc.
  5th;-- I put my little head in, etc.
  6th;-- I put my whole self in, etc.




BAA, BAA, BLACK SHEEP


_Permission to use words and music:--
Miss Lydia Clark and Benj. H. Sanborn & Co._

Arr. by +Fannie Robertson+

[Music:
  Baa, baa, Black Sheep, have you any wool?
  Yes, sir; yes, sir!
    Three bags full;
  One for my master,
    One for my dame.
  But none for the little boy
    That cries in the lane.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Children form a single circle with hands joined. (The
Sheep.) A boy is chosen who stands in the center of the circle. (The
little boy in the lane.) Outer, front and rear aisles of room utilized.


1st Line;-- Baa, Baa, Black Sheep, have you any wool?

  Interpretation;-- Seven quick slides to the right, ceasing movement
  on the eighth count.

2nd Line;-- Yes, sir; yes, sir!

  Inter.;-- Those in the circle (The Sheep), place hands on hips and
  nod their heads twice emphatically.

Three bags full;

  Inter.;-- Place right elbow in left hand with three fingers extended,
  shaking same three times vigorously.

3rd Line;-- One for my master,

  Inter.;-- Step sideward to the right and close feet; bow and assume
  erect position. Hands are placed upon the hips.

One for my dame,

  Inter.;-- Step sideward to the left and close feet; bow and assume
  erect position. Hands are placed upon hips.

4th Line;-- But none for the little boy

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place; (right; left; right; left); turning
  head to the right, left, right and front. Hands are placed on hips.

That cries in the lane.

  Inter.;-- Place right elbow in the left hand with forefinger extended,
  shaking same three times vigorously at the little boy in the center
  of the circle.


[Illustration: THE LITTLE BOY CRYING IN THE LANE]




BEAN PORRIDGE


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Bean porridge hot, Bean porridge cold,
  Bean porridge in the pot, Nine days old;
  Some like it hot, And some like it cold,
  Some like it in the pot, Nine days old.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Double circle formation facing partners with hands on hips.

Suggestion:-- In so far as possible have the sex units divided; the boys
forming the inner circle and the girls forming the outer circle.


1st Line;-- Bean

  Interpretation;-- Clap hands to thighs.

porridge

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

hot,

  Inter.;-- Clap partner's hands.

Bean

  Inter.;-- Clap hands to thighs.

porridge

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

cold,

  Inter.;-- Clap partner's hands.

2nd Line;-- Bean

  Inter.;-- Clap hands to thighs.

porridge

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

in the

  Inter.;-- With right hand, clap partner's right hand.

pot,

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

Nine

  Inter.;-- With left hand clap partner's left hand.

days

  Inter.;-- Clap own hands.

old;

  Inter.;-- Clap partner's hands.

  Description of pupil; Outer circle. Counterlike as to movement for
  pupils of inner circle.

3rd Line;-- Some

  Inter.;-- Clasp partner's hands and raise arms to shoulder height.
  Step sideward, right. (In line of direction.)

like it

  Inter.;-- Close left to right.

hot, And

  Inter.;-- Step dip, right.

Some

  Inter.;-- Step sideward, left. (In reverse line of direction.)

like it

  Inter.;-- Close right to left.

cold,

  Inter.;-- Step dip, left.

4th Line;-- Some like it in the pot,

  Inter.;-- Four chasse steps in line of direction.

Nine days

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, once.

old.

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, once.




FLY AWAY JACK AND JILL


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  Two little blackbirds, Sitting on a hill,
  One named Jack And the other named Jill;
  Fly away, Jack and fly away, Jill;
  Come again, Jack And come again, Jill.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Double circle facing counter clockwise (line of direction);
inside hands joined and raised shoulder height; outside hands on hips.

Inner circle:-- Jack. Outer circle:-- Jill.

Suggestion;-- In so far as possible have the sex units divided, the boys
forming the inside circle and the girls forming the outside circle.

Start the dance movement with the outside foot. (Boys beginning with the
left foot; girls beginning with the right foot.)


1st Line;-- Two little blackbirds,

  Interpretation;-- Three steps in line of direction.
  Inner circle (Jack);-- (Left; right, left and close right to left.)
  Outer circle (Jill);-- (Right; left, right and close left to right.)

Sitting on a hill,

  Inter.;-- Bend knees deeply. Outer and inner circles.

2nd Line;-- One named

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Jack); place hands on hips, stretch knees and
  turn to partner. (Right.)
  Inter.;-- Outer circle (Jill); Replace left hand to hip and remain in
  deep knee position.

Jack

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.
  Inter.;-- No activity.

And the

  Inter.;-- No activity for either circles.

other named

  Inter.;-- Outer circle (Jill); stretch knees and turn to partner
  (Left.)
  Inter.;-- Inner circle;-- No activity.

Jill;

  Inter.;-- [Outer circle] Bow and assume erect position.

3rd Line;-- Fly away, Jack

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Jack); Three chasses in line of direction.
  Inter.;-- Outer circle (Jill); No activity.

And

fly away, Jill;

  Inter.;-- Outer circle (Jill); Three chasses in line of direction.
  Inter.;-- Inner circle; (Jack); No activity.

4th Line;-- Come again, Jack

  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Jack); Three chasses in reverse line of
  direction.
  Inter.;-- Outer circle (Jill); No activity.

And

come again, Jill.

  Inter.;-- Outer circle (Jill); Three chasses in reverse line of
  direction.
  Inter.;-- Inner circle (Jack); No activity.


[Illustration: TWO LITTLE BLACK BIRDS SITTING ON A HILL (_See page 52_)]


[Illustration: I HAD A LITTLE PONY (_See page 56_)]




POP GOES THE WEASEL


[Music:
  A sixpence for a spool of thread,
  A penny for a needle;
  That's the way the money goes;
  Pop goes the weasel.
  Watch how the needle does fly,
  Nimble hands to guide it;
  Every time the wheel goes round,
  Pop goes the weasel.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Double circle formation, partners facing; hands joined and
raised shoulder height.

Suggestion;-- In so far as possible have the sex units divided, the boys
forming the inner circle and the girls forming the outer circle.

Description of the pupils occupying the outer circle (girls); inner
circle (boys); counterlike.


Verse

1st Line;-- A sixpence for

  Interpretation;-- Step dip, right. (In line of direction.)

a spool of thread,

  Inter.;-- Step dip, left. (In reverse line of direction.)

2nd Line;-- A penny for a needle;

  Inter.;-- Four chasse steps in line of direction.

NOTE.-- On the fourth chasse step do not close left foot to the right.

3rd Line;-- That's

  Inter.;-- Face line of direction; inner hands joined and outer hands
  on hips. Step forward, left.

the way

  Inter.;-- Step forward, right.

the money

  Inter.;-- Step forward, left.

goes;

  Inter.;-- Close right to left and place inner hand to hip.

4th Line;-- Pop

  Inter.;-- With a jump, execute a turn right about and clap hands once.

goes the

weasel.

  Inter.;-- With a jump, execute a turn right about, and clap hands
  once. Finish with inner hands joined and outer hands on hips. Facing
  in line of direction.


Repeat Verse

1st Line;-- A sixpence for

  Interpretation;-- Two step, right. (In line of direction.)

a spool of thread,

  Inter.;-- Two step, left. (In line of direction.)

2nd Line;-- A penny

  Inter.;-- Step forward, right.

for a

  Inter.;-- Step forward, left.

needle;

  Inter.;-- Step forward, right and close left to right.

3rd Line;-- That's the way

  Inter.;-- Two step, left. (In line of direction.)

the money goes;

  Inter.;-- Two step, right. (In line of direction.)

4th Line;-- Pop

  Inter.;-- Step forward, left.

goes the

  Inter.;-- Step forward, right.

weasel.

  Inter.;-- Step forward, left and close right to the left. Finish with
  hands on hips.


Chorus

1st Line;-- Watch how

  Inter.;-- Turn to partner and step dip, right. (In line of direction.)
  Clap hands three times.

the needle does fly,

  Inter.;-- Step dip, left. (In reverse line of direction.) Clap hands
  three times.

2nd Line;-- Nimble hands to guide it;

  Inter.;-- Encircle to the right with three walking steps. (Right;
  left; right and close left to right.) As the first step is taken clap
  hands once and replace hands to hips.

3rd Line;-- Every time

  Inter.;-- Step dip, left. (In reverse line of direction.) Clap hands
  three times.

the wheel goes round,

  Inter.;-- Step dip, right. (In line of direction.) Clap hands three
  times.

4th Line;-- Pop goes the weasel.

  Inter.;-- Encircle to the left with three walking steps. (Left; right;
  left and close right to the left.) As the first step is taken clap
  hands once and replace hands to hips.




DAPPLE GREY


Arr. by +J. N. Richards+

[Music:
  I had a little pony
    And his name was Dapple Grey;
  I lent him to a lady,
    To ride a mile away.
  She whipped him and she slashed him,
    She rode him through the mire;
  I would not lend my pony now
    For all the lady's hire.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Children arranged in double circle formation, facing
counter clockwise (line of direction); outside hands placed on hips;
inside hands joined and raised shoulder height.

Suggestion;-- In so far as possible have the sex units divided, the boys
forming the inside circle and the girls forming the outside circle.

Start the dance movement with the outside foot. (Boys beginning with the
left foot; girls beginning with the right foot.)

Description of pupils in outer circles. (Girls.) Counterlike-- Inner


1st Line;-- I had

  Interpretation;-- Point step forward, right.

a little

  Inter.;-- Point step backward, right.

pony

  Inter.;-- Three steps forward and hold. (Right; left and right.)

  Cues;-- Point and point and step, step, step.

And his name

  Inter.;-- Swing left forward and point step forward, left.

was Dapple

  Inter.;-- Point step backward, left.

Grey;

  Inter.;-- Three steps forward and hold. (Left; right and left.)

Cues;-- Point and point and step, step, step.

2nd Line;-- I lent

  Inter.;-- With a jump, face partner; clasp outside hands and raise
  both arms to shoulder height.

him to

  Inter.;-- Jump, in place, once.

a lady,

  Inter.;-- Step throw, right and step throw, left.

To ride a mile away.

  Inter.;-- Seven chasses in line of direction, closing left to right,
  completing movement.

3rd Line;-- She

whipped him and she slashed him,

  Inter.;-- Replace left hand to hip. Grasp imaginary whip with the
  right hand and with a vigorous motion imitate whipping. (Three times
  replacing hand to hip upon the word, "him.") Mark time, in place, six
  counts. (Right; left; right; left; right and left.)

  NOTE.-- The downward movement of whipping takes place as the right
  foot is lowered to the floor.

She

rode him through the mire;

  Inter.;-- Clasp partner's hands, raising arms to shoulder height and
  bend and stretch knees six times.

4th Line;-- I would

  Inter.;-- Step dip, right, clapping hands three times.

not lend

  Inter.;-- Step dip, left, clapping hands three times.

my pony now

  Inter.;-- Face line of direction; replace hands to hips and execute
  two steps forward. (Right; left and close light to left.)

For all

  Inter.;-- Step throw, right.

the lady's

  Inter.;-- Step throw, left.

hire.

  Inter.;-- Mark time, in place, three counts. (Right; left and right.)




SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE


_Permission to use words and music:--
McLoughlin Bros._ Arr. by +J. W. Elliott+

[Music:
  Sing a song of sixpence,
    A pocket full of Rye;
  Four and twenty Blackbirds
    Bak'd in a Pie.
  When the Pie was open'd,
    The Birds began to sing;
  Wasn't that a dainty dish
    To set before a King.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Single circle formation facing counter clockwise (right) in
close order formation. Hands are placed upon the shoulders of the pupil
in front.


1st Verse

1st Line;-- Sing a song of sixpence, A pocket full of Rye;

  Interpretation;-- Starting with the inside foot (left) moving in line
  of direction execute point step forward and step, left; right; left
  and right. During this movement, bend the trunk slightly to the left
  and right as the activity proceeds.

  Cues;-- Point and step; point and step; point and step; point and
  step.

2nd Line;-- Four and twenty Blackbirds

  Inter.;-- Turn the head to the left; step sideward, left and close
  right to left and repeat.

  Cue;-- Step and close; step and close.

Bak'd in a Pie.

  Inter.;-- Turn the head to the right; step sideward, right and close
  left to the right and repeat.

  Cue;-- Step and close; step and close.

3rd Line;-- When the Pie was open'd,

  Inter.;-- Facing inward (left); clasp hands to the right and left and
  starting with the right foot execute three steps backward. (Right;
  left; right and close left to the right.)

  Cues;-- Step; step; step and close.

The Birds began to sing;

  Inter.;-- Three chasse steps in line of direction. (To the right.)

4th Line;-- Wasn't that a dainty dish

  Inter.;-- Extend arms forward slightly flexed, clapping hands seven
  times, and step bend, left and right. (Step to the left; place the
  right toe behind the left heel, bending both knees slightly. During
  this movement the head is turned to the left, the trunk bending
  slightly as the knee bending occurs. (Counterlike as to movement of
  head and trunk when executed to the right.)

To set before

  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips; step sideward, left and close right
  to left.

a King?

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.


_Second Verse_

[Music:
  The King was in the counting house,
    Counting out his money;
  The Queen was in the parlour,
    Eating bread and honey;
  The maid was in the garden,
    Hanging out the clothes;
  There came a little Dicky Bird,
    And popp'd upon her nose.]


DESCRIPTION

Formation;-- Single circle facing inward with hands on hips.


1st Line;-- The King was in the counting house,

  Interpretation;-- Starting with the left foot execute three steps
  forward. (Left; right; left and close right to the left.)

Counting out his money;

  Inter.;-- Bend knees deeply and suit activity to the words, holding
  imaginary coins in the palm of the left hand, counting with the right
  hand. (Six counts.)

2nd Line;-- The Queen was in the parlour,

  Inter.;-- Stretch the knees, lower heels; facing to the right, start
  with the right foot, execute three chasse steps to the right, with
  arms raised sideward.

Eating bread and honey;

  Inter.;-- Hold imaginary plate in the left hand (palm up) and suit
  activity to words, imitating eating with the right hand. (Six counts.)

3rd Line;-- The maid was in the garden,

  Inter.;-- Extend arms forward slightly flexed, clapping hands seven
  times, and step bend, left and right. (Step to the left, place right
  toe behind the left heel, bending both knees slightly. During this
  movement the head is turned to the left, the trunk bending slightly as
  the knee bending occurs. (Counterlike as to movement of head and trunk
  when executed to the right.)

Hanging

  Inter.;-- Replace left foot; stretch the knees; bending trunk forward,
  downward grasping clothes with hands.

out

  Inter.;-- Stretching the trunk; raise arms forward upward to imaginary
  clothesline.

the clothes;

  Inter.;-- Take clothespin out of mouth with right hand and pin clothes
  to line.

4th Line;-- There came a little Dicky Bird,

  Inter.;-- Replace hands to hips, execute four hops forward.

And popp'd

  Inter.;-- Clap hands, replacing same to hips, and execute one-quarter
  turn to the left by hopping.

upon her nose.

  Inter.;-- Bow and assume erect position.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Errors corrected by transcriber.

Missing or invisible periods (full stops) have been silently supplied.

Rhythmic Steps, #7.
  Hand clapping occurs on counts _one_ and _two_.
    _printed "_one and two_" (continuous italics): may be correct_
Fly Away Jack and Jill #1: line 4 Int.
  No activity for either files.
    _text unchanged (compare "circles" below)_
See Saw, Marjory Daw: text
  Because he won't work any faster.
    _apostrophe missing_
Fly Away Jack and Jill #2: line 2 Int.
  No activity for either circles.
    _text unchanged (compare "files" above)_
Same, next line--
  Inter.;-- Inner circle;-- No activity.
    _"No activity" printed in first column_
Same--
  4th Line;-- Come again, Jack
    _header "4th Line" missing_






End of Project Gutenberg's Dramatized Rhythm Plays, by John N. Richards

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DRAMATIZED RHYTHM PLAYS ***

***** This file should be named 22035.txt or 22035.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/0/3/22035/

Produced by Louise Hope, David Newman, Chuck Greif and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
