Project Gutenberg's Myths and Legends of the Great Plains, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Myths and Legends of the Great Plains

Author: Unknown

Editor: Katharine Berry Judson

Release Date: July 16, 2007 [EBook #22083]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYTHS AND LEGENDS ***




Produced by David Edwards, Sam W. and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)









                         MYTHS AND LEGENDS
                        OF THE GREAT PLAINS

                       SELECTED AND EDITED BY

                       KATHARINE BERRY JUDSON

 AUTHOR OF "MYTHS AND LEGENDS OF CALIFORNIA AND THE OLD SOUTHWEST,"
"MYTHS AND LEGENDS OF THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST," "MONTANA," "MYTHS AND
     LEGENDS OF ALASKA," AND "WHEN THE FORESTS ARE ABLAZE."

                            ILLUSTRATED

                           [Illustration]


                              CHICAGO
                        A. C. McCLURG & CO.
                               1913




_Copyright_
A. C. McCLURG & CO.
1913


Published November, 1913


W. F. Hall Printing Company
Chicago




_BY THE SAME AUTHOR_


MYTHS AND LEGENDS OF CALIFORNIA AND THE OLD SOUTHWEST. _Over fifty
full-page illustrations. Small quarto. $1.50 net._

MYTHS AND LEGENDS OF ALASKA. _Beautifully illustrated. Small quarto.
$1.50 net._

MYTHS AND LEGENDS OF THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST. Especially of Washington
and Oregon. _With fifty full-page illustrations. Small quarto. $1.50
net._

MONTANA: "The Land of Shining Mountains." _Illustrated. Indexed.
Square 8vo. 75 cents net._

WHEN THE FORESTS ARE ABLAZE. _Illustrated. Crown 8vo. $1.35 net._

A. C. McClurg & Co., Publishers




[Notes: BIANKI'S VISION

(Kiowa Drawing)

_The ghost-dance among the Sioux was based on the belief that the dead
Indians would all come to life and drive out the white intruders. Then
the buffaloes, which were disappearing, would come back in the immense
herds of the olden time._

_The vision of one of the dreamer priests is represented. After
reaching the spirit world, Bianki found himself on a vast prairie
covered with innumerable buffaloes and ponies. He went through the
herds (dotted lines) until he came to a large Kiowa camp, with its
ornament tepees. He met four young women who had died years before,
and asked about two of his brothers, also dead. He soon met them
coming into camp, with buffalo meat hanging from their saddles._]

[Illustration: _Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]




PREFACE


From the edge of the Darkening Land, where stand the mountains which
encircle the earth-plain, eastward toward the Sunland, lie the great
plains of America. Smooth and flat and green they stretch away,
hundreds of miles, rising from a dead level into a soft rolling of the
land, then into the long green waves of the prairies where rivers
flow, where the water ripples as it flows, and trees shade the banks
of the gleaming water.

Here, amidst the vast sweep of the plains which stretch away to the
horizon on every side, boundless, limitless, endless, lived the plains
Indians. Standing in the midst of this vast green plain on a soft May
morning, after the Thunder Gods have passed, when the sun is shining
in the soft blue above, and the sweet, rain-swept air is blown about
by the Four Winds which are always near to man, day and
night,--standing far out on the plains with no hint of the white man
or his work--one sees the earth somewhat as the Indian saw it and
wonders not at his reverence for the Mysterious One who dwelt
overhead, beyond the blue stone arch, and for the lesser powers which
came to him over the four paths guarded by the Four Winds. It was
Wakoda, the Mysterious One, who gave to man the sunshine, the clear
rippling water, the clear sky from which all storms, all clouds are
absent, the sky which is the symbol of peace. Through this sky sweeps
the eagle, the "Mother" of Indian songs, bearing upon her strong wings
the message of peace and calling to her nestlings as she flies. Little
wonder that to some tribes song was an integral part of their lives,
and that emotions too deep for words were expressed in song.

Other songs there were, with words, songs of the birds which fly
through that soft, tender blue:

    All around the birds in flocks are flying;
    Dipping, rising, circling, see them coming.
    See, many birds are flocking here,
    All about us now together coming.

    [_Pawnee_]

The power to fly has always inspired Indians of all tribes and of all
degrees of civilization with wonder and reverence. The bird chiefs
have their own places in Indian myths. Owl is chief of the night;
Woodpecker, with his ceaseless tattoo on the trees, is chief of the
trees; Duck is chief of the water; but Eagle is chief of the day. It
is always Eagle who is chief of the birds, even though Wren may outwit
him in a tale told by the fire glimmering in the tepee, when the story
tellers of the tribe tell of the happenings in the days "way beyond."
It is Eagle who inspires admiration, and becomes the most sacred bird.

    Round about a tree in ever widening circles an eagle flies, alert,
        watching o'er his nest;
    Loudly whistles he, a challenge sending far, o'er the country wide
        it echoes, there defying foes.

    [_Pawnee_]

In the breeze that rippled the long grass of the prairie and fluttered
the flaps of the graceful tepee, waved also the corn, sent by
Old-Woman-Who-Never-Dies, the ever returning life of the green thing
growing. In the ravines and on the lower slopes of the grassy waves of
the prairie bellowed the buffalo, or grazed in silence, having long
since come up from the underground world and become the source of the
Indian's food, clothing, home, utensils, and comfort. Endless were the
charms and enchantments to bring the buffalo herds near his camping
ground. Severe was the punishment meted out to the thoughtless warrior
whose unguarded eagerness frightened the herds and sent them away.

Over the plains and prairies, at other times, swept the Thunder Gods,
with their huge jointed wings, darkening all the land, and flashing
fire from angry eyes which struck down man and beast. Terrified were
the Indians when the Thunder Gods rolled. Vows made to them must be
kept, for relentless were they.

"Oh, grandfather," prayed the Indian when the sky was black and the
lightning flashed, as he filled a pipe with tobacco and offered it
skyward, "Oh, grandfather! I am very poor. Somewhere make those who
would injure me leave a clear space for me." Then he put the sacred
green cedar upon the fire--the cedar which stayed awake those seven
nights and therefore does not lose its hair every winter--and the
smoke from the sacred, burning wood, rolling upward, appeased the
rolling Thunders.

       *       *       *       *       *

The authorities used in this compilation are those found in the annual
reports of the Bureau of American Ethnology and the Publications of
the United States Geographical and Geological Survey: contributions to
North American Ethnology. Of the various ethnologists whose work has
been used, those of especial importance are Alice C. Fletcher, whose
wonderful work among the Omaha and Pawnee Indians is deserving of the
most careful study, J. Owen Dorsey, James Mooney, and S. R. Riggs.

No claim whatever is made for original work. Indeed, original work of
any kind in a compilation such as this would impair the authenticity
of the myths, and therefore destroy the value of this work. Nor has
any effort been made towards "style." The only style worth having in
telling an Indian legend is that of the Indian himself.

    K. B. J.

_Seattle, Washington._




TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                    Page
  The Creation                             _Osage_                    19
  How the World was Made                   _Cherokee_                 22
  The Flood and the Rainbow                _Lenni-Lenapi (Delaware)_  26
  The First Fire                           _Cherokee_                 28
  The Ancestors of People                  _Osage_                    31
  Origin of Strawberries                   _Cherokee_                 32
  Sacred Legend                            _Omaha_                    34
  The Legend of the Peace Pipes            _Omaha_                    38
  A Tradition of the Calumet               _Lenni-Lenapi (Delaware)_  41
  The Sacred Pole                          _Omaha_                    43
  Ikto and the Thunders                    _Teton_                    46
  The Thunder Bird                         _Comanche_                 47
  The Thunder Bird                         _Assiniboin_               48
  Song to the Thunder Gods                 _Omaha_                    49
  Songs of the Buffalo Hunt                _Sioux_                    50
  Origin of the Buffalo                    _Teton_                    53
  The Buffalo Being                        _Teton_                    55
  The Youth and the Underground People     _Omaha_                    57
  The Buffalo and the Grizzly Bear         _Omaha_                    68
  My First Buffalo Hunt                    _Omaha_                    71
  Bird Omens                               _Sioux_                    73
  The Bird Chief                           _Omaha_                    74
  Song of the Birds                        _Pawnee_                   75
  Song of Kawas, the Eagle                 _Pawnee_                   77
  The Eagle's Revenge                      _Cherokee_                 78
  The Race between Humming Bird and Crane  _Cherokee_                 80
  Rabbit and the Turkeys                   _Omaha_                    82
  Unktomi and the Bad Songs                _Dakota_                   84
  How the Pheasant Beat Corn               _Cherokee_                 88
  Why Turkey Gobbles                       _Cherokee_                 89
  Omaha Beliefs                            _Omaha_                    90
  Pawnee Beliefs                           _Pawnee_                   92
  A Song of Hospitality                    _Sioux_                    95
  A Song of the March                      _Sioux_                    96
  Song of the Prairie Breeze               _Kiowa_                    97
  Old-Woman-Who-Never-Dies                 _Mandan_                   98
  Legend of the Corn                       _Arikara_                 101
  Tradition of the Finding of Horses       _Ponca_                   105
  Dakota Beliefs and Customs               _Dakota_                  108
  Why the Tetons Bury on Scaffolds         _Teton_                   110
  The Ghost's Resentment                   _Dakota_                  111
  The Forked Roads                         _Omaha_                   116
  Tattooed Ghosts                          _Dakota_                  117
  A Ghost Story                            _Ponca_                   118
  The Ghost and the Traveler               _Teton_                   119
  The Man who Shot a Ghost                 _Teton_                   120
  The Indian Who Wrestled with a Ghost     _Teton_                   122
  The Wakanda, or Water God                _Yankton_                 126
  The Spirit Land                          _Arapahoe_                129
  Waziya, the Weather Spirit               _Teton_                   131
  Kansas Blizzards                         _Kansa_                   132
  Ikto and the Snowstorm                   _Teton_                   133
  The Southern Bride                       _Cherokee_                135
  The Fallen Star                          _Dakota_                  136
  Quarrel of Sun and Moon                  _Omaha_                   147
  Why the Possum Plays Dead                _Cherokee_                148
  Bog Myth                                 _Dakota_                  150
  Coyote and Snake                         _Omaha_                   151
  Why the Wolves Help in War               _Dakota_                  153
  How Rabbit Escaped from the Wolves       _Cherokee_                155
  How Rabbit Lost His Fat                  _Omaha_                   157
  How Flint Visited Rabbit                 _Cherokee_                158
  How Rabbit Caught the Sun in a Trap      _Omaha_                   161
  How Rabbit Killed the Giant              _Omaha_                   163
  How Deer Got His Horns                   _Cherokee_                167
  Why the Deer has Blunt Teeth             _Cherokee_                169
  Legend of the Head of Gold               _Dakota_                  171
  The Milky Way                            _Cherokee_                175
  Coyote and Gray Fox                      _Ponca_                   176
  Ictinike and Turtle                      _Omaha_                   178
  Ictinike and the Creators                _Omaha_                   181
  How Big Turtle Went on the War Path      _Omaha_                   186




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                    Page
  Bianki's Vision                                         _Frontispiece_
  Woman's Costume                                                     32
  An Elderly Omaha Beau                                               33
  Tattooing, Showing Conventional Design of the Peace Pipe            42
  Bull Boat                                                           43
  German Knights and Indian Warriors                                  56
  Rivalry over the Buffalo                                            70
  Capture of a Wandering Buffalo                                      71
  Five Chiefs of the Ogalla Sioux                                     84
  Old Horse                                                           85
  Siouan Tents                                                        96
  An Arapahoe Bed                                                     97
  Indian Scaffold Cemetery on the Missouri River                     110
  An Omaha Village, Showing Earth Lodge and Conical Tepees           111
  Black Coyote                                                       122
  Ornamentation on the Reverse of an Arapahoe "ghost-dance" Shirt    123
  "Killed two Arikara chiefs"                                        132
  Many Tongues, or Loud Talker                                       133
  Petroglyph in Nebraska                                             144
  Plains Indians Dragging Brush for a Medicine Lodge                 156
  An Earth Lodge                                                     157
  Kansa Chief                                                        168
  Big Goose                                                          169
  Omaha Assault on a Dakota Village                                  186
  "Killed ten men and three women"                                   187




MYTHS AND LEGENDS OF THE GREAT PLAINS




THE CREATION

_Osage (Wazhá zhe group)_


Way beyond, once upon a time, some of the Osages lived in the sky.
They did not know where they came from, so they went to Sun. They
said, "From where did we come?"

He said, "You are my children."

Then they wandered still further and came to Moon.

Moon said, "I am your mother; Sun is your father. You must go away
from here. You must go down to the earth and live there."

So they came to the earth but found it covered with water. They could
not return up above. They wept, but no answer came to them. They
floated about in the air, seeking help from some god; but they found
none.

Now all the animals were with them. Elk was the finest and most
stately. They all trusted Elk. So they called to Elk, "Help us."

Then Elk dropped into the water and began to sink. Then he called to
the winds. The winds came from all sides and they blew until the
waters went upwards, as in a mist. Now before that the winds had
traveled in only two directions; they went from north to south and
from south to north. But when Elk called to them, they came from the
east, from the north, from the west, and from the south. They met at a
central place; then they carried the waters upwards.

Now at first the people could see only the rocks. So they traveled on
the rocky places. But nothing grew there and there was nothing to eat.
Then the waters continued to vanish. At last the people could see the
soft earth. When Elk saw the earth, he was so joyous, he rolled over
and over on the earth. Then all the loose hairs clung to the soil. So
the hairs grew, and from them sprang beans, corn, potatoes, and wild
turnips, and at last all the grasses and trees.

Now the people wandered over the land. They found human footsteps.
They followed them. They joined with them, and traveled with them in
search of food.


_(Hoga group)_

The Hoga came down from above, and found the earth covered with water.
They flew in every direction. They sought for gods who would help
them and drive the water away. They found not one. Then Elk came. He
had a loud voice and he shouted to the four corners of the sky. The
four winds came in answer. They blew upon the water and it vanished
upwards, in a mist. Then the people could see the rocks. Now there was
only a little space on the rocks. They knew they must have more room.
The people were crowded. So they sent Muskrat down into the water. He
did not come back. He was drowned. Then they sent Loon down. He did
not come back. He was drowned. Then they sent Beaver down into the
water. The water was too deep. Beaver was drowned. Then Crawfish dived
into the water. He was gone a long time. When he came up there was a
little mud in his claws. Crawfish was so tired he died. But the people
took the mud out of his claws and made the land.




HOW THE WORLD WAS MADE

_Cherokee_


The earth is a great floating island in a sea of water. At each of the
four corners there is a cord hanging down from the sky. The sky is of
solid rock. When the world grows old and worn out, the cords will
break, and then the earth will sink down into the ocean. Everything
will be water again. All the people will be dead. The Indians are much
afraid of this.

In the long time ago, when everything was all water, all the animals
lived up above in Galun'lati, beyond the stone arch that made the sky.
But it was very much crowded. All the animals wanted more room. The
animals began to wonder what was below the water and at last Beaver's
grandchild, little Water Beetle, offered to go and find out. Water
Beetle darted in every direction over the surface of the water, but it
could find no place to rest. There was no land at all. Then Water
Beetle dived to the bottom of the water and brought up some soft mud.
This began to grow and to spread out on every side until it became
the island which we call the earth. Afterwards this earth was
fastened to the sky with four cords, but no one remembers who did
this.

At first the earth was flat and soft and wet. The animals were anxious
to get down, and they sent out different birds to see if it was yet
dry, but there was no place to alight; so the birds came back to
Galun'lati. Then at last it seemed to be time again, so they sent out
Buzzard; they told him to go and make ready for them. This was the
Great Buzzard, the father of all the buzzards we see now. He flew all
over the earth, low down near the ground, and it was still soft. When
he reached the Cherokee country, he was very tired; his wings began to
flap and strike the ground. Wherever they struck the earth there was a
valley; whenever the wings turned upwards again, there was a mountain.
When the animals above saw this, they were afraid that the whole world
would be mountains, so they called him back, but the Cherokee country
remains full of mountains to this day. [This was the original home, in
North Carolina.]

When the earth was dry and the animals came down, it was still dark.
Therefore they got the sun and set it in a track to go every day
across the island from east to west, just overhead. It was too hot
this way. Red Crawfish had his shell scorched a bright red, so that
his meat was spoiled. Therefore the Cherokees do not eat it.

Then the medicine men raised the sun a handsbreadth in the air, but it
was still too hot. They raised it another time; and then another time;
at last they had raised it seven handsbreadths so that it was just
under the sky arch. Then it was right and they left it so. That is why
the medicine men called the high place "the seventh height." Every day
the sun goes along under this arch on the under side; it returns at
night on the upper side of the arch to its starting place.

There is another world under this earth. It is like this one in every
way. The animals, the plants, and the people are the same, but the
seasons are different. The streams that come down from the mountains
are the trails by which we reach this underworld. The springs at their
head are the doorways by which we enter it. But in order to enter the
other world, one must fast and then go to the water, and have one of
the underground people for a guide. We know that the seasons in the
underground world are different, because the water in the spring is
always warmer in winter than the air in this world; and in summer the
water is cooler.

We do not know who made the first plants and animals. But when they
were first made, they were told to watch and keep awake for seven
nights. This is the way young men do now when they fast and pray to
their medicine. They tried to do this. The first night, nearly all the
animals stayed awake. The next night several of them dropped asleep.
The third night still more went to sleep. At last, on the seventh
night, only the owl, the panther, and one or two more were still
awake. Therefore, to these were given the power to see in the dark, to
go about as if it were day, and to kill and eat the birds and animals
which must sleep during the night.

Even some of the trees went to sleep. Only the cedar, the pine, the
spruce, the holly, and the laurel were awake all seven nights.
Therefore they are always green. They are also sacred trees. But to
the other trees it was said, "Because you did not stay awake,
therefore you shall lose your hair every winter."

After the plants and the animals, men began to come to the earth. At
first there was only one man and one woman. He hit her with a fish. In
seven days a little child came down to the earth. So people came to
the earth. They came so rapidly that for a time it seemed as though
the earth could not hold them all.




THE FLOOD AND THE RAINBOW

_Delaware (Lenni-Lenapi)_


The Lenni-Lenapi are the First People, so that they know this story is
true.

After the Creation of the earth, the Mysterious One covered it with a
blue roof. Sometimes the roof was very black. Then the Manitou of
Waters became uneasy. He feared the rain would no longer be able to
pour down upon the earth through this dark roof. Therefore the Manitou
of Waters prayed to the Mysterious One that the waters from above be
not cut off.

At once the Mysterious One commanded to blow the Spirit of the Wind,
who dwells in the Darkening Land. At once thick clouds arose. They
covered all the earth, so that the dark roof could no longer be seen.

Then the voice of the Mysterious One was heard amongst the clouds. The
voice was deep and heavy, like the sound of falling rivers.

Then the Spirit of Rain, the brother of the Spirit of Waters and the
Spirit of the Winds, poured down water from above. The waters fell for
a long time. They fell until all the earth was covered. Then the
birds took refuge in the branches of the highest trees. The animals
followed the trails to the mountain peaks.

Then the Manitou of Waters feared no longer. Therefore the Mysterious
One ordered the rain to cease and the clouds to disappear. Then
Sin-go-wi-chi-na-xa, the rainbow, was seen in the sky.

Therefore the Lenni-Lenapi watch for the rainbow, because it means
that the Mysterious One is no longer angry.




THE FIRST FIRE

_Cherokee_


In the beginning there was no fire and the world was cold. Then the
Thunders, who lived up in Galun'lati, sent their lightning and put
fire into the bottom of a hollow sycamore tree which grew on an
island. The animals knew it was there because they could see the smoke
coming out at the top, but they could not get to it on account of the
water, so they held a council to decide what to do. This was a long,
long time ago.

Every animal was anxious to go after the fire. Raven offered. He was
large and strong, so he was sent first. He flew high and far across
the water, and lighted on the sycamore tree. There he perched,
wondering what to do next. Then he looked at himself. The heat had
scorched his feathers black. Raven was so frightened he flew back
across the water without any fire.

Then little Wa-hu-hu, the Screech Owl, offered to go. He flew high and
far across the water and perched upon a hollow tree. As he sat there
looking into the hollow tree, wondering what to do, a blast of hot air
came up and hurt his eyes. Screech Owl was frightened. He flew back as
best he could, because he could hardly see. That is why his eyes are
red even to this day.

Then Hooting Owl and the Horned Owl went, but by the time they reached
the hollow tree, the fire was blazing so fiercely that the smoke
nearly blinded them. The ashes carried up by the breeze made white
rings around their eyes. So they had to come home without fire.
Therefore they have white rings around their eyes.

None of the rest of the birds would go to the fire. Then Uk-su-hi, the
racer snake, said he would go through the water and bring back fire.
He swam to the island and crawled through the grass to the tree. Then
he went into the tree by a small hole at the bottom. But the heat and
smoke were dreadful. The ground at the bottom of the tree was covered
with hot ashes. The racer darted back and forth trying to get off the
ashes, and at last managed to escape through the same hole by which he
had entered. But his body had been burned black. Therefore he is now
the black racer. And that is why the black racer darts around and
doubles on his track as if trying to escape.

Then great Blacksnake, "The Climber," offered to go for fire. He was
much larger than the black racer. Blacksnake swam over to the island
and climbed up the tree on the outside, as the blacksnake always does,
but when he put his head down into the hole the smoke choked him so
that he fell into the burning stump. Before he could climb out, he,
too, was burned black.

So the birds, and the animals, and the snakes held another council.
The world was still very cold. There was no fire. But all the birds,
and the snakes, and all the four-footed animals refused to go for
fire. They were all afraid of the burning sycamore.

Then Water Spider said she would go. This is not the water spider that
looks like a mosquito, but the other one--the one with black downy
hair and red stripes on her body. She could run on top of the water,
or dive to the bottom.

The animals said, "How can you bring back fire?"

But Water Spider spun a thread from her body and wove it into a
_tusti_ bowl which she fastened on her back. Then she swam over to the
island and through the grass to the fire. Water Spider put one little
coal of fire into her bowl, and then swam back with it.

That is how fire came to the world. And that is why Water Spider has a
_tusti_ bowl on her back.




THE ANCESTORS OF PEOPLE

_Osage_


There are people who come from under the water. They lived in the
water weeds that hang down, all green, into the water. They have
leaves upon their stems. Now the water people lived in shells. The
shells were their houses and kept the water out.

There were other animals who lived under the earth. Cougar lived under
the earth, and bear, and buffalo. These creatures came up out of the
ground. Then the shell people came up to the earth also; and the sky
people came down. So all these three peoples lived together. They are
the fathers of the people who live on the earth today.




[Illustration: WOMAN'S COSTUME

(Omaha)

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]


[Illustration: AN ELDERLY OMAHA BEAU

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]




ORIGIN OF STRAWBERRIES

_Cherokee_


When the world was new, there was one man and one woman. They were
happy; then they quarreled. At last the woman left the man and began
to walk away toward the Sunland, the Eastland. The man followed. He
felt sorry, but the woman walked straight on. She did not look back.

Then Sun, the great Apportioner, was sorry for the man. He said,

"Are you still angry with your wife?"

The man said, "No."

Sun said, "Would you like to have her come back to you?"

"Yes," said the man.

So Sun made a great patch of huckleberries which he placed in front of
the woman's trail. She passed them without paying any attention to
them. Then Sun made a clump of blackberry bushes and put those in
front of her trail. The woman walked on. Then Sun created beautiful
service-berry bushes which stood beside the trail. Still the woman
walked on.

So Sun made other fruits and berries. But the woman did not look at
them.

Then Sun created a patch of beautiful ripe strawberries. They were the
first strawberries. When the woman saw those, she stopped to gather a
few. As she gathered them, she turned her face toward the west. Then
she remembered the man. She turned to the Sunland but could not go on.
She could not go any further.

Then the woman picked some of the strawberries and started back on her
trail, away from the Sunland. So her husband met her, and they went
back together.




SACRED LEGEND

_Omaha_


In the beginning the people were in water. They opened their eyes, but
they could see nothing. As the people came out of the water, they
first saw the daylight. They had no clothing. Then they took weeds and
grasses and from them wove clothing.

The people lived near a large body of water; it was in a wooded
country where there was game. The men hunted the deer with clubs; they
did not know the use of the bow. The people wandered about the shores
of the great water. They were poor and cold. The people thought, "What
shall we do to help ourselves?" So they began chipping stones. They
found a bluish stone that was easily flaked and chipped; so they made
knives and arrowheads out of it. But they were still poor and cold.
They thought, "What shall we do?"

Then a man found an elm root that was very dry. He dug a hole in it
and put a stick in and rubbed it. Then smoke came. He smelled it. Then
the people smelled it and came near. Others helped him to rub. At last
a spark came. They blew this into a flame. Thus fire came to warm the
people and to cook their food.

After this the people built grass houses; they cut the grass with the
shoulder blade of a deer. Now the people had fire and ate their meat
roasted. Then they grew tired of roast meat. They thought, "How shall
we cook our meat differently?"

A man found a piece of clay that stuck well together. Then he brought
sand to mix with it. Then he molded it as a pot. Then he gathered
grass until he had a large heap of it; he put the clay pot into the
midst of the grass and set it on fire. This made the clay hard. After
a time he put water into the pot; the water did not leak out. This was
good. So he put water into it and then meat into it, and put the pot
over the fire. Thus the people had boiled meat to eat.

Now their grass coverings would grow fuzzy and drop off. It was hard
to gather and keep these coverings. The people were not satisfied.
Again they thought, "What can we do to have something different to
wear?"

Before this, they had been throwing away the hides from the game which
they killed. But now they took their stone knives to scrape down the
hides and make them thin. They rubbed the hides with grass and with
their hands to make them soft. Then they used the hides for clothing.
Now they had clothing and were warm.

Now the women had to break the dry wood to keep up the fires. They had
no tools. So the men made a stone ax with a groove. Then they put a
handle on the grooved stone and fastened it with rawhide. This was
used. Then they wanted something better to break the wood. So they
made wedges of stone.

Now the grass shelter came to pieces easily. Then the people thought,
"What shall we do? How can we get something that will not come to
pieces?" Then they tried putting skins on poles.

First they tried deerskins. But they were too small. They tried elk
skins. But they became hard and stiff in the rain and sun. Then they
did not try skins longer. They used bark to cover the poles of their
tepees.

But the bark houses were not warm. Then the people took the leg bone
of the deer and splintered it So they made sharp pieces for awls. Then
they took buffalo skins and sinews, and with the awl they fastened the
skins together. So they made comfortable covers for their tepees.

Then a man wandered around a long time. One day he found some small
pieces of something which were white, and red, and blue. He thought
they must be something of great value, so he hid them in a mound of
earth. Now one day he went to see if they were safe. Behold! When he
came to the mound, green stalks were growing out of it. And on the
stalks were small kernels of white, and red, and blue. Behold! It was
corn. Then the man took the corn, and gave it to the people. They
tried it for food. They found it good, and have ever since called it
their life.

Now when the people found the corn good, they thought to hide it in
mounds as the first man had done. So they took the shoulder blade of
an elk and made mounds. Then they hid the corn in it. So the corn grew
and the people had food.

Now as the people wandered around, they came to a forest where the
birch trees grew. There was a great lake there. Then they made canoes
of birch bark. They traveled in them on the water. Then a man found
two young animals. He carried them home. He fed them so they grew
bigger. Then he made a harness which he placed upon them and fastened
it to poles. So these animals became burden bearers. Before that,
every burden had to be carried on the back. Now the dogs helped the
people.




THE LEGEND OF THE PEACE PIPES

_Omaha_


The people came across a great water on logs tied together. They
pitched their tents on the shore. Then they thought to make for
themselves certain bounds within which they were to live and rules
which should govern them. They cleared a space of grass and weeds so
they could see each other's faces. They sat down and there was no
obstruction between them.

While they were holding a council, an owl hooted in the trees near by.
The leader said, "That bird is to take part in our council. He calls
to us. He offers us his aid."

Immediately afterward they heard a woodpecker. He knocked against the
trees. The leader said, "That bird calls to us. He offers us his aid.
He will take part in our council."

Then the chief appointed a man as servant. He said, "Go into the woods
and get an ash sapling." The servant came back with a sapling having a
rough bark.

"We do not want that," said the leader. "Go again and get a sapling
with a smooth bark, bluish in color at the joint where a branch
comes." So the servant went out, and came back with a sapling of the
kind described.

When the leader took up the sapling, an eagle came and soared about
the council which was sitting in the grass. He dropped a downy
feather; it fell. It fell in the center of the cleared space. Now this
was the white eagle. The chief said, "This is not what we want," so
the white eagle passed on.

Then the bald eagle came swooping down, as though attacking its prey.
It balanced itself on its wings directly over the cleared space. It
uttered fierce cries, and dropped one of its downy feathers, which
stood on the ground as the other eagle's feather had done. The chief
said, "This is not what we want." So the bald eagle passed on.

Then came the spotted eagle, and soared over the council, and dropped
its feather as the others had done. The chief said, "This is not what
we want," and the spotted eagle passed on.

Then the imperial eagle, the eagle with the fantail, came, and soared
over the people. It dropped a downy feather which stood upright in the
center of the cleared space. The chief said, "This is what we want."

So the feathers of this eagle were used in making the peace pipes,
together with the feathers of the owl and woodpecker, and with other
things. These peace pipes were to be used in forming friendly
relations with other tribes.

When the peace pipes were made, seven other pipes were made for
keeping peace within the tribe. One pipe was to prevent revenge. If
one man should kill another, the chief took this pipe to the relatives
and offered it to them. If the relatives of the dead man refused to
accept it, it was offered again. It was offered four times. If it was
refused four times, the chief said, "Well, you must take the
consequences. We will do nothing, and you cannot now ask to see the
pipes." He meant if they took revenge and any trouble came to them,
they could not ask for help or for mercy.

Each band had its own pipe.




A TRADITION OF THE CALUMET

_Lenni-Lenapi_


In the days of the old men, far to the north there lived a nation with
many villages. Their warriors were as many as the buffalo herds on the
plains toward the Darkening Land. Their tepees were many on the shores
of a beautiful lake and along wide rivers.

Then the Mysterious One, whose voice is in the clouds, told the chiefs
of a great nation, also of many villages, which hunted through all the
country from the Big Water in the sunrise to the mountains in the
Darkening Land.

Then the chiefs and the old men held a council. Runners came from many
villages to the great council. And the council voice was to go to the
great nation to the south, the nation with many villages, and bring
back scalps and horses.

So the chiefs and warriors went out, one by one. Then runners were
sent to all the villages, ordering the chiefs to dance the scalp
dance.

Suddenly there came through the sky a great white bird. It came from
the forest, and flew into the village of the great chief. It rested
above the head of the chief's daughter.

Then the chief's daughter heard a voice in her heart. The voice said,
"Call all the chiefs and warriors together. Tell them the Mysterious
One is sad because they seek the scalps of the Lenni-Lenapi, the First
People. Tell the warriors they must wash their hands in the blood of a
young fawn. They must go with many presents to the First People. They
must carry to the First People Hobowakan, the calumet."

Thus the First People and the mighty people with many villages on the
shore of the lake smoked together the pipe of council. So there was
peace.




[Illustration: TATTOOING, SHOWING CONVENTIONAL DESIGN OF THE PEACE
PIPE

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]


[Illustration: BULL BOAT

Made of the hide of the buffalo bulls. The only boat used by the
plains Indians.

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]




THE SACRED POLE

_Omaha_


A young man who had been wandering came back to his village. When he
reached his home he said, "Father, I have seen a wonderful tree." Then
he told his father about it. The old man was silent because all was
not yet settled between the tribes. The Cheyenne, the Arikara, the
Omaha, Ponca, and Iowa were having a great council, so as to adopt
rules concerning the hunting of game, and of peace, and war.

After a while, the young man went to visit the tree. When he reached
home, he told his father again of it. The old man was silent, for the
chiefs were still holding their council. At last, when the council was
over and the rules decided upon, the old man sent for the chiefs. He
said, "My son has seen a wonderful tree. The Thunder Birds come and go
upon this tree. They make a trail of fire which leaves four paths on
the burnt grass that stretch towards the Four Winds. When the Thunder
Birds alight upon the tree, it bursts into flame. The fire mounts to
the top. The tree stands burning, but no one can see the fire except
at night."

When the chiefs heard this tale, they sent runners to see what this
tree might be. The runners came back and told the same story. In the
night they had seen the tree burning as it stood. Then all the people
held a council as to what this might mean. The chiefs said, "We shall
run for it. Put on your ornaments and prepare as if for battle."

The warriors painted themselves as if for war. They put on their
ornaments. They set out for the tree, which stood near a lake. They
ran as if it were a race to attack the enemy. All the men ran. A Ponca
was the first to reach the tree and he struck it as if it were an
enemy.

Then they cut the tree down. Four men, walking in a straight line,
carried it on their shoulders to the village. The chiefs for four
nights sang the songs made in honor of the tree. They held a council
about the tree. A tent was made for it, and it was set up in the
circle of lodges. The chiefs worked upon it; they trimmed it and
called it a human being. They made a basket of twigs and feathers and
tied it half way up the tree. Then they said, "It has no hair!" So
they sent out to get a large scalp lock and they put it on top of Pole
for hair. Afterwards the chiefs told the criers to tell the people
that when Pole was completed they should see it.

Then they painted Pole and set it up before the tent. They leaned it
on a crotched stick. Then they called all the people and all the
people came. Men, women, and children came.

When they were all together, the chiefs said, "This is a mystery.
Whenever we meet with trouble, we shall bring all our prayers to Pole.
We shall make offerings to him. We shall ask him for what we need.
When we ask anything, we must make gifts. If anyone desires to become
a chief, he shall make presents to the Keepers of the Pole, and they
shall give him authority to be a chief."

When all was finished the people said, "Let us appoint a time when we
shall again paint Pole; when we shall act before him the battles we
have fought." So they fixed the time in the moon when the buffaloes
bellow.




IKTO AND THE THUNDERS

_Teton_


Ikto once stood on the bank of a stream across which he could not
swim. He stood on the bank and thought. Then he sang:

    I stand,
    Thinking often,
    Oh, that I might reach the other side.

Just then a long Something passed, swimming against the current. When
it reached Ikto, it said,

"I will take you across, but you must not lift your head above the
water. Should you notice even a small cloud, warn me at once, as I
must go under the water. If you see a small cloud, you must say,
'Younger brother, your grandfather is coming.'"

Before the other bank was reached, Ikto looked up. He saw a small
cloud and said, "Younger brother, your grandfather is coming."

There was a sudden commotion. When Ikto became conscious again, the
Thunder Beings were roaring, and the water was dashing high, but the
monster had vanished.




THE THUNDER BIRD

_Comanche_


In the olden times, a hunter once shot at a large bird which was
flying above him. It fell to the ground. It was so large he was afraid
to go to it alone, so he went back to the camp for others.

When they came back to the place where the bird had been shot, thunder
was rolling through the ravine. Flashes of lightning showed the place
where the bird lay. They came nearer. Then the lightning flashed so
that they could not see the bird. One flash killed a hunter.

The other Indians fled back to the camp. They knew it was the Thunder
Bird.

Once the Thunder Bird, in the days of the grandfathers, came down to
the ground and alighted there. You may know that is so, because the
grass remains burned off a large space, and the outlines are those of
a large bird with outspread wings.




THE THUNDER BIRD

_Assiniboin_


The Sioux, or Dakotas, of whom the Assiniboins are a branch, pretend
that thunder is an enormous bird, and that the muffled sound of the
distant thunder is caused by a countless number of young birds! The
great bird, they say, gives the first sound, and the young ones repeat
it; this is the cause of the reverberations. The Sioux declare that
the young Thunders do all the mischief, like boys who will not listen
to good advice; but the old Thunder, or big bird, is wise and
excellent; he never kills or injures any one!




SONG TO THE THUNDER GODS[A]

_Omaha_


    Ye four, come hither and stand, near shall ye stand,[B]
    In four groups shall ye stand,
    Here shall ye stand, in this place stand.

    [The thunder rolls]

    Turned by the wind goes the one I send yonder;
    Yonder he goes who is whirled by the winds;
    Goes, where the four hills of life and the four winds are standing;
    There in the midst of the winds do I send him,
    Into the midst of the winds standing there.

    [The thunder rolls]

FOOTNOTES:

[A] By Alice C. Fletcher.

[B] The "four" are the four winds.




SONGS OF THE BUFFALO HUNT

_Sioux_


    The whole world is coming,
    A nation is coming, a nation is coming,
    The Eagle has brought the message to the tribe.
    The father says so, the father says so,
    Over the whole earth they are coming.
    The buffalo are coming, the buffalo are coming,
    The Crow has brought the message to the tribe,
    The father says so, the father says so.[C]

FOOTNOTE:

[C] "This fine song summarizes the whole hope of the Ghost-dance--the
return of the buffalo and the departed dead, the message being brought
to the people by the sacred birds, the Eagle and the Crow."




SONGS OF THE BUFFALO HUNT[D]

_Sioux_


    _He!_ They have come back racing,[E]
    _He!_ They have come back racing,
    Why, they say there is to be a buffalo hunt over here,
    Why, they say there is to be a buffalo hunt over here.
    Make arrows! Make arrows!
    Says the father, says the father.
          Give me my knife,
          Give me my knife,
          I shall hang up the meat to dry--_Ye´ ye!_
          I shall hang up the meat to dry--_Ye´ ye!_
          Says grandmother--_Yo´ yo!_
          Says grandmother--_Yo´ yo!_
          When it is dry I shall make pemmican,
          When it is dry I shall make pemmican,
          Says grandmother--_Yo´ yo!_
          Says grandmother--_Yo´ yo!_[F]

FOOTNOTES:

[D] Songs and comments as given by James Mooney.

[E] "When going on a buffalo hunt, it was customary among the Sioux to
send out a small advance party to locate the herd. On finding it,
these men returned at once at full gallop to the main body of hunters,
but instead of stopping on reaching them, they dashed past and then
turned and fell in behind. It is to this custom the first line
refers."

[F] "In the old days an Indian camp during the cutting up of the meat
after a buffalo hunt was a scene of the most joyous activity....
Preparations were made for days and weeks ahead. Couriers were sent
out to collect the neighboring bands at a common rendezvous, medicine
men began their prayers and ceremonies to attract the herd, the
buffalo songs were sung, and finally when all was ready the
confederated bands or sometimes the whole tribe--men, women, children,
horses, dogs, and travois--moved out into the buffalo grounds. Here
the immense camp of hundreds of tipis was set up, more ceremonies were
performed, and the mounted warriors rode out in a body to surround and
slaughter the herd. The women followed close after them to strip the
hides from the fresh carcasses, and cut out the choice portion of the
meat and tallow and bring it into camp."




ORIGIN OF THE BUFFALO

_Teton_


In the days of the grandfathers, buffaloes lived under the earth. In
the olden times, they say, a man who was journeying came to a hill
where there were many holes in the ground. He entered one of them.
When he had gone inside he found buffalo chips and buffalo tracks on
all sides. He found also buffalo hairs where the buffaloes had rubbed
against the walls. These were the real buffaloes and they lived under
the ground. Afterwards some of them came to the surface of the earth
and lived there. Then the herds on the earth increased.

These buffaloes had many lodges and there they raised their children.
They did many strange things. Therefore when a man escapes being
wounded by an enemy, people say he has seen the buffaloes in his
dreams, and they have helped him.

Men who dream of the buffaloes act like them and dance the
buffalo-bull dance. Then the man who acts the buffalo has a real
buffalo inside of him, people say, a little hard ball near the
shoulder blade; and therefore he is very hard to kill. No matter how
often he is wounded, he does not die.

People know that the buffaloes live in earth lodges; so they never
dance the buffalo dance vainly.




THE BUFFALO BEING

_Teton_


Once upon a time, a Buffalo Being attacked a party of Indians. He
killed one of them, but the others ran away and climbed a tree. The
Buffalo Being followed them and rushed at the tree. He rushed many
times, knocking off piece after piece of the tree, until very little
was left.

Then the frightened Indians lighted some tinder, and threw it far off
into the tall grass. The fire scorched the Buffalo Being's eyes, and
injured his horns. The hard part of the horn slipped off, leaving only
the softer part, so that he could no longer injure any one.

But the Buffalo Being was still dangerous. At last one of the Indians
slipped down the tree, with his bow and arrow. He killed the Buffalo
Being. Then all the men came down the tree and skinned the animal and
cut up the flesh. Into the buffalo-skin robe they placed the body of
the dead Indian. But suddenly another Buffalo Being appeared. The
Indians again climbed the tree. But this Being only walked four times
around the dead Indian. Then he said, "Arise to your feet."

At once the dead man came to life. The Buffalo Being said to him,
"Hereafter you shall be mysterious. The sun, the moons, the four
winds, day and night shall be your slaves."

Then it was so. The Indian could take the form of a fine plume, which
was blown against a tree. It would stick to the tree and wave many
times in the breeze.




[Notes: GERMAN KNIGHTS AND INDIAN WARRIORS

_The German knights are from a sketch in a Ms., dated 1220, in the
University of Leipzig. The sketch was copied from Rudolph Cronau's
"Geschichte der Solinger Klingenindustrie." They are Knights of the
13th century._

_The Indian warriors were drawn by an Apache Indian at Anadarko, in
1884, though the insignia is really that of the Cheyenne Indians._

_The comparison and contrast are made by the Bureau of Ethnology._]

[Illustration: _Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]




THE YOUTH AND THE UNDERGROUND PEOPLE

_Omaha_


There were some villages which were very populous. The chief's son and
his daughter were unmarried. There were two sons. They surrounded the
herds of buffaloes. They used to kill buffaloes.

One of the sons of this chief attacked a buffalo when far apart from
the rest. He shot it; but the buffalo had gone out of sight into the
ground. The man and his horse, too, went headlong; but the buffalo
went down first.

Now the father sent out criers. "He says that his son reached the
buffaloes, but he has not come home. He says that ye who have seen his
son will please tell it," shouted the criers.

One said he had seen him. "I saw him very distinctly. He went in
pursuit. Perhaps he went headlong into a sunken place, for when on
very level ground he vanished altogether. I did not see him again," he
said.

The father commanded the people to join him in seeking his son. When
the man who had seen him said, "It was just here," the people
scattered far and wide, seeking the chief's son. All the people sought
him. Behold, he had gone down the pit some time before. The buffalo
had gone down, having kicked off a piece of the soil. The horse, too,
had gone down, having kicked off a piece of the soil.

There was no trail beyond the pit. All the people went directly to it,
without hesitation.

The pit was very large and extended far downward. The chief spoke of
removing the village there, at once. So there they camped. They camped
around the pit.

Then the chief implored the young men and those who had been his
friends. If there was one man who was stout-hearted, one who had a
firm heart, the father wished him to enter the pit and go after the
young man. So he implored them.

At length one rode round and round the village. Then he promised to
enter the pit and go after the missing son.

"Tell his father. He must also collect cords," he said.

Having cut buffalo hides in strips, he collected the cords.

"Make a round piece of skin for me, and tie the long line of cord to
it," he said. So they finished it.

"Now it matters not to what place I go, I will put the body in the
skin bucket. I go to take hold of him. When I reach the ground at the
bottom, I will pull suddenly on the cord. When I pull on it many
times, you will draw it up." Thus he said.

At last he reached the ground inside the pit. It was very dark. When
he felt around in the dark, the buffalo was lying alone, being killed
by the fall. The horse, too, was lying by itself, having been killed
by the fall. And the man lay apart from them, having been killed by
the fall.

Picking up the body of the chief's son, he put it in the hollow skin.
Then he pulled many times on the cord.

But when the young man went down, strange to say, he did not ask
favors for himself. And they rejoiced because he had put the chief's
son in the hollow skin. Having brought up the dead man they forgot the
living one.

Though he sat waiting for the hollow skin to come down again, he was
not drawn up. So he sat wailing.

Now the chief had promised him his daughter to go down into the pit.
"If you bring my son back, you shall marry her," he had said.

The young man wandered about in the darkness. At length when walking
along the trail, he came suddenly upon an old woman.

"Venerable woman, though this land is very difficult to reach, I have
come hither. I came to the hole in the ground above. One person came
hither, having fallen into this pit. I came to take him back. They
have not drawn me up; and I have no way of going back. Venerable
woman, help me." So he spoke.

"There is nothing that I can do to help you," she said. "A person is
in that place, out of sight. Go there. He is the one who will do it
for you."

He went there. When he arrived, he knocked repeatedly on the door.
Though he stood hearing them speaking, they did not open the door for
him.

The woman said, "Fie! A person has come. Open the door for him."

Behold! The man's child was dead, and therefore he sat without
speaking. He sat still, being sad. Then the young man arrived within
the lodge, the woman having opened the door for him. Yet her husband
sat without speaking. The young man was impatient from hunger. The
husband questioned him:

"From what place have you walked?" he asked.

The young man told his story. "I walked up above, but a man headed off
the herd, and having fallen, he came here. I came here to take him
back. They did not take me back; I have no way of going back. Help
me," he said.

The man said, "We had a child, but it died. We will treat you just
like the child who died." He meant he would adopt him. "All things
which I have are yours," said the father.

The young man did not speak. He wished to go homeward.

"Whatever you say I will do it for you," said the father. "Even if you
desire to go homeward, it shall be so," he said.

At last the young man spoke of going homeward.

"If you say, 'I will go homeward riding a horse of such a color, O
father!' it shall be so," said the father.

"Fie!" said the woman. "Heretofore we were deprived of our child. The
young man who has just come home is like him. Give him one thing which
you have."

"I make you my child. I will give you something. Whatever I desire I
always make with it, when I wish to have anything," said the father.
He had a piece of iron and when he wished anything he used to point at
the iron.

"O father, I wish to go homeward riding a horse with very white hair.
I also desire a mule with very white hair, and a good saddle," said
the young man.

"Come, go there. Open the door of that stable. When you wish to see
us again, you shall see us. When you will go homeward, you will say,
'Come, O father, I desire to go homeward,'" said the father.

The young man went homeward. He made the rocks open suddenly by
pointing at them with the iron. He went up, making the ground echo
under the horse's feet. When he pushed aside a very large rock which
was in his way, he found himself again on the surface of the earth.
The horse and mule were very sudden in their movements. They shied at
every step. They sniffed the odor of a bad land.

The young man found his nation that he had left. Behold! they had
recently removed and departed. After they waited some time for him to
appear, they had removed their camp and departed. The horse and mule
went along, fearing the sight of the old camping ground. They followed
the trail of the departing village.

Then the young man saw two people on a large hill, walking in the
trail. They were the head chief and his wife who were walking along,
mourning for the dead.

They looked behind and said, "Yonder comes one on horseback, following
the trail made by the departing village."

He drew near. They sat waiting for him to appear. The horse and mule
feared the sight of them; they sniffed a bad odor.

"Why! Of what nation are you?" asked the chief.

"It is I," said the young man.

"But which one are you?" said the chief.

"Your son went headlong into a pit when they surrounded the herd,"
said the young man. "And I went down to get him. You did not bring me
back. It is I."

As he was very much changed, the old man doubted.

"Fie! Tell the truth about yourself."

"When they surrounded the herd, your son went headlong as well as the
buffalo, and he was killed by falling into a pit. When you commanded
them to get him, they drew back through fear. I am he who went to get
him when you offered your daughter as a reward," said the young man.
"I have hardly been able to come again to the surface."

Then they recognized him. The two men stood talking together on the
large hill. The chief's son looked back from the camp.

"Why! The chief and his wife have come as far as the large hill and a
man on horseback has come, too. He stands talking to them. I will go
thither. Let me see! I will go to see them."

He went back on horseback and came to his father.

"With what person do you talk?" said the son.

"Why! He who went to get your elder brother has come back!" said the
head chief.

They shook hands. And the head chief gave his daughter to the young
man.

"Let all the men and chiefs assemble. Let all the stout-hearted young
men assemble. They can look at my daughter's husband," he said.

They assembled. They came to see the young man and brought the things
they intended giving him.

"He says that he who went to get the man who was killed by falling has
come back. The chief says that as he has made the young man his
daughter's husband you shall go to see the young man. He says that you
will take to him what things you wish to give him. The chief says he
will give thanks for them." So shouted the crier.

All the young men and those who were brave and generous went thither.
They all gave him clothing and good horses. His wife's father made him
the head chief.

"Make ye a tent for him in the center," said the old chief.

They set up a tent for him in the center. They finished it.

"The people did not eat. As they sat waiting for you to appear, the
nation did not eat. You came back when they were just removing camp,"
said the old chief.

"Ho!" said the one who had just reached home. "Let two old men go as
criers."

So the criers shouted: "The chiefs daughter's husband says that you
will rest tomorrow. He says you will not go in any direction
whatever."

The next day he commanded those who had come back on horseback to act
as scouts. And the scouts came back very soon; because by means of the
iron rod which he had asked of his father, he made a great many
buffaloes very quickly. He spoke of surrounding them. They shot down
many of the buffaloes. He went to take part in surrounding them.

His wife said, "I desire to go to see them surround the herd. I must
go to see the buffaloes. When they are killed, I will be quite likely
to come back."

When they killed the buffaloes she was coming back; the wife stood on
the hill. Her husband came to that place.

"Though I killed the buffaloes, they will cut them up," he said. They
who surrounded them reached home.

Again they spoke of a buffalo hunt. "The chief's daughter's husband
speaks indeed of sending them to act as scouts," said the criers.

Again the herd of buffaloes had come to that country. They surrounded
them. Again they shot down many of them.

At last the son of the old head chief was in a bad humor. He was in a
bad humor because his sister's husband had been made chief.

Now at night, the horse used to say to the young man, "O father, a man
desires very much to kill us. It is so every night." And after that at
night the young man used to take care of his horse and mule.

On the next day they surrounded the herd in the land where the deed
was done. It was just so again; a great many buffaloes had been
coming. At length the son wished the buffaloes to trample his sister's
husband to death. When they attacked the buffaloes, he waved his robe.
Turning around in his course, he waved his robe again. When the
sister's husband went right in among the buffaloes, they closed in on
him and he was not seen at all.

The people said, "The buffaloes have trampled to death the chief's
daughter's husband."

When the buffaloes trampled him to death, they scattered and went
homeward in every direction, moving in long lines. And the people did
not find any trace whatever of what was done. They did not find the
horse. Even the man they did not find. When the buffaloes killed him
by trampling, the horse had gone back to Him Who Made Things.




THE BUFFALO AND THE GRIZZLY BEAR

_Omaha_


Grizzly Bear was going somewhere, following the course of a stream,
and at last he went straight towards the headland. When he got in
sight, Buffalo Bull was standing beneath it. Grizzly Bear retraced his
steps, going again to the stream, following its course until he got
beyond the headland. Then he drew near and peeped. He saw that Buffalo
Bull was very lean, and standing with his head bowed, as if sluggish.
So Grizzly Bear crawled up close to him, made a rush, seized him by
the hair of his head, and pulled down his head. He turned Buffalo Bull
round and round, shaking him now and then, saying, "Speak! Speak! I
have been coming to this place a long time, and they say you have
threatened to fight me. Speak!" Then he hit Buffalo Bull on the nose
with his open paw.

"Why!" said Buffalo Bull, "I have never threatened to fight you, who
have been coming to this country so long."

"Not so! You have threatened to fight me." Letting go the buffalo's
head, Grizzly Bear went around and seized him by the tail, turning him
round and round. Then he left, but as he did so, he gave him a hard
blow with his open paw.

"Oh! Oh! Oh! Oh! Oh! you have caused me great pain," said Buffalo
Bull. Bobtailed Grizzly Bear departed.

Buffalo Bull thought thus: "Attack him! You too have been just that
sort of a person."

Grizzly Bear knew what he was thinking, so he said, "Why! what are you
saying?"

"I said nothing," said Buffalo Bull.

Then Grizzly Bear came back. He seized Buffalo Bull by the tail,
pulling him round and round. Then he seized him by the horns, pulling
his head round and round. Then he seized him again by the tail and hit
him again with the open paw. Again Grizzly Bear departed. And again
Buffalo Bull thought as he had done before. Then Grizzly Bear came
back and treated Buffalo Bull as he had before.

Buffalo Bull stepped backward, throwing his tail into the air.

"Why! Do not flee," said Grizzly Bear.

Buffalo threw himself down, and rolled over and over. Then he
continued backing, pawing the ground.

"Why! I say, do not flee," said Grizzly Bear. When Buffalo Bull
backed, making ready to attack him, Grizzly Bear thought he was
scared.

Then Buffalo Bull ran towards Grizzly, puffing a great deal. When he
neared him, he rushed on him. He sent Grizzly Bear flying through the
air.

As Grizzly Bear came down towards the earth, Buffalo Bull caught him
on his horns and threw him into the air again. When Grizzly Bear fell
and lay on the ground, Buffalo Bull made at him with his horns to gore
him, but just missed him. Grizzly Bear crawled away slowly, with
Buffalo Bull following him step by step, thrusting at him now and
then, though without striking him. When Grizzly Bear came to a cliff,
he plunged over headlong, and landed in a thicket at the foot. Buffalo
Bull had run so fast he could not stop at the edge where Grizzly Bear
went over, but followed the cliff for some distance. Then he came back
and stood with his tail partly raised. Grizzly Bear returned to the
bank and peeped.

"Oh, Buffalo Bull," said Grizzly Bear. "Let us be friends. We are very
much alike in disposition."




[Notes: RIVALRY OVER THE BUFFALO

(Comanche drawing on a buffalo shoulder blade)

_The Indian chase is by arrow; the white man's by the lasso, gun, and
spear. The rivalry is indicated by half the buffalo being drawn as
belonging to one race, half to the other. The white men are supposed
to be Spaniards. The shoulder blade was found in the Comanche country,
in Texas._]

[Illustration: _Enlarged from a sketch in Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology_]


[Notes: CAPTURE OF A WANDERING BUFFALO

(Indian drawing)

_A buffalo has wandered near an Indian village, and is being captured.
The dotted lines indicate footprints. One Indian, having secured the
buffalo by his forefeet, tells his companion of his success--indicated
by the line drawn from his mouth to its feet. Another, having secured
the buffalo by the horns, gives a companion a chance to kill it with
an axe. This he intends to do--indicated by the line from his mouth to
its head, as well as by his attitude. The Indian in the upper corner
is told by his squaw to take an arrow and join in the capture. He
turns his head to inform her that he has an arrow--indicated by
holding it up, and by the line from his mouth to her._]

[Illustration: _Enlarged from a sketch in Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology_]




MY FIRST BUFFALO HUNT[G]

_Omaha_


I went three times on the buffalo hunt. When I was there the first
time, I was small; therefore, I did not shoot the buffaloes. But I
used to take care of the pack horses for those who surrounded the
herd. When they surrounded the herd at the very first, I spoke of
shooting at the buffaloes. But my father said, "Perhaps the horse
might throw you suddenly, and then the buffalo might gore you." And I
was in a bad humor.

My father went with me to the hill. We sat and looked on them when
they attacked the buffaloes. And notwithstanding my father talked to
me, I continued there without talking to him. At length one man was
coming directly toward the tents in pursuit of a buffalo bull. And the
buffalo bull was savage. He attacked the man now and then.

"Come! Go thither," said my father. I tied a lariat on a large red
mare that was very tall. And taking a very light gun which my father
had, I went over there. When I arrived the buffalo bull was standing
motionless. The man said he was very glad that I had come. The buffalo
bull was savage. The man shot suddenly at him with a bow and wounded
him on the back. And then he attacked us. The horse on which I was
seated leaped very far four times, and had gone off, throwing me
suddenly. When the buffalo bull had come very close, he wheeled around
and departed. So I failed to shoot at him before he went. I reached
home just as my mother was scolding my father about me. When the horse
reached home with the bridle sticking to it, she knew that I had been
thrown. My father said nothing at all, but sat laughing. Addressing
me, he said, "Did you kill the buffalo bull?" And I did not speak.

FOOTNOTE:

[G] The author, Frank La Flèche, an Omaha Indian, was about twelve
years old when this occurred.




BIRD OMENS

_Sioux_


When whippoorwills sing together at night, "_Hohin, hohin,_" one says
in reply, "No." If the birds stop talking at once, then the person
will die soon. But if the birds continue talking, then the man will
live a long time.

The gray screech owl foretells cold weather. When the night is to be
very cold, then the owl cries out; it sounds just as if a person's
teeth chattered. When the owl cries out, all people wrap themselves in
their thickest robes; and they put plenty of wood on the fires.

The Ski-bi-bi-la is a small gray bird, with a black head, and spotted
on the breast. It lives in the woods, and it answers a person who
calls to it. When this bird says, "Has it returned?" people are glad.
They know that spring is near. When a boy hears the bird ask this
question, he runs to his mother; she tells him he must answer, "No; it
has not yet returned."

When the people first hear the cry of the nighthawk in the spring,
they begin to talk of hunting buffalo. This is because when the hawk
returns, the buffaloes have become fat again and the birds bring the
news.




THE BIRD CHIEF

_Omaha_


All the birds were called together. To them was said, "Whichever one
of you can fly farthest into the sky shall be chief."

All the birds flew to a great height. But Wren got under the thick
feathers of Eagle and sat there as Eagle flew. When all the birds
became wing-tired, they flew down again; but Eagle flew still higher.
When Eagle had gone as far as he could, Wren flew still higher.

When all the birds reached the ground, Eagle alone returned, after a
great while. Behold! Wren only was absent. So they awaited him. At
last he returned. Eagle had too highly been thinking of himself, being
sure of being made chief; and behold! Wren was made chief.




SONG OF THE BIRDS[H]

_Pawnee_


    All around the birds in flocks are flying.
    Dipping, rising, circling, see them coming.
    See, many birds are flocking here,
    All about us now together coming.

    Yonder see the birds in flocks, come flying;
    Dipping, rising, circling, see them gather.
    Loud is the sound their winging makes.
    Rushing, come they on the trees alighting.

    From the flock an eagle now comes flying;
    Dipping, rising, circling, comes she hither.
    Loud screams the eagle, flying swift,
    As an eagle flies, her nestlings seeking.

    It is Kawas coming, Kawas flying;
    Dipping, rising, circling, she advances.
    See! Nearer she comes, nearer comes.
    Now, alighted, she her nest is making.

    Yonder people like the birds are flocking;
    See them circling, this side, that side coming.
    Loud is the sound their moving makes,
    As together come they, onward come they.

FOOTNOTE:

[H] Rendition by Alice C. Fletcher.




SONG OF KAWAS, THE EAGLE[I]

_Pawnee_


    O'er the prairie flits in ever widening circles the shadow of a
        bird about me as I walk;
    Upward turn my eyes, Kawas looks upon me, she turns with flapping
        wings and far away she flies.

    Round about a tree in ever widening circles an eagle flies, alert
        watching o'er his nest;
    Loudly whistles he, a challenge sending far, o'er the country wide
        it echoes, there defying foes.

FOOTNOTE:

[I] Rendition by Alice C. Fletcher.




THE EAGLE'S REVENGE

_Cherokee_


Once a hunter in the mountains heard a noise at night like a rushing
wind. He went outside his tepee, and found an eagle was sitting on the
drying pole, feasting at the deer he had shot. So he shot the eagle.

The next morning the hunter took the deer back to the village. He told
how he had shot the deer and then the eagle. Therefore the chief sent
out men to bring in the eagle, and have an Eagle dance.

That night when they were dancing, there was a _whoop_ outside. A
strange warrior walked into the circle. He was not of that village.
They thought he had come from one of the other Cherokee villages.

This warrior told how he had killed a man. At the end of the story, he
yelled, "_Hi!_" One of the men with rattles, who was leading the
dance, fell dead. The stranger sang of another deed. At the end he
yelled, "_Hi!_" Another rattler fell dead. The people were frightened.
But the stranger sang of another great deed. Then again he yelled,
"_Hi!_" Again a man with the rattles fell dead. So all seven men who
had rattles and who were leading the dance fell dead. And the people
were too frightened to leave the lodge where they were dancing.

Then the stranger vanished into the darkness. Long after they learned
that the stranger was the brother of the eagle that had been killed.




THE RACE BETWEEN HUMMING BIRD AND CRANE

_Cherokee_


Humming Bird and Crane were both in love with a pretty woman. She
liked Humming Bird, who was handsome. Crane was ugly, but he would not
give up the pretty woman. So at last to get rid of him, she told them
they must have a race, and that she would marry the winner. Now
Humming Bird flew like a flash of light; but Crane was heavy and slow.

The birds started from the woman's house to fly around the world to
the beginning. Humming Bird flew off like an arrow. He flew all day
and when he stopped to roost he was far ahead.

Crane flew heavily, but he flew all night long. He stopped at daylight
at a creek to rest. Humming Bird waked up, and flew on again, and soon
he reached a creek, and behold! there was Crane, spearing tadpoles
with his long bill. Humming Bird flew on.

Soon Crane started on and flew all night as before. Humming Bird slept
on his roost.

Next morning Humming Bird flew on and Crane was far, far ahead. The
fourth day, Crane was spearing tadpoles for dinner when Humming Bird
caught up with him. By the seventh day Crane was a whole night's
travel ahead. At last he reached the beginning again. He stopped at
the creek and preened his feathers, and then in the early morning went
to the woman's house. Humming Bird was far, far behind.

But the woman declared she would not marry so ugly a man as Crane.
Therefore she remained single.




RABBIT AND THE TURKEYS

_Omaha_


Rabbit was going somewhere. At length he reached a place where there
were wild Turkeys.

"Come," said Rabbit. "I will sing dancing songs for you."

Turkeys went to him saying, "Oho! Rabbit will sing dancing songs for
us!"

"When I sing for you, you larger ones must go around the circle next
to me. Beware lest you open your eyes. Should one of you open his
eyes, your eyes shall be red," said Rabbit.

Then he began to sing,

    Alas for the gazer!
    Eyes red! Eyes red!
    Spread out your tails!
    Spread out your tails!

Whenever a large Turkey came near, Rabbit seized it and put it in his
bag. While he was putting in a Turkey, another one opened his eyes a
little, and exclaimed, "Why! He has captured nearly all of us large
ones!"

Off they all flew with a whirring sound.

Rabbit took home those he had in his bag, saying to his grandmother,
"Do not look at what is in that bag! I have brought it home on my back
and I wish you to guard it!"

Then he went out to cut spits on which to roast the Turkeys. When the
old woman was alone, she thought, "What could he have brought home on
his back?" So she untied the bag, and when she looked in out flew all
the Turkeys, hitting their wings hard against the grass lodge, and
flying out the smoke hole. The old woman barely killed one by hitting
it. At length Rabbit came home.

"Oh I have inflicted a severe injury on my grandchild," she said.

"Really," he answered. "Grandmother, I told you not to look at it."

But that is why Turkeys have red eyes.




[Notes: FIVE CHIEFS OF THE OGALLA SIOUX

_Rank is shown by pipe and pouch. The first Cankutanka, Big Road;
often called Good Road--big and broad and well traveled. The bird
flying through the dusk shows that one may fly rapidly over a good
road. Next is Low Dog. The dog figure is "low," as shown by the
shortness of the legs. In the center is Long Dog, as shown by the long
legs on the dog figure. Below, to the left, is Iron Crow, the crow
painted blue indicating iron. The last is Little Hawk. Each chief has
three bands on the cheek, but with variant colors and patterns._]

[Illustration: _From Report of the Bureau of Ethnology_]


[Illustration: OLD HORSE

Name of an Indian Chief, as shown in Red Cloud's census. Old age is
represented by the wrinkles and projecting lips.

_Enlarged from a sketch in Report of the Bureau of Ethnology_]




UNKTOMI AND THE BAD SONGS

_Dakota_


Unktomi was going along; his way lay along by the side of a lake. Out
on the lake there were a great many ducks, geese, and swans swimming.
When Unktomi saw them he went backward out of sight, and picking some
grass, bound it up in a bundle. He placed this on his back and so went
again along by the side of the lake.

"Unktomi, what are you carrying?" asked the ducks and the geese and
the swans.

"These are bad songs I am carrying," said Unktomi.

The ducks said, "Unktomi, sing for us."

Unktomi replied, "But the songs are very bad."

But the ducks insisted upon it. Then Unktomi said, "Make a grass
lodge." So they went to work and made a large grass lodge.

"Now, let all the ducks, geese, and swans gather inside the lodge and
I will sing for you," said Unktomi. So all the ducks and the geese and
the swans gathered inside and filled the grass lodge. Then Unktomi
took his place at the door of the lodge and said, "If I sing for
you, no one must look, for that is the meaning of the song."

Then he began to sing,

    Dance with your eyes shut;
    If you open your eyes
    Your eyes shall be red!
    Your eyes shall be red!

When he said and sang this, the geese, ducks, and swans danced with
their eyes shut. Then Unktomi rose up and said,

    I even, even I
    Follow in my own;
    I even, even I,
    Follow in my own.

So they all gabbled as they danced, and Unktomi, dancing among them,
commenced twisting off the necks of the fattest of the geese and ducks
and swans. But when he tried to twist off the neck of a large swan and
could not, he only made him squawk. Then a small duck, called Skiska,
partly opened his eyes. He saw Unktomi try to break the swan's neck,
and he made an outcry:

    Look ye, look ye!
    Unktomi will destroy us all.
    Look ye, look ye!

At once they all opened their eyes and attempted to go out. But
Unktomi threw himself in the doorway and tried to stop them. They
rushed upon him with their feet and wings, and smote him and knocked
him over, walking on his stomach, and leaving him as though dead. Then
Unktomi came to life, and got up, and looked around.

But they say that the Wood Duck, which looked first, had his eyes made
red.

Then Unktomi gathered up the ducks and geese and swans he had killed
and carried them on his back. He came to a river and traveled along by
the side of it till he came to a long, straight place where he stopped
to boil his kettle. He put all the ducks and geese and swans whose
necks he had twisted into the kettle, and set it on the fire to boil,
and then he lay down to sleep.

As he lay there, curled up on the bank of the river, he said, "Mionze
[familiar spirit], if anyone comes you wake me up." So he slept.

Now a mink came paddling along on the river, and coming close to
Unktomi's boiling place, saw him lying fast asleep. Then he went
there. While Unktomi slept, he took out all the boiling meat and ate
it up, putting the bones back into the kettle. Then Unktomi waked up.
He sat up and saw no one.

"Perhaps my boiling is cooked for me," he said.

He took the kettle off the fire. He poked a stick into it and found
only bones. Then he said, "Indeed, the meat has all fallen off." So he
took a spoon and dipped it out; nothing was there but bones.

This is the story of Unktomi and the Bad Songs.




HOW THE PHEASANT BEAT CORN

_Cherokee_


Once Pheasant saw a woman beating corn in a wooden mortar in front of
her lodge.

"I can do that, too," said Pheasant.

"I don't believe you," said the woman.

"Yes, I can," said Pheasant. So Pheasant went into the woods behind
the lodge. He flew to a hollow log and drummed with his wings until
the people thought he really was beating corn.

That is why the Indians have the Pheasant dance, as a part of the
Green-corn dance.




WHY THE TURKEY GOBBLES

_Cherokee_


In the old days, Grouse had a good voice and Turkey had none.
Therefore Turkey asked Grouse to teach him. But Grouse wanted pay, so
Turkey promised to give him some feathers for a collar. That is how
the Grouse got his collar of turkey feathers.

So the Grouse began to teach Turkey. At last Grouse said, "Now you
must try your voice. You must halloo."

Turkey said, "Yes."

Grouse said, "I'll stand on this hollow log, and when I tap on it, you
must halloo as loudly as you can."

So Grouse climbed upon a log, ready to tap on it, but when he did so,
Turkey became so excited that when he opened his mouth, he only said,
"_Gobble, gobble, gobble!_"

That is why the Turkey gobbles whenever he hears a noise.




OMAHA BELIEFS

_Omaha_


Song was an integral part of Omaha life. Through song, the Omaha
approached the mysterious Wakoda; through song he voiced his emotions,
both individual and social; through song he embodied feelings and
aspirations that eluded expression in words. In one of their
ceremonies, the Wa´ wa, "to sing for somebody," songs are one of the
chief characteristics.

In this ceremony, the eagle is "Mother." She calls to her nestlings
and upon her strong wings she bears the message of peace. Peace and
its symbol, the clear, cloudless sky, are the theme of the principal
songs. The curlew, in the early morning, stretches its neck and its
wing as it sits on the roost, and utters a long note. The sound is
considered an indication that the day will be cloudless.

Green represents the verdure of the earth; blue is the color of the
sky; red is the color of the sun, typifying life. The eagle is the
bird of tireless strength. The owl represents night, and the
woodpecker the day and sun. These two birds also stand for life and
death.

Wakoda gives to man the sunshine, the clear sky from which all storms,
all clouds are absent; in the Wa´ wa ceremony, they stand for peace.
In this connection, black storm clouds with their thunder and
lightning are emblematic of war.




PAWNEE BELIEFS

_Pawnee_


At the creation of the world, lesser powers were made, because
Tira'wa-tius, the Mighty Power, could not come near to man, or be seen
or felt by him. These lesser powers dwell in the great circle of the
sky. One is North Star; another is Brown Eagle. The Winds were the
first of the lesser powers to come near man. Therefore, when man calls
for aid, he calls first to the Winds. They stand at the four points,
and guard the four paths down which the lesser powers come when they
help mankind. The Winds are always near us, by day and by night.

The Sun is one of these powers. It comes from the mighty power above;
therefore it has great strength.

Mother Earth is another power. She is very near to man. From her we
get food; upon her we lie down. We live and walk on her. We could not
exist without Mother Earth, without Sun, and without the Winds.

Water is another lesser power. Water is necessary to mankind.

Fire made by rubbing two sticks together is sacred. It comes direct
from the power granted Toharu, vegetation, in answer to man's prayer
as he rubs the sticks. When the flame leaps from the glowing wood, it
is the word of the fire. The power has come near.

Blue is the color of the sky, the dwelling place of Tira´ wahut, the
circle of powers which watch over man. As a man paints the blue stick
he sings.

Red is the color of the sun. Green is the color of Mother Earth.

Eagle is the chief of day; Owl is chief of the night; Woodpecker is
chief of the trees; Duck is chief of the water.

The ear of corn represents the supernatural power that dwells in the
earth, which brings forth the food that sustains life; there corn is
spoken of as _h'Atira_, "mother breathing forth life." The power which
dwells in the earth, which enables it to give life to all growing
things, comes from above. Therefore, in the Hako, the Pawnee ceremony,
the ear of corn is painted with blue.

The wildcat was made to live in the forest. He has much skill and
ingenuity. The wildcat shows us we must think, must use tact, must be
shrewd when we set out to do anything. The wildcat is one of the
sacred animals.

Trees grow along the banks of the streams; we can see them at a
distance, like a long line, and we can see the river glistening in the
sunlight in its length. We sing to the river, and when we come nearer
and see the water and hear it rippling along, then we sing to the
water, the water that ripples as it runs.

Hills were made by Tira'wa. We ascend hills when we go away alone to
pray. From the top of a hill we can look over the country to see if
there are enemies in sight, or if any danger is near us. We can see if
we are to meet friends. The hills help man, so we sing to them.




A SONG OF HOSPITALITY[J]

_Sioux_


    I am mashing the berries,
    I am mashing the berries,
    They say travelers are coming on the march,
    They say travelers are coming on the march,
    I stir [the berries] around, I stir them around,
    I take them up with a spoon of buffalo horn,
    I take them up with a spoon of buffalo horn,
    And I carry them, I carry them [to the strangers],
    And I carry them, I carry them [to the strangers].

      "Word comes that travelers are approaching ... on the
      march with their children, dogs, and household
      property. She stirs them around with a spoon of
      buffalo horn and goes to offer them to the strangers.
      The translation is an exact paraphrase of the rhythmic
      repetition of the original."

FOOTNOTE:

[J] James Mooney.




A SONG OF THE MARCH[K]

_Sioux_


    Now set up the tipi,
    Now set up the tipi,
    Around the bottom,
    Around the bottom,
    Drive in the pegs,
    Drive in the pegs,
    In the meantime I shall cook,
    In the meantime I shall cook.

      "To those who know the Indian life it brings up a
      vivid picture of a prairie band on the march, halting
      at noon or in the evening. As soon as the halt is
      called by some convenient stream, the women jump down
      and release the horses from ... the travois, in the
      olden times, and hobble them to prevent them from
      wandering away. Then, while some of the women set up
      the tipi poles, draw the canvas over them, and drive
      in the pegs around the bottom and the wooden pins up
      the side, other women take axes and buckets and go
      down to the creek for wood and water. When they
      return, they find the tipis set up and the blankets
      spread out on the grass, and in a few minutes fires
      are built and the meal is in preparation."

FOOTNOTE:

[K] James Mooney.




[Notes: SIOUAN TENTS

_B. Tent of Little Cedar, belonging to the order of Sun and Moon
shamans. The circle represents the sun in which stands a man holding
deer rattles._

_C. Those persons who belong to the Inke-sabe sub-gens known as
Keepers of the Pipes, paint their tents with the pipe decorations._

_D. Used by a member of the order of Grizzly Bear shamans. "When they
have had visions of grizzly bears, they decorate their tents
accordingly." (George Miller.) The bear is represented as emerging
from his den. The dark band represents the ground._

_E. Sketch furnished by Chief Dried Buffalo. The circle at the top
represents a bear's cave. Below there are lightnings, then prints of
bears' paws. E also represents the grizzly bear vision._]

[Illustration: _Enlarged from plate in report of the Bureau of
Ethnology_]


[Illustration: AN ARAPAHOE BED

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]




SONG OF THE PRAIRIE BREEZE[L]

_Kiowa_


    That wind, that wind
    Shakes my tipi, shakes my tipi,
    And sings a song for me,
    And sings a song for me.

      "To the familiar, this little song brings up pleasant
      memories of the prairie camp when the wind is
      whistling through the tipi poles and blowing the flaps
      about, while inside the fire burns bright and the song
      and the game go round."

FOOTNOTE:

[L] James Mooney.




OLD-WOMAN-WHO-NEVER-DIES

_Mandan_


In the sun lives the Lord of Life. In the moon lives
Old-Woman-Who-Never-Dies. She has six children, three sons and three
daughters. These live in the sky. The eldest son is the Day; another
is the Sun; another is Night. The eldest daughter is the Morning Star,
called "The Woman who Wears a Plume"; another is a star which circles
around the polar star, and she is called "The Striped Gourd"; the
third is Evening Star.

Every spring Old-Woman-Who-Never-Dies sends the wild geese, the swans,
and the ducks. When she sends the wild geese, the Indians plant their
corn and Old-Woman-Who-Never-Dies makes it grow. When eleven wild
geese are found together, the Indians know the corn crop will be very
large. The swans mean that the Indians must plant gourds; the ducks,
that they must plant beans.

Indians always save dried meat for these wild birds, so when they come
in the spring they may have a corn feast. They build scaffolds of many
poles, three or four rows, and one above the others. On this they
hang the meat. Then the old women in the village, each one with a
stick, meet around the scaffold. In one end of the stick is an ear of
corn. Sitting in a circle, they plant their sticks in the ground in
front of them. Then they dance around the scaffolds while the old men
beat the drums and rattle the gourds.

Afterwards the old women in the village are allowed to eat the dried
meat.

In the fall they hold another corn feast, after the corn is ripe. This
is so that Old-Woman-Who-Never-Dies may send the buffalo herds to
them. Each woman carries the entire cornstalk, with the ears attached,
just as it was pulled up by the roots. Then they call on
Old-Woman-Who-Never-Dies and say,

"Mother, pity us. Do not send the cold too soon, or we may not have
enough meat. Mother, do not let the game depart, so that we may have
enough for winter."

In the fall, when the birds go south to Old-Woman, they take back the
dried meat hung on the scaffolds, because Old-Woman is very fond of
it.

Old-Woman-Who-Never-Dies has large patches of corn, kept for her by
the great stag and by the white-tailed stag. Blackbirds also help her
guard her corn patches. The corn patches are large, therefore the Old
Woman has the help also of the mice and the moles. In the spring the
birds go north, back to Old-Man-Who-Never-Dies.

In the olden time, Old-Woman-Who-Never-Dies lived near the Little
Missouri. Sometimes the Indians visited her. One day twelve came, and
she offered them only a small kettle of corn. They were very hungry
and the kettle was very small. But as soon as it was empty, it at once
became filled again, so all the Indians had enough to eat.




LEGEND OF THE CORN

_Arikara_


The Arikara were the first to find the maize. A young man went out
hunting. He came to a high hill. Looking down a valley, he saw a
buffalo bull near where two rivers joined. When the young man looked
to see how he could kill the buffalo, he saw how beautiful the country
was. The banks of the two rivers were low, with many trees. The
buffalo faced the north; therefore he could not get within bowshot of
him. He thought he should wait until the buffalo moved close to the
banks of one of the rivers, or to a ravine where there were bushes and
shrubs. So the young man waited. The sun went down before the buffalo
moved.

Nearly all night the hunter lay awake. He had little food. He felt
sorry he could not reach the buffalo. Before the sun rose, he hurried
to the top of the hill. The buffalo stood just where it had, but it
faced the east. Again he waited for it to move. He waited all day.
When the sun went down, the buffalo still stood in the same place.

Nearly all night the young man lay awake. He had very little food
indeed. The next morning he rose early, and came to the top of the
hill, just as the sun came up. The buffalo was still standing in the
same place; but now it faced the south. He waited all day. Then the
sun went down.

Now the next morning, when he arose early, the buffalo stood in the
same place; this time it faced the west. All day the young man waited,
but the buffalo did not move.

Now the young man thought, "Why does not the buffalo move?" He saw it
did not drink, did not eat, did not sleep. He thought some power must
be influencing it.

Now the next morning, the young man hurried to the top of the hill.
The sun had risen and everything was light. The buffalo was gone. Then
he saw where the buffalo had stood there was a strange bush.

He went to the place; then he saw it was a plant. He looked for the
tracks of the buffalo. He saw where it had turned to the east and to
the south and to the west. In the center there was one track; out of
it the small plant had grown. There was no track to show where the
buffalo had left the place.

Then the hunter hurried to his village. He told the chiefs and the
people of the strange buffalo and the plant. So all the chiefs and
the people came to the place. They saw the tracks of the buffalo as he
had stood, but there were no tracks of his coming or going.

So all the people knew that Wahkoda had given this strange plant to
the people. They knew of other plants they might eat. They knew there
was a time when each plant was ripe. So they watched the strange
plant; they guarded it and protected it.

Then a flower appeared on the plant. Afterwards, at one of the joints,
a new part of the plant pushed out. It had hair. At first the hair was
green; then it was brown. Then the people thought, "Perhaps this fruit
is ripe." But they did not dare touch it. They met together. They
looked at the plant.

Then a young man said, "My life has not been good. If any evil comes
to me, it will not matter."

So the people were willing, and the young man put his hand on the
plant and then on its fruit. He grasped the fruit boldly. He said to
the people, "It is solid. It is ripe." Then he pulled apart the husks,
and said, "It is red."

He took a few of the grains and showed them to the people. He ate
some. He did not die. So the people knew Wahkoda had sent this plant
to them for food.

Now in the fall, when the prairie grass turned brown, the leaves of
this plant turned brown also. Then the fruit was plucked, and put
away. After the winter was over, the kernels were divided. There were
four to each family.

Then the people moved the lodges to the place where the plant had
grown. When the hills became green, they planted the seed of the
strange plant. But first they built little mounds like the one out of
which it grew. So the fruit grew and ripened. It had many colors; red,
and yellow, and white, and blue.

Then the next year there were many plants and many ears of corn. So
they sent to other tribes. They invited them to visit them and gave
them of the new food. Thus the Omahas came to have corn.




TRADITION OF THE FINDING OF HORSES

_Ponca_


Long ago, the people followed the Missouri River northward to a place
where they could step over the water. Then they turned, and were going
across the land. Then they met the Padouca [Comanche].

At that time the Ponca had no animals but dogs to help them carry
burdens. Wherever they went they had to go on foot, but the people
were strong and fleet. They could run a great distance and not be
weary. One day when they were hunting buffalo, they met the Padouca.
Then they had many battles with them. The Padouca were mounted on
strange animals. At first the Ponca thought it was all one animal. The
Padouca had bows made from elk horn. They were not very long, nor were
they very strong. They boiled the horn until it was soft; then they
scraped it, and bound it together with sinews and glue. Their arrows
were tipped with bone. They fought also with a stone battle-ax. The
handle was a sapling; a grooved stone ax head, pointed at both ends,
was fastened to this with rawhides. So the Padouca were terrible
fighters. They protected their horses with a covering of thick rawhide
cut in round pieces, and put together like fish scales. They spread
glue over the outside and then sand. So when the Comanches fought, the
arrows of their enemies glanced off the horses' armor. Then the
Padouca made breastplates for themselves like those of the horses.

When the Ponca met these terrible warriors, they were afraid. They
thought man and horse were one. They named it "Kawa" because they
noticed the odor of the horse. Then they knew by this odor when the
Padouca were coming. When a man smelled the horses, he would run to
the camp and say, "The wind tells us the Kawa are coming." Then the
Ponca would make ready to defend themselves. The Ponca had many
battles with the Comanches. They did not know how to use the animals,
so they killed the horses as well as the men. Neither could they find
out where the Padouca lived.

One day the two tribes had a great battle. The people fought all day.
Sometimes the Ponca were driven back, sometimes the Padouca. Then at
last a Ponca shot a Padouca so that he fell from his horse. Then the
battle ceased. After this, one of the Padouca came toward the Ponca
and said in plain Ponca,

"Who are you? What do you call yourselves?"

The Ponca replied, "We call ourselves Ponca. You speak our language,
are you of our tribe?"

The other said, "No. I speak your language as a gift from a Ponca
spirit. One day I lay on a Ponca grave after a battle. Then a man rose
from the grave and spoke to me. So I know your language."

Then it was agreed to make peace. The tribes visited each other. The
Ponca traded their bows and arrows for horses. They knew where the
Padouca lived. Then the Padouca taught the Ponca how to ride, and how
to put burdens on the horses.

When the Ponca had learned how to ride, and had horses, they went to
war again. They attacked the Padouca in their own village. They
attacked them so many times and stole so many of their horses that at
last the Padouca fled. We do not know where they went. The Ponca
followed the Platte River toward the rising sun; then they came back
to the Missouri, and they brought their horses with them.




DAKOTA BELIEFS AND CUSTOMS

_Dakota_


The Dakotas have names for the natural divisions of time. Their years
they count by winters. A man is so many winters old, or so many
winters have passed since such an event. When one goes on a journey,
he says he will be back in so many sleeps. They have no division of
time into weeks, and their months are literally by moons.

The Dakotas believe that when the moon is full, a great number of
small mice begin to nibble on one side. They nibble until they eat up
the entire moon. So when the new moon begins to grow, it is to them
really a new moon; the old one has been eaten up.

The Dakota mother loves her baby as well as the white woman does hers.
When the spirit takes its flight a wild howl goes up from the tent.
The baby form is wrapped in the best buffalo calfskin, or the best red
blanket, and laid away on a scaffold or on the branch of some tree.
There the mother goes with disheveled hair and oldest clothes, the
best ones having been given away, and wails out her sorrow in the
twilight, wailing often until far into the cold night. The nice
kettle of hominy is prepared, and carried to the scaffold where the
spirit hovers for several days. When the kettle has remained there
long enough for the _wanagi_, the spirit, to inhale the food, the
little children of the village are invited to eat up the rest.

When a hunter dies, the last act of the medicine man is to sing a song
to conduct the spirit over the _wanagi tacanku_, the spirit's road, as
the Milky Way is called. The friends give away their good clothes.
They wear ragged clothes, with bare feet, and ashes on their hands.
Both within and without the lodge there is a great wailing.
"_Micinski, micinski, my son, my son,_" is the lamentation in Dakota
land as it was in Israel.

The dead hunter is wrapped in the most beautifully painted buffalo
robe, or in the newest red and blue blanket. Young men are called and
feasted, and their duty it is to carry the body away and place it on a
scaffold, for the dead remain not long in the tepee. In more recent
times they bury it. The custom of burial immediately after death,
however, was not a Dakota custom. The spirit did not bid farewell to
the body for several days after death, and so the body was laid on a
high scaffold or in some tree crotch where it would have a good view
of the surrounding country, and also be safe from wolves.




WHY THE TETONS BURY ON SCAFFOLDS

_Teton_


In the olden days, the people buried some men on a hill. Then they
removed their camp to another place. Many winters afterwards, a man
visited the hill; but there were no graves there. So he told the
people.

Then many men came and dug far down into the hill. By and by a man
said, "There is a road here."

There they found a road, a tunnel, large enough for men to walk,
stooping. Other roads there were. They followed the first road and
they came to a place where a strange animal had dragged the bodies of
those who were buried in the hill.

Therefore the people refused to bury their dead in the ground. They
bury them on scaffolds where the animals cannot reach them.[M]

FOOTNOTE:

[M] At the present day, the Teton gives three reasons for not burying
in the ground: animals or persons might walk over the graves; the dead
might lie in mud and water after rain or snow; wolves might trouble
the bodies.




[Illustration: INDIAN SCAFFOLD CEMETERY ON THE MISSOURI RIVER

(From Schoolcraft)

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]


[Illustration: AN OMAHA VILLAGE, SHOWING EARTH LODGE AND CONICAL
TEPEES

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]




THE GHOST'S RESENTMENT

_Dakota_


Long, long ago, a Dakota died and his parents made a death lodge for
him on the bluff. In the lodge they made a grave scaffold, on which
they laid the body of their son.

Now in that same village of Dakotas lived a young married man. His
father lived with him, and there were two old men who used to visit
the father and smoke with him, and talk with him about many things.

One night the father of the young man said, "My friends, let us go to
the death scaffold and cut off summer robes for ourselves from the
tent skins."

The young man said, "No! Do not do so. It was a pity the young man
died, and as his parents had nothing else to give up for him they made
the death lodge and left it there."

"What use can he get from the tent?" asked the father. "We have no
robes, so we wish to use part of the tent skins for ourselves."

"Well, then," said the young man. "Go as you have said and we shall
see what will happen."

The old men arose without saying a word and went to the lodge on the
bluff. As soon as they were gone, the young man said, "Oh, wife, get
my piece of white clay. I must scare one of those old men nearly to
death."

But the woman was unwilling, saying, "Let them alone. They have no
robes. Let them cut off robes for themselves."

But as the husband would not stop talking about it, the wife got the
piece of white clay for him. He whitened his whole body and his face
and hands. Then he went to the lodge in a course parallel to that
taken by the old men. He went very quickly and reached there before
they did.

He climbed the scaffold and lay on it, thrusting his head out through
the tent skins just above the doorway.

At last the old men approached, ascending the hill, and talking
together in a low tone. The young man lay still, listening to them.
When they reached the lodge, they sat down.

The leader said, "Fill your pipe, friends. We must smoke this last
time with our friend up there."

"Yes, your friend has spoken well. That should be done," answered one
of them.

So he filled the pipe. He drew a whiff, and when the fire glowed, he
turned the pipestem toward the seam of the skins above the doorway. He
looked up towards the sky, saying, "Ho, friend, here is the pipe. We
must smoke with you this last time. And then we must separate. Here is
the pipe."

As he said this, he gazed above the doorway and saw a head looking out
from the tent.

"Oh! My friends!" he cried. "Look at this place behind you."

When the two looked, they said, "Really! Friends, it is he!" And all
fled.

Then the young man leaped down and pursued them. Two of them fell to
the ground in terror, but he did not disturb them, going on in pursuit
of his father. When the old man was overtaken, he fell to the ground.
He was terrified. The young man sat astride of him. He said, "You have
been very disobedient! Fill the pipe for me!"

The old man said, "Oh! My grandchild! Oh! My grandchild!" hoping that
the ghost would pity him. Then he filled the pipe as he lay stretched
there and gave it to his son.

The young man smoked. When he stopped smoking, the old man said, "Oh!
My grandchild! Oh! My grandchild! Pity me, and let me go. We thought
we must smoke with you this last time, so we went to the place where
you were. Oh! My grandchild, pity me."

"If that be so, arise and extend your hands to me in entreaty," said
the young man.

The old man arose and did so, saying continually, "Oh! My grandchild!
Oh! My grandchild!"

It was as much as the young man could do to keep from laughing. At
length he said, "Well! Begone! Beware lest you come again and go
around my resting place very often! Do not visit it again!" Then he
let the old man go.

On returning to the burial lodge, he found the two old men still lying
where they had fallen. When he approached them, they slipped off, with
their heads covered, as they were terrified, and he let them go
undisturbed. When they had gone, the young man hurried home. He
reached there first and after washing himself, reclined at full
length.

He said to his wife, "When they return, be sure not to laugh. Make an
effort to control yourself. I came very near making them die of
fright."

When the old men returned, the young people seemed to be asleep. The
old men did not lie down; all sat in silence, smoking together until
daylight. When the young man arose in the morning, the old men
appeared very sorrowful.

Then he said, "Give me one of the robes that you and your friends cut
off and brought back. I, too, have no robe at all."

His father said, "Why! We went there, but we did not get anything at
all. We were attacked. We came very near being killed."

To this the son replied, "Why! I was unwilling for this to happen, so
I said, 'Do not go,' but you paid no attention to me, and went. But
now you think differently and you weep."

When it was night, the young man said, "Go again and make another
attempt. Bring back a piece for me, as I have no robe at all."

The old men were unwilling to go again, and they lost their patience,
as he teased them so often.




THE FORKED ROADS

_Omaha_


Long ago, in the days of the grandfathers, a man died and was buried
by his village. For four nights his ghost had to walk a very dark
trail. Then he reached the Milky Way and there was plenty of light.
For this reason, people ought to keep the funeral fires lighted for
four nights, so the spirit will not walk in the dark trail.

The spirit walked along the Milky Way. At last he came to a point
where the trail forked. There sat an old man. He was dressed in a
buffalo robe, with the hair on the outside. He pointed to each ghost
the road he was to take. One was short and led to the land of good
ghosts. The other was very long; along it the ghosts went wailing.

The spirits of suicides cannot travel either road. They must hover
over their graves. For them there is no future life.

A murderer is never happy after he dies. Ghosts surround him and keep
up a constant whistling. He is always hungry, though he eat much food.
He is never allowed to go where he pleases, lest high winds arise and
sweep down upon the others.




TATTOOED GHOSTS

_Dakota_


If a ghost wishes to walk the Ghost Road safely, then during living
the person must tattoo himself either in the forehead or on the
wrists. An old woman sits in the Ghost Road and she examines each
ghost who passes. If she finds the tattoo marks, then the ghost
travels on at once to Many Lodges. If the tattoo marks are not there,
the old woman pushes the ghost from a cloud and he falls to this world
again. Then he wanders all over the world. He is never quiet. He goes
about whistling, with no lodge, and people are afraid of him.

When these ghosts visit the sick, they are driven away by smoke from
the sacred cedar, or else cedar is laid outside the lodge. When a
person hears a ghost whistling he goes outside the lodge and makes a
loud noise. If a ghost calls to a loved one and he answers, then he is
sure to die soon.

If a ghost meets a man who is alone, he will catch hold of him and
pull his mouth and eyes until they are crooked. Indeed, a ghost did
this to a person who only dreamed about one.




A GHOST STORY

_Ponca_


A great many persons went on the warpath. They were Ponca. As they
approached the foe, they camped for the night. They kindled a fire. It
was during the night. After kindling a bright fire, they sat down;
they made the fire burn very brightly. Rejoicing greatly, they sat
eating. Very suddenly a person sang.

"Keep quiet. Push the ashes over that fire. Seize your bow in
silence!" said their leader. All took their bows. And they departed to
surround him. They made the circle smaller and smaller, and commenced
at once to come together. And still he stood singing; he did not stir
at all. At length they went very near to the tree. And when they drew
very near to it, the singer ceased his song. When they had reached the
tree, bones lay there in a pile. Human bones were piled there at the
foot of the tree. When persons die, the Dakotas usually suspend the
bodies in trees.




THE GHOST AND THE TRAVELER

_Teton_


Once an Indian alone was just at the edge of a forest. Then the
Thunder Beings raised a great storm. So he remained there for the
night. After it was dark, he noticed a light in the woods. When he
reached the spot, behold! there was a sweat lodge, in which were two
persons talking.

One said, "Friend, someone has come and stands without. Let us invite
him to share our food."

Then the Indian fled because they were ghosts. But they followed him.
He looked back now and then, but he could not see them.

All at once he heard the cry of a woman. He was glad to have company.
But the moment he thought about the woman, she appeared. She said, "I
have come because you have just wished to have company."

This frightened the man. The woman said, "Do not fear me; else you
will never see me again."

They journeyed until daybreak. The man looked at her. She seemed to
have no legs, yet she walked without any effort. Then the man thought,
"What if she should choke me." Immediately the ghost vanished.




THE MAN WHO SHOT A GHOST

_Teton_


In the olden time, a man was traveling alone, and in a forest he
killed several rabbits. After sunset he was in the midst of the
forest. He had to spend the night there, so he made a fire.

He thought this: "Should I meet any danger by and by, I will shoot. I
am a man who ought not to regard anything."

He cooked a rabbit, so he was no longer hungry. Just then he heard
many voices. They were talking about their own affairs. But the man
could see no one.

So he thought: "It seems now that at last I have encountered ghosts."

Then he went and lay under a fallen tree, which was a great distance
from the fire. They came around him and whistled, "_Hyu! hyu! hyu!_"

"He has gone yonder," said one of the ghosts. Then they came and stood
around the man, just as people do when they hunt rabbits. The man lay
flat beneath the fallen tree, and one ghost came and climbed on the
trunk of that tree. Suddenly the ghost gave the cry that a man does
when he hits an enemy, "_A-he!_" Then the ghost kicked the man in the
back.

Before the ghost could get away, very suddenly the man shot at him and
wounded him in the legs. So the ghost cried as men do in pain, "_Au!
au! au!_" At last he went off, crying as women do, "_Yun! yun! yun!
yun!_"

The other ghosts said to him, "Where did he shoot?"

The wounded ghost said, "He shot me through the head and I have come
apart." Then the other ghosts were wailing on the hillside.

The man decided he would go to the place where the ghosts were
wailing. So when day came, he went there. He found some graves. Into
one of them a wolf had dug, so that the bones could be seen; and there
was a wound in the skull.




[Illustration: BLACK COYOTE

Arapahoe chief, and a leader in the ghost-dance.

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]


[Illustration: ORNAMENTATION ON THE REVERSE OF AN ARAPAHOE
"GHOST-DANCE" SHIRT

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]




THE INDIAN WHO WRESTLED WITH A GHOST

_Teton_


A young man went alone on the warpath. At length he reached a wood.
One day, as he was going along, he heard a voice. He said, "I shall
have company." As he was approaching a forest, he heard some one
halloo. Behold, it was an owl.

By and by he drew near another wood, and as night was coming on he lay
down to rest. At the edge of the trees he lay down in the open air. At
midnight he was aroused by the voice of a woman. She was wailing, "My
son! my son!" Still he remained where he was, and put more wood on the
fire. He lay with his back to the fire. He tore a hole in his blanket
large enough to peep through.

Soon he heard twigs break under the feet of one approaching, so he
looked through his blanket without rising. Behold, a woman of the
olden days was coming. She wore a skin dress with long fringe. A
buffalo robe was fastened around her at the waist. Her necklace was
of very large beads, and her leggings were covered with beads or
porcupine work. Her robe was drawn over her head and she was snuffing
as she came.

The man lay with his legs stretched out, and she stood by him. She
took him by one foot, which she raised very slowly. When she let it
go, it fell with a thud as though he were dead. She raised it a second
time; then a third time. Still the man did not move. Then the woman
pulled a very rusty knife from the front of her belt, seized his foot
suddenly and was about to lift it and cut it, when up sprang the man.
He said, "What are you doing?" Then he shot at her suddenly. She ran
into the forest screaming, "_Yun! yun! yun! yun! yun! yun!_" She
plunged into the forest and was seen no more.

Again the man covered his head with his blanket but he did not sleep.
When day came, he raised his eyes. Behold, there was a burial
scaffold, with the blankets all ragged and dangling. He thought, "Was
this the ghost that came to me?"

Again he came to a wood where he had to remain for the night. He
started a fire. As he sat there, suddenly he heard someone singing. He
made the woods ring. The man shouted to the singer, but no answer was
paid. The man had a small quantity of _wasna_, which was grease mixed
with pounded buffalo meat, and wild cherry; he also had plenty of
tobacco.

So when the singer came and asked him for food, the man said, "I have
nothing." The ghost said, "Not so; I know you have some _wasna_."

Then the man gave some of it to the ghost and filled his pipe. After
the meal, when the stranger took the pipe and held it by the stem, the
traveler saw that it was nothing but bones. There was no flesh. Then
the stranger's robe dropped back from his shoulders. Behold, all his
ribs were visible. There was no flesh on them. The ghost did not open
his lips when he smoked. The smoke came pouring out through his ribs.

When he had finished smoking, the ghost said, "Ho! we must wrestle
together. If you can throw me, you shall kill the enemy without
hindrance and steal some horses."

The young man agreed. But first he threw an armful of brush on the
fire. He put plenty of brush near the fire.

Then the ghost rushed at the man. He seized him with his bony hands,
which was very painful; but this mattered not. The man tried to push
off the ghost, whose legs were very powerful. When the ghost was
pulled near the fire, he became weak; but when he pulled the young man
toward the darkness, he became strong. As the fire got low, the
strength of the ghost increased. Just as the man began to get weary,
the day broke. Then the struggle began again. As they drew near the
fire again, the man made a last effort; with his foot he pushed more
brush into the fire. The fire blazed up again suddenly. Then the ghost
fell, just as if he was coming to pieces.

So the man won in wrestling. Also he killed his enemy and stole some
horses. It came out just as the ghost said. That is why people believe
what ghosts say.




THE WAKANDA, OR WATER GOD

_Yankton_


A man and his wife had only one child, they say, whom they loved very
much. He used to go playing every day, they say; and one day he fell
into the water. His father and mother and all his relations wailed
regularly. His father was very sad, they say. He would not sleep
within the lodge; he lay out of doors, without any pillow at all. When
he lay on the ground with his cheek on the palm of his hand, he heard
his child crying. He heard him crying down under the ground, they say.
Having assembled all his relations, he spoke of digging into the
ground. The relations collected horses to be given as pay; they
collected goods and horses. Then came two old men who said they were
sacred. They spoke of seeking for the child. An old man went to tell
the father. He brought the two sacred men to the lodge. The father
filled a pipe with tobacco. He gave it to the sacred men, and said,
"If you bring my child back, I will give all this to you."

So they painted themselves; one made his body very black, the other
made his body very yellow. Both went into the deep water. So they
arrived there, they say. They talked to the wakanda. The child was not
dead; he was sitting up, alive.

The men said, "The father demands his child. We have him; we will go
homeward," they said.

"You have him; but if you take him homeward with you, he shall die.
Had you taken him before he ate anything, he might have lived. Begone
ye, and tell those words to his father."

The two men went. They arrived at the lodge, they say.

"We have seen your child; the wakanda's wife has him. We saw him
alive, but he has eaten of the food of the wakandas. Therefore the
wakanda says that if we bring the child back with us out of the water,
he shall die."

Still, the father wished to see him.

"If the wakanda's wife gives you back your child, she desires a very
white dog as pay."

"I promise to give her the white dog," said the father.

Again the two men painted themselves; the one made himself very black,
the other made himself very yellow. Again they went beneath the water.
They arrived at the place again.

"The father said we were to take the child back at any cost; he spoke
of seeing his child."

So the wakanda gave the child back to them; homeward they went with
him. When they reached the surface of the water with him, the child
died. They gave him back to his father. Then all the people wailed
when they saw the child, their relation.

They plunged the white-haired dog into the water. When they had buried
the child they gave pay to the two men.

After a while, the parents lost another child, a girl, in the same
way, they say. But she did not eat any of the wakanda's food,
therefore they took her home alive. But it was another wakanda who
took her, and he promised to give her back if they would give him four
white-haired dogs.




THE SPIRIT LAND

_Arapahoe_


The spirit world is toward the Darkening Land, higher up, and
separated from the world of living by a great lake. Now when the
spirits came back to this world [in the ghost-dance excitement] Crow
was their leader. That is because Crow is black; his color is the same
as that of the Darkening Land. Crow was followed by all the Indians.
But when they reached the edge of the shadow land, below them was a
great sea.

Far away, toward the Sunrise Land were their people in the world of
living. So Crow took a pebble in his beak. He dropped it into the
water, and it became a mountain, towering up to the shadow land. So
the Indians came down the mountain side to the edge of the water.

Then Crow took some dust in his bill. He flew out and dropped it into
the water, and it became solid land. It stretched between the spirit
land and the world of living.

Then Crow flew out again, with blades of grass in his beak. He
dropped these upon the new made land. At once the earth was covered
with green grass.

Again Crow flew out with twigs in his beak, and he dropped these upon
the new earth. At once it was covered with a forest of trees.

Again he flew back to the base of the mountain. Then he called all the
spirit Indians together. Now he is coming to help the living Indians.
He has already passed the sea. He is now on the western edge of the
world of living.




WAZIYA, THE WEATHER SPIRIT

_Teton_


The giant called Waziya knows when there is to be a change of weather.
He is a giant. When he travels, his footprints are large enough for
several Indians to stand in abreast. His strides are very far apart;
at one step he can go over a hill.

When it is cold, people say, "Waziya has returned." They used to pray
to him, but when they found he paid no attention to him, they ceased
to do it.

When warm weather is coming, Waziya wraps himself in a thick robe. But
when cold weather is coming, he wears nothing at all. Waziya, the
giant god of the north, and Itokaga, the god of the south, are ever
battling. Each in turn wins the victory.




KANSAS BLIZZARDS

_Kansa_


When there is a blizzard, the other Kansa beg the members of the
Tcihaci gens to interpose, as they are the Wind People.

They say, "Oh, grandfather, I wish good weather. Please have one of
your children decorated."

Then the youngest son of one of the Wind People, but one half grown,
is selected. He is painted all over with red paint. Then he goes out
into the storm and rolls over and over the snow, reddening it for some
distance. This stops the storm.




[Notes: "KILLED TWO ARIKARA CHIEFS"

(Indian drawing)

_The rank of the chiefs is shown by the white weasel skins attacked to
their costumes. The arrow in the thigh of the horseman indicates that
he was wounded._]

[Illustration: _Enlarged from a sketch in Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology_]


[Notes: MANY TONGUES, OR LOUD TALKER

_Oddly enough, the name is given as that of the vanquished, not of the
victor, although the balloon of sound would seemingly indicate
otherwise. The pipe between the two indicates that the victor is
entitled to celebrate his victory._]

[Illustration: _Enlarged from a sketch in Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology_]




IKTO AND THE SNOWSTORM

_Teton_


Ikto was the first person in this world. He is more cunning than human
beings. He it was who named all the animals and people. But sometimes
Ikto was tricked by the beings he had created.

One day Ikto was hungry; just then he caught a rabbit. He was about to
roast him.

Suddenly Rabbit said, "Oh, Ikto, I will teach you a magic art."

Ikto said, "I have created all things."

"But I will show you something new," said Rabbit. Therefore Ikto
consented. He let go of Rabbit.

Rabbit stood in front of Ikto and said, "Elder brother, if you wish
snow to fall at any time, take some hair such as this,"--and he pulled
out some of his rabbit fur--"and blow it in all directions; there will
be a blizzard."

Rabbit made a deep snow in this way, though the leaves were green.

At once, Ikto began to pull his own fur and say magic words. Rabbit
made a long leap and ran away. Ikto pulled his fur and blew it about.
But there was no snow. Then he pulled more fur, and blew it about.
Still there was no snow. It was only rabbit fur that made the snow.




THE SOUTHERN BRIDE

_Cherokee_


North went traveling, and after a long time, and after visiting many
tribes, he fell in love with the daughter of South.

South and his wife said, "No. Ever since you came the weather has been
cold. If you stay we will all freeze."

North said he would go back to his own country. So South let his
daughter marry him. Then North went back to his own country with
South's daughter. All the people there lived in ice houses.

The next day, after sunrise, the houses began to leak. The ice began
to melt. It grew warmer and warmer. Then North's people came to him.
They said, "It is the daughter of the South. If she lives here all the
lodges will melt. You must send her back to her father."

North said, "No."

But every day it grew hotter. The lodges began to melt away. The
people said North must send his wife home. Therefore North had to send
her back to South.




THE FALLEN STAR

_Dakota_


A people had this camp. And there were two women sleeping out of doors
and looking up at the stars.

One of them said, "I wish that that large and bright shining star were
my husband."

The other said, "I wish the star that shines less brightly were my
husband."

And immediately both were immediately carried upward, they say. They
found themselves in a beautiful country which was full of beautiful
twin flowers. And they found that the star which had shone most
brightly was a large man; the other star was only a young man. So the
two stars married the two women and they lived in that beautiful Star
Country.

Now in that country was a plant, the Teepsinna, with large, attractive
stalks. The wife of the large star wanted to dig them. Her husband
said, "No; no one does so here."

Then the camp moved. When the woman had pitched her tepee, and came
inside to lay the mats, she saw there a beautiful teepsinna. She said
to herself, "I will dig this; no one will see me." So she took her
digging stick and dug the teepsinna; but when she pulled it out of the
earth, the foundation of the Star Country broke and she fell through
with her baby. So the woman died; but the baby was not injured. It lay
there stretched out.

An old man came that way. When he saw that the baby was alive, he took
it in his blanket and took it to his own lodge. He said to his wife,
"Old woman, I saw something today that made my heart feel badly."

"What was it?" she asked.

"A woman lay dead; and a little baby boy lay beside her kicking."

"Why did you not bring it home, old man?" she asked.

"Here it is," he said. Then he took it out of his blanket.

The wife said, "Old man, let us adopt this child."

The old man said, "We will swing it around the tepee." He whirled it
up through the smoke hole. It went whirling around and around and fell
down, and came creeping into the tent.

Again he took up the baby and threw it up through the smoke hole. It
got up and came into the tent walking. Again the old man whirled him
out. In came a boy with some green sticks. He said, "Grandfather, I
wish you would make me arrows."

Again the old man whirled him out. No one knows where he went. This
time he came back into the tepee a long man, with many green sticks.
He said, "Grandfather, make me arrows of these."

So the old man made him arrows, and he killed a great many buffaloes,
and they made a large tepee, and built up a high sleeping place in the
back part of the tepee, and were very rich in dried meat.

The old man said, "Old woman, I am glad we are well off; I will
proclaim it abroad." So when morning came, he went to the top of the
tent, and sat, and said, "I, I have abundance laid up. I eat the fat
of the animals."

That is how the meadow lark came to be made, they say. It has a yellow
breast and black in the middle, which is the yellow of that morning,
and they say the black stripe is made by a smooth buffalo horn worn
for a necklace.

The young man said, "Grandfather, I want to go visiting."

"Yes," said the old man. "When one is young is the time to go
visiting."

The young man went and came to a people, and lo! they were engaged in
shooting arrows through a hoop. And there was a young man who was
simply looking on. By and by he said, "My friend, let us go to your
house."

So they came to his lodge. Now this young man also had been raised by
his grandmother, and lived with her, they say.

"Grandmother, I have brought my friend home with me; get him something
to eat," said the grandson.

Grandmother said, "What shall I do?"

Then the visiting young man said, "How is it, grandmother?"

She said, "The people are about to die of thirst. All who go for water
will not come back again."

Fallen Star said, "My friend, take a kettle; we will go for water."

"With difficulty have I raised my grandchild," objected the old woman.

"You are afraid of trifles," said the grandson. So he went with
Star-born.

They reached the side of the lake. By the water of the lake stood
troughs half full of water.

Star-born called out, "You who they say have killed every one who has
come for water, where have you gone? I have come for water."

Then immediately whither they went is not manifest. Behold, there was
a long house which was extended, and it was full of young men and
women. Some of them were dead and some were dying.

"How did you come here?" asked Star-born.

They replied, "What do you mean? We came for water and something
swallowed us."

Something kept striking on the head of Star-born.

"What is this?" he said.

"Get away," they replied, "that is the heart."

Then he drew out his knife and cut it to pieces. Suddenly something
made a great noise. In the great body, these people were swallowed up.
When the heart died, death came to the body. Then Star-born cut a
great hole in the side, and came out, bringing the young men and the
young women. All came to life again.

So the people were thankful and offered him two wives.

But he said, "I am journeying. My friend here will marry them."

Then Star-born went on, they say. Again he found a young man standing
where they were shooting through a hoop. He said, "I will look on with
my friend," and went and stood beside him.

Then the other said, "My friend, let us go home," so he went with him
to his tepee.

"Grandmother, I have brought my friend home with me," he said. "Get
him something to eat."

Grandmother replied, "How shall I do as you say?"

"How is it?" said Star-born.

"This people are perishing for wood," she said; "when any one goes for
wood, he never comes home again."

Star-born said, "My friend, take the packing strap; we will go for
wood."

The old woman protested. "This one, my grandchild, I have raised with
difficulty," she said. He answered, "Old woman, what you are afraid of
are trifles," and went with the young man. "I am going to bring wood,"
he said. "If any wish to go, come along."

"The young man who came from somewhere says this," they said, so they
followed him.

They had now reached the wood. They found it tied up in bundles. He
ordered them to carry it home, but he stood still and said, "You who
killed every one who came to this wood, where have you gone?"

Then, suddenly, where he went was not made manifest. And lo! a tepee,
and in it some young men and young women; some were eating, and some
were waiting.

He said to them, "How came you here?"

They answered, "What do you mean? We came for wood and something
brought us here. Now you also are lost."

He looked behind him, and lo! there was a hole.

"What is this?" he asked.

"Stop!" they said. "That is the thing itself."

He drew out an arrow and shot it. Then suddenly it opened out and
behold! it was the ear of an owl in which they had been shut up. When
it was killed, it opened out. Then he said, "Young men and women, come
out," so they went home.

Again they offered him two wives. But he said, "My friend will marry
them. I am traveling."

Again he passed on. And he came to a dwelling place of people and
found them shooting the hoop. There stood a young man looking on. He
joined him as his friend. While they stood there together, he said:

"Friend, let us go to your home." So he went with him to his tepee.

The young man said, "Grandmother, I have brought my friend home with
me; get him something to eat."

She said, "Where shall I get it from, that you say that?"

"Grandmother, how is it that you say so?" asked the stranger.

She replied, "Waziya treats this people very badly. When they go out
to kill buffalo, he takes it all, and now they are starving to death."

Now Waziya was a giant who caused very cold weather and blizzards.

Then he said, "Grandmother, go to him and say, 'My grandchild has come
on a journey and has nothing to eat; so he has sent me to you.'"

So the old woman went and standing at a distance, cried, "Waziya, my
grandchild has come on a journey and has nothing to eat; so he has
sent me to you."

He replied, "Bad old woman, get you home; what do you mean by coming
here?"

The old woman came home crying, and saying that Waziya had threatened
to kill some of her relations.

Star-born said, "My friend, take your strap; we will go there."

The old woman interfered: "I have with difficulty raised my
grandchild."

Grandchild replied to this by saying, "Grandmother is very much
afraid." So the two went together.

When they came to the house of Waziya, they found a great deal of
dried meat outside. He put as much on his friend as he could carry,
and sent him home with it; then Star-born entered the tepee of Waziya,
and said to him, "Waziya, why did you answer my grandmother as you did
when I sent her to you?"

Waziya only looked angry.

Hanging there was a bow of ice. "Waziya, why do you keep this?" he
said.

The giant replied, "Hands off; whoever touches that gets a broken
arm."

Star-born said, "I will see if my arm breaks." He took the ice bow and
snapped it into many pieces, and then started home.

The next morning all the people went on the chase and killed many
buffaloes. But, as he had done before, the Waziya went all over the
field, gathered up all the meat, and put it in his blanket.

Star-born was cutting up a fat cow. Waziya came and stood there. He
said, "Who cuts this up?"

"I am," answered Star-born.

Waziya said, "From where have you come that you act so haughtily?"

"Whence have you come, Waziya, that you act so proudly?" he retorted.

Waziya said, "Fallen Star, whoever points his finger at me dies." The
young man thought, "I will point my finger at him and see if I die."
He pointed his finger, but it made no difference.

Then Fallen Star said, "Waziya, whoever points his finger at me, his
hand loses all use." So Waziya thought, "I will point my finger and
see." He pointed his finger. His forearm lost all use. Then he
pointed his finger with the other hand. It was destroyed even to the
elbow.

Then Fallen Star drew out his knife and cut up Waziya's blanket, and
all the buffalo meat he had gathered there fell out. Fallen Star
called to the people, "Henceforth kill and carry home."

So the people took the meat and carried it to their tepees.

The next morning, they say, it was rumored that the blanket of Waziya,
which had been cut to pieces, had been sewed up by his wife. He was
about to shake it.

The giant stood with his face toward the north and shook his blanket.
Then the wind blew from the north. Snow fell all about the camp so
that the people were all snowed in. They were much troubled. They
said, "We did live in some fashion before; but now this young man has
acted so we are in great trouble."

But he said, "Grandmother, find me a fan."

Then she made a road under the snow, and went to people and said, "My
grandchild says he wants a fan."

"What does he mean by saying that?" they asked and gave him one.

Now the snow reached to the top of the lodges, and so Fallen Star
pushed up through the snow, and sat on the ridge of the lodge. While
the wind was blowing to the south, he sat and fanned himself and made
the wind come from the south. Then the heat became great. The snow
went as if boiling water had been poured over it. All over the ground
there was a mist. Waziya and his wife and children all died with the
great heat. But the youngest child, the littlest child of Waziya, took
refuge in the hole made by the tent pole, where there was a frost, and
so he lived. So they say that is all that is left of Waziya now, just
the littlest child.




[Illustration: PETROGLYPH IN NEBRASKA

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]




QUARREL OF THE SUN AND MOON

_Omaha_


"I am out of patience with you," said Moon to Sun. "Although I bring
people together, you scatter them. Thus many are lost."

"I have desired many people to grow," said Sun, "and so I have
scattered them; but you have been putting them in darkness and thus
have you been killing many with hunger. Ho! ye people!" called the
Sun. "Many of you shall mature. I will look down on you from above. I
will direct you, whatever you do."

Then Moon said, "And I, too, will dwell so. I will collect you; when
it is dark, you shall assemble in full numbers, and sleep. I myself
will rule you, whatever you do. And we shall walk in the road, one
after the other. I will walk behind him."

Moon is just like a woman. She always walks with a kettle on her arm.




WHY THE POSSUM PLAYS DEAD

_Cherokee_


Rabbit and Possum each wanted a wife, but no one would marry either of
them. They talked over the matter and Rabbit said, "We can't get wives
here. Let's go to the next village. I'll say I'm messenger for the
council and that everybody must marry at once, and then we'll be sure
to get wives."

Off they started for the next town. As Rabbit traveled the faster, he
got there first. He waited outside the village until people noticed
him and took him into the council lodge. When the chief asked his
business, Rabbit said he brought an important message: everyone must
be married at once. So the chief called a great council of the people
and told them the message.

Every animal took a mate at once, and thus Rabbit got a wife.

But Possum traveled slowly. Therefore he reached the village so late
that all the men were married and there was no wife for him. Rabbit
pretended to be sorry. He said, "Never mind. I'll carry the same
message to the next village."

So Rabbit traveled ahead to the next village. He waited outside until
they invited him to the council lodge. There he told the chief he
brought an important message: there had been peace so long, there must
be war at once. The war must begin in the council lodge.

The animals all began to fight at once, but Rabbit got away in just
four leaps. Then Possum reached the lodge. Now Possum had brought no
weapons. So all the animals began to fight Possum. They hit him so
hard that after a while he rolled over in a corner and shut his eyes
and pretended to be dead. That is why Possum pretends to be dead when
he finds the hunters after him.




BOG MYTH

_Dakota_


Bogs are very mysterious. Strange things, with thick hair, remain at
the bottom of a bog. These things have no eyes, but they eat
everything which comes to them, and from their bodies water flows
always. When one of these Beings wishes, he changes his place of
abode. He lives at a new place. Then the old place where he lived
dries up; but a fresh spring of water gushes from his new lodge. The
water of this spring is warm in winter; but in summer it is as cold as
ice. Before one dares drink of it, he prays to the water, else he may
bring illness on himself for irreverence.

In the olden days, one of the Bog Beings was pulled out of a bog and
carried to the camp. A special tepee was built for him. But so much
water flowed all around that the people were almost drowned. Then
those who were not drowned offered him food. He sat motionless, gazing
at them. But the food vanished before they could see it go; and no one
saw the Bog Being eat it.




COYOTE AND SNAKE

_Omaha_


Coyote was going in a straight line across the prairie. While he was
seeking something, a person said suddenly, "Stop!" Coyote thought,
"Who can it be?"

He looked all around but saw no one. Then he walked on a few steps,
when some one said, "Walk around me!" Then Coyote saw it was Snake.

"Humph!" said Coyote. "When I walk here, I do not wish to walk around
anyone at all. You go to one side. Get out of my way!"

Snake replied, "I am here. I have never thought for a moment of giving
place to anyone!"

"Even if you think so," said Coyote, "I will run over you."

"If you do so, you shall die," said Snake.

"Why should I die? There is nothing that can kill me," said Coyote.

"Come! Step over me. Do it in spite of me," said Snake. Then Coyote
stepped over him. And Snake bit him. But Coyote did not feel it.

"Where is it? You said that if I stepped over you, I should die.
Where have I received my death blow?" said Coyote.

Snake made no reply and Coyote walked on. After some time he came to a
creek. As he was about to drink, he saw himself in the water. He
seemed very fat.

"Whew!" he said. "I was never so before. I am very fat." Saying this,
he felt himself all over; but that was all he did. Then he walked on
until he felt sleepy. He said, "I am very sleepy." So he pushed his
way into the thick grass and fell asleep. Coyote did not wake up.
Snake had told the truth.




WHY THE WOLVES HELP IN WAR

_Dakota_


Once upon a time an Indian found a wolf den, and began digging into it
to get the cubs.

Wolf Mother appeared, barking. She said, "Pity my children," but he
paid no attention to her. So she ran for her husband.

Wolf Father soon appeared. He barked. Still the man dug into the den.
Then Wolf Father sang a beautiful song. He sang, "O man, pity my
children, and I will teach you one of my arts." He ended with a howl
which caused a fog. When the Wolf Father howled again, the fog
disappeared.

The man thought, "These animals have mysterious gifts." So he tore up
his red blanket into small pieces. He tied a piece around the neck of
each of the wolf cubs, as a necklace. Then he painted them with red
paint and put them back into the den.

Wolf Father was very grateful. He said, "When you go to war hereafter,
I will go with you. I will bring about whatever you wish." Then the
man went away.

After a while the man went on the warpath. Just as he came in sight
of the village of the enemy, a large wolf met him.

Wolf said, "By and by I will sing. Then you shall steal their horses
when they least suspect danger."

So the man stopped on a hill close to the village. And the wolf sang.
After that he howled, making a high wind arise. The horses fled to the
forest, but many stopped on the hillside. When the wolf howled again,
the wind died down and a mist arose. So the man on the warpath took as
many horses as he pleased.




HOW RABBIT ESCAPED FROM THE WOLVES

_Cherokee_


Once upon a time, Wolves caught Rabbit. They were going to eat him,
but Rabbit said he would show them a new dance. Now the Wolves knew
that Rabbit was a good dancer, so they made a ring around him.

Rabbit pattered with his feet and began to dance around in a circle,
singing,

    On the edge of the field I dance about,
    _Ha' nia lil! lil! Ha' nia lil! lil!_

Then the Rabbit stopped a minute. He said, "Now when I sing 'on the
edge of the field,' I dance that way"--and he danced over in that
direction; "and when I sing '_lil! lil!_' you must all stamp your feet
hard."

The Wolves liked that. They liked new dances.

Rabbit began singing the same song, dancing nearer to the field, while
all the Wolves stamped their feet. He sang the song again, dancing
still nearer the edge of the field. The fourth time he sang it, while
the Wolves were stamping their feet as hard as they could. Rabbit made
one jump off and leaped through the long grass. The Wolves raced after
him, but Rabbit ran for a hollow stump and climbed inside. When the
Wolves got there, one of them put his head inside, but Rabbit hit him
on the eye and he pulled his head out. The others were afraid to try,
so they went away and left Rabbit in the stump.




[Illustration: PLAINS INDIANS DRAGGING BRUSH FOR A MEDICINE LODGE

_By permission of Sumner W. Matteson, the photographer_]


[Illustration: AN EARTH LODGE

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]




HOW RABBIT LOST HIS FAT

_Omaha_


At first all the four-footed animals were fat. The one who made them
wished to know if they looked well so fat. So he called all the
four-footed animals together. He seized by the head each one who did
not look handsome with the fat, and scraped it all off.

At length someone took Rabbit to him.

"Fat makes me handsome," said Rabbit "I will be the one."

"Let me see! Come here!" said the one who made the animals. Then he
made Rabbit fat. Then he looked at him. "Fat makes you ugly beyond
measure."

So he seized Rabbit by the head and scraped off the fat from the base
of his neck. But he pulled suddenly at the flesh in the space between
the shoulders. Therefore, ever since then Rabbit has had a hollow
space between his shoulders, and only in that place is there a piece
of fat.

At length the person who made the animals saw that Raccoon was the
only person who looked well when fat. So he made the whole body of
Raccoon fat.




HOW FLINT VISITED RABBIT

_Cherokee_


Long ago, in the old days, Flint lived up in the mountains, and all
the animals hated him because he had helped to kill so many of them.
All the arrowheads were made of flint. They used to have councils.
They tried to think of some means of killing him. But everybody was
afraid to go near to his house, until at last Rabbit, who was the
boldest, offered to try to kill Flint.

So Rabbit asked the trail to Flint's house. At last he reached the
house.

Flint was standing at the door of his lodge when Rabbit reached there.
He said, "_Siyu!_ Hello! Are you the fellow they call Flint?"

"Yes; that's what they call me," said Flint.

"Is this where you live?"

"Yes; this is where I live."

All the time Rabbit was looking at the lodge and all about him. He was
trying to think how to kill Flint. Rabbit had expected Flint to invite
him into his lodge. But Flint only stood in the door.

Rabbit said, "My name is Rabbit. I've heard a good deal about you, so
I came to see you."

Flint said, "Where is your lodge?"

"Down in the broom-grass field near the river," said Rabbit.

Flint said, "I will come and visit you after a while."

Rabbit said, "Come now and have supper with me."

So Rabbit coaxed Flint until he said yes, and the two started down the
mountain side together.

When they came near Rabbit's hole, Rabbit said, "There is my lodge,
but in summer I stay outside here, where it is cooler."

So he made a fire and they had their supper on the grass. When supper
was over, Flint stretched out on the grass to rest. Rabbit picked up
some heavy sticks and his knife, and cut a mallet and wedge.

Flint looked up and said, "What is that for?"

"Oh," said Rabbit, "I like to be doing something and they may come in
handy."

Flint lay down again and soon he was sound asleep. Rabbit spoke to him
once or twice, but he did not answer. Then Rabbit came over to Flint
and with one blow of the mallet drove the stake through Flint. Then he
ran with all his might for his own hole. But before he reached it,
there was a loud explosion, and pieces of flint flew all about. That
is why we find flint in so many places now. One piece struck Rabbit
and cut him just as he dived into his hole. He sat listening until
everything was quiet again. Then he put his head out to look around,
just as another piece fell. It cut his lip, just as we see it now.




HOW RABBIT CAUGHT THE SUN IN A TRAP

_Omaha_


Once upon a time Rabbit dwelt in a lodge with no one but his
grandmother. It was his custom to go hunting very early in the
morning. But no matter how early in the morning he went, a person with
a very long foot had been along, leaving a trail. Rabbit wished to
know him.

"Now," he thought, "I will go in advance of that person." Having risen
very early in the morning, he departed, but again it happened that the
person had been along, leaving a trail. Then Rabbit went home.

"Grandmother," he said, "though I arrange for myself to go first, a
person goes ahead of me every time. Grandmother, I will make a snare
and I will catch him."

"Why should you do it?" she asked.

"I hate the person," he said.

Again Rabbit departed. And again had the footprints gone along. So
Rabbit lay waiting for night to come. Then he made a noose of a
bowstring, setting it where the footprints were commonly seen.

Next morning Rabbit reached the place very early, to see what he had
caught in his trap. And it happened that he had caught the Sun.
Running very fast, he went homewards to tell about it.

"Grandmother," he said, "I have caught something or other but it
scares me. Grandmother, I wished to take away my bowstring, but I was
scared every time."

So he went there again with a knife. This time he got very near it.

"You have done wrong. Why have you done it? Come and untie me," said
the Sun.

The Rabbit, although he went to untie him, kept going past him a
little on one side. Then he made a rush with his head bent down and
his arm stretched out, and cut the bowstring with his knife. And the
Sun rose into the sky. But Rabbit had the hair between his shoulders
scorched yellow by the heat of the Sun as he stooped and cut the
bowstring. Then Rabbit arrived at his lodge.

"I am burnt. Oh, grandmother! the heat has left nothing of me," he
said.

Grandmother said, "Oh, my grandchild! I think the heat has left to me
nothing of him!"

From that time Rabbit has always had a singed spot upon his back,
between his shoulders.




HOW RABBIT KILLED THE GIANT

_Omaha_


When Rabbit was going on a journey, he came to a certain village. The
people said, "Halloo! Rabbit has come as a visitor."

On meeting him, they said, "Whom did you come to see?"

"Why, I will go to the lodge of any one," said Rabbit.

"But the people have nothing to eat," they said. "The Giant is the
only one who has anything to eat. You ought to go to his lodge."

Yet, the Rabbit passed on to the end lodge and entered it.

"Friend, we have nothing to eat," said the host.

"Why, my friend," said Rabbit, "when there is nothing, people eat
anything they can get."

At length the Giant invited Rabbit to a feast.

"Oh ho!" called the man whose lodge Rabbit had entered. "Friend, you
are invited. Hasten!"

Now all the people were afraid of the Giant. No matter what animal
anyone killed, the Giant kept all of the meat.

Rabbit arrived at the lodge of the Giant. As he entered, the host
said, "Oh! Pass around to that side." But Rabbit leaped over and took
a seat. At length food was given him. He ate it very rapidly but left
some which he hid in his robe. Then he pushed the bowl aside.

"Friend," he said to the Giant, "here is the bowl." Then he said,
"Friend, I must go." He sprang past the fireplace at one leap, at the
second leap his feet touched the chest of the Giant's servant, and
with another leap he had gone.

When Rabbit reached the lodge where he was visiting, he gave his host
the food he had not eaten. The man and his wife were glad to eat it,
since they had been without food.

Next morning, the crier passed through the village, commanding the
people to be stirring.

They said, "The Giant is the one for whom they are to kill game." So
they all went hunting. They scared some animals out of a dense forest
and shot at them. Rabbit went thither very quickly. He found Giant had
reached there before him and taken all the game. When Rabbit heard
shooting in another place, he went thither, but again found the Giant
was before him.

"This is provoking!" thought Rabbit.

When some persons shot at game in another place Rabbit noticed it,
and went thither immediately, reaching the spot before the Giant.

"Friend," he said to the man who had killed the deer, "let us cut it
up."

The man was unwilling. He said, "No, friend, the Giant will come by
and by."

"Pshaw, friend," said Rabbit. "When one kills animals, he cuts them up
and then makes an equal distribution of the pieces," said the Rabbit.

Still the man refused, fearing the Giant. So Rabbit rushed forward and
seized the deer by the feet.

When he had only slit the skin, the Giant arrived.

"You have done wrong. Let it alone," Giant said.

"What have I done wrong?" asked Rabbit. "When one kills game, he cuts
it up and makes an equal distribution of the pieces."

"Let it alone, I say," said the Giant.

But Rabbit continued to insert the knife in the meat.

"I will blow that _thing_ into the air," said the Giant.

"Blow me into the air! Blow me into the air!" said Rabbit.

So the Giant went closer to him, and when he blew at him the Rabbit
went up into the air with his fur blown apart. Striding past, the
Giant seized the deer, put it through his belt, and departed. That was
his custom. He took all the deer that were killed, hung them on his
belt, and took them to his lodge. He was a very tall person.

At night Rabbit wandered around, and at last went all around the
Giant's lodge. He seized an insect and said to it, "Oh, insect! You
shall go and bite the Giant right in the side."

At length when it was morning, it was said the Giant was ill. Then he
died.

The people said, "Make a village for Rabbit!"

But Rabbit said, "I do not wish to be chief. I have left my old woman
by herself, so I will return to her."




HOW THE DEER GOT HIS HORNS

_Cherokee_


Long ago, in the beginning, Deer had no horns. His head was smooth
like a doe's. Now Deer was a very fast runner, but Rabbit was a famous
jumper. So the animals used to talk about it and wonder which could go
the farther in the same time. They talked about it a great deal. They
decided to have a race between the two, and they made a pair of large
antlers to be given to whoever could run the faster. Deer and Rabbit
were to start together from one side of a thicket, go through it, and
then turn and come back. The one who came out of the thicket first was
to receive the horns.

On a certain day all the animals were there. They put the antlers down
on the ground to mark the starting point. Everyone admired the horns.
But Rabbit said, "I don't know this part of the country; I want to
look through the bushes where I am to run."

So the Rabbit went into the thicket, and stayed a long time. He was
gone so long the animals suspected he was playing a trick. They sent a
messenger after him. Right in the middle of the thicket he found
Rabbit, gnawing down the bushes and pulling them away to make a clear
road for himself.

The messenger came back quietly and told the animals. When Rabbit came
back, they accused him of cheating. Rabbit said, "No," but at last
they all went into the thicket and found the road he had made.
Therefore the animals gave the antlers to Deer, saying that he was the
better runner. That is why deer have antlers. And because Rabbit cut
the bushes down, he is obliged to keep cutting them down, as he does
to this day.




[Illustration: KANSA CHIEF

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]


[Illustration: BIG GOOSE

(Omaha)

_Courtesy of the Smithsonian Institution_]




WHY THE DEER HAS BLUNT TEETH

_Cherokee_


One day after the race which they did not run, Rabbit stretched a
large grapevine across the trail, gnawing it nearly in two in the
middle. Then he went back on the trail, took a run, and jumped up at
the vine. He did this again and again. At last Deer came along and
asked him to tell what he was doing.

"Don't you see?" said Rabbit. "I'm so strong I can bite through that
grapevine at one jump."

Deer said, "Do it." Rabbit ran back, made a long leap, and bit through
the vine where he had gnawed it before.

Deer said, "Well, I can do it if you can."

So Rabbit stretched a larger grapevine across the trail but without
gnawing it in the center. Deer ran back as he had seen Rabbit do, made
a spring, and struck the grapevine right in the center. It only flew
back and threw him over.

Deer tried again and again, but he was only bruised and hurt.

"Let me see your teeth," said Rabbit. They were long like a wolf's
teeth but not very sharp.

"No wonder you cannot do it," said Rabbit. "Your teeth are too blunt
to bite anything. Let me sharpen them for you so they are like mine.
My teeth are so sharp I can cut through a stick just like a knife."

And Rabbit showed Deer a black locust twig, of which rabbits gnaw the
young shoots, which he had shaved off as well as a knife could do it.

So Deer let Rabbit sharpen his teeth. But Rabbit got a hard stone with
rough edges and ground down the Deer's teeth until they were blunt.

"Now try it," said Rabbit to Deer. So Deer tried it again, but he
could not bite at all.

"Now you've paid for your horns," said Rabbit as he sprang through the
underbrush. That is why the Deer's teeth are blunt.




LEGEND OF THE HEAD OF GOLD

_Dakota_


A man had four children. And they were all young men, but they were
poor and it seemed as if they would die of laziness. The old man said,
"Behold! old woman. I have the greatest pity for my youngest child,
and I do not wish him to die of poverty. See here; let us seek the
Great Mystery, Wakantanka. If we find him, behold! I will give the boy
to him to train up well for me."

"Yes, old man; you say well. We will do so," said the old woman. So at
once they went toward the Darkening Land, seeking Wakantanka. They
came to a very high hill; and as they came to it, behold! another man
came there also.

The stranger said, "For what are you seeking?"

"Alas, my friend," the old man said, "my child, whom I pity, I wish to
give to Wakantanka, the Great Mystery, and so I am seeking him."

"Yes, friend. I am Wakantanka," said the man. "My friend, give him to
me. I will take him to my home."

So when the father gave up the boy, the Great Mystery took him to a
house that stood up like the clouds. He said, "Look at this house as
much as you like. Take good care of these horses. But do not look into
the little house that stands here."

Having said this, he gave him all the keys. He added, "Yes, have a
watch of this. Lo, I am going on a journey." He said this and went
away.

It was evening; he came home with a great many men, who sat down,
filling the house. When they had been there a good while one of them
said, "The boy is good; that is enough." Saying this, he went out. In
like manner, all the men went home.

Then again Wakantanka said, "Behold, I go on a journey. Stay here and
keep watch." So again he went away.

While the boy was watching, one of the horses said, "Friend, go into
the little house where you are commanded not to look, and inside in
the middle of the floor stands something yellow. Dip your head in that
and make haste--we two are together. When he brings home a great many
men, they will eat you, as they will eat me, but I am unwilling--we
two shall share the same," he said.

So the boy went into the little house. In the middle of the floor
stood a round yellow thing into which he dipped his head. Immediately
his head became golden and the house was shining and full of light.

Then he came out and jumped on the horse that had talked to him and
they fled.

They went very fast. Now when they had gone a long way, behold! there
came after them the one who called himself Wakantanka. He shouted,
"You bad rascals, stop! You shall not live! Where will you go in such
a small country as this?"

Saying this he came toward them and they were much frightened. Again
he shouted, "You bad rascals, stop! You shall not live." And indeed it
seemed as if they could not live.

Then the horse said, "Take the egg you have and throw it behind us."
The boy did so. At once the whole country became a sea. He who
followed was obliged to stop. He said, "Alas, my horse, have mercy on
me and take me to the other side. If you do, I will value you very
highly."

"Oh, I am not willing to do that," the horse replied. But he continued
to urge. Then he threw himself down from above the water, so that when
he came to the middle of it, he went down and both he and the horse
were drowned. But the boy passed safely on.

So he came to the dwellings of people and remained there. But from
behind they came to attack and fought with them. But the boy turned
his head around, and his head was covered with gold; also the horse he
sat upon was golden, and those who came against him were thrown off
their horses and only a few remained when the battle was over. Again,
when they returned to the attack, he destroyed them all. So the boy
was much thought of by the people.




THE MILKY WAY

_Cherokee_


Now the Indians had a corn mill, in which they pounded the corn into
meal. Several mornings when they came to the stone in which the corn
was pounded, they saw that some of the meal had been stolen. Therefore
they looked at the ground. They found the tracks of a dog.

The next night, the people watched, and when the dog came from the
north, they saw him begin to eat meal out of the stone bowl. Then they
sprang out and whipped him.

The dog ran howling back to the north, dropping the meal from his
mouth as he ran. Therefore he left behind a white trail where we now
see the Milky Way. But the Cherokees called it "Where-the-dog-ran."




COYOTE AND GRAY FOX

_Ponca_


Gray fox was very fat. Coyote said, "Younger brother, what has made
you fat?" "Elder brother," said the Gray Fox, "I lie down on the trail
in the way of those who carry crackers, and I pretend to be dead. When
they throw me in the wagon, I lie there, kicking the crackers out.
Then I leap out and start home eating. It is the crackers which make
me fat. Elder brother, I wish you would do likewise. Elder brother,
you have large feet, so I think will knock out a great many crackers."

Coyote went to the place and lay down in the trail. When the white man
came along, he threw Coyote into the wagon. The white man thought, "It
is not the first time he has acted in this way," so he tied the feet
of Coyote. Having put the Coyote in the wagon, the white man went to
his house. He threw Coyote out near an old outhouse. Then the white
man brought a knife, and cut the cords which bound Coyote's feet. He
acted as if Coyote was dead, so he threw him over his back and started
off for the house.

But Coyote managed to get loose and ran homeward. He went back to get
even with Gray Fox.

"Oh, younger brother," said Coyote, "you have made me suffer."

"You yourself are to blame," said Gray Fox. "Be silent and listen to
me. You brought the trouble on yourself as you lay down in the place
where the white man came with his load of goods."

"Oh, younger brother, you tell the truth," said Coyote. But Gray Fox
had tempted him.




ICTINIKE AND THE TURTLE

_Omaha_


Ictinike was journeying. When he came in sight at a bend of a stream,
Big Turtle was sitting there in a sheltered place warmed by the sun.
Ictinike drew himself back out of sight, crouching at intervals as he
retraced his steps, and ran down the hill to where Big Turtle was.

"Why! How is it that you continue to pay no attention to what is going
on? It has been said that yonder stream is to dry up so that all the
four-footed animals that frequent the water have kept close to the
deep water," said Ictinike.

Big Turtle said, "Why! I have been coming here regularly, but I have
not heard anything at all. I usually come and sit in this place when
the sun gets as high as it is at present."

"Hurry!" said Ictinike, "for some of the young men died very soon for
want of water. The young otters died, so did the young muskrats, the
young beavers, and the young raccoons."

"Come, let us go," said Big Turtle. So Ictinike departed with him. As
he accompanied him, Ictinike sought for a dry bone. Having found one
that would be good as a club, Ictinike said, "Friend, go on.
_Mingam._"

When he was alone, Ictinike seized the bone, and before long overtook
Big Turtle, walking along beside him.

"Friend," said he, "when a person walks, he stretches his neck often."

So Big Turtle began to stretch his neck very far, and he was walking
with his legs bent very much. As he was going thus, Ictinike gave him
a hard blow on the neck, knocking him senseless, and he did not stop
beating him until he had killed him.

"Ha, ha!" said Ictinike, as he carried Big Turtle away. "There are
some days when I act thus for myself."

He kindled a fire and began to roast Big Turtle. Then he became very
sleepy, and said, "Ho! I will sleep, but you, O, Ijaxe, must keep
awake. Big Turtle, when you are cooked, you must say, '_Puff!_'"

So he went to sleep. Now Coyote came along, very cautiously. He seized
Big Turtle, pulled one of the legs out of the fire, and sat there,
biting off the meat. When he had eaten all the meat on all the legs,
he pushed the bones back just as they had been before, arranged the
fire over them, and left after putting everything just as he had found
it.

At length Ictinike awoke. He pushed into the ashes to find Big Turtle,
took hold of a leg, and pulled it out. Only that leg came out.
"Pshaw!" said he. Then he tried another leg, with a like result, and
still another, but only the bones appeared. When he had pulled out the
fourth leg, he was astonished. All at once he exclaimed, "Surprising!
I had already eaten the Turtle, but I had forgotten it."




ICTINIKE AND THE CREATORS

_Omaha_


Ictinike married and dwelt in a lodge. One day he said to his wife,
"Hand me that tobacco pouch. I must go visit your grandfather,
Beaver." So he departed.

As he was entering Beaver's lodge, Beaver said, "Ho, pass around to
one side." And they seated Ictinike on a pillow. Beaver's wife said,
"We have been without food. How can we give your grandfather anything
to eat?" Now Beaver had four young ones.

The youngest Beaver said, "Father, let me serve for food." So the
youngest Beaver served for food. Beaver's wife therefore gave some of
the meat to Ictinike, who ate it. But before letting him eat it,
Beaver said to him, "Be careful lest you break even a single bone by
biting! Do not break a bone!" Yet Ictinike broke one of the toe bones.

After the meal, Beaver gathered the bones, put them in a skin, and
plunged them beneath the water. In a moment the youngest Beaver came
up from the water, alive again.

When the father said, "Is all right?" the son said, "Father, he broke
one of my toes by biting." Therefore, from that time, every beaver has
had one little toe (the next to the little one), which has seemingly
been split by biting.

When Ictinike was about to go home, he pretended he had forgotten
about his tobacco pouch, which he left behind. So Beaver said to one
of the children, "Take that to him. Do not go near him, but throw it
to him when you are at a great distance from him, as he is always very
talkative."

Then the child took the tobacco pouch and started after Ictinike.
After getting in sight of the latter, Little Beaver was about to throw
the pouch, when standing at a great distance; but Ictinike called to
him, "Come closer! come closer!" When young Beaver took the pouch
closer, Ictinike said, "Tell your father that he is to visit me."

When young Beaver reached home, he said, "Oh, father, he said you were
to visit him."

Beaver replied, "As I feared that very thing, I said to you, 'Throw it
to him while standing at a great distance from him.'"

Then Beaver went to visit Ictinike. When he arrived there, Ictinike
wished to kill one of his own children, as Beaver had done, and was
making him cry by hitting him often. Beaver was unwilling for him to
act thus, so he said, "Let him alone! You are hurting him!" Then
Beaver went to the stream where he found a young beaver that he took
back to the lodge, and they ate it.

On another day, Ictinike said to his wife, "Hand me that tobacco
pouch. I must go call on your grandfather, Muskrat." So he departed.
As he was entering Muskrat's lodge, the host said, "Ho, pass around to
one side." And Ictinike was seated on a pillow.

Muskrat's wife said, "We have been without food. How can we give your
grandfather anything to eat?"

Muskrat said, "Fetch some water."

The woman brought the water. He told her to put it in the kettle and
hang the kettle over the fire. When the water was boiling very fast,
the husband upset the kettle, and instead of water, out came wild
rice! So Ictinike ate the wild rice.

When Ictinike departed he left his tobacco pouch, as before. Then
Muskrat called one of his children, and said, "Take that to him. Do
not go near him! Throw it to him when you are a great distance from
him, as he is always very talkative."

So the child took the tobacco pouch to return it to Ictinike. When he
was about to throw it to him, he said, "Come closer! Come closer!"
When the child took the pouch closer, Ictinike said, "Tell your
father he is to visit me."

When the young Muskrat reached home, he said, "Oh, father, he said
that you were to visit him." Muskrat replied, "As I feared that very
thing, I said to you, 'Throw it to him while standing at a great
distance from him.'"

Then Muskrat went to see Ictinike. And Ictinike said to his wife,
"Fetch water." The woman went after water. She filled the kettle and
hung it over the fire until it boiled. When Ictinike upset the kettle,
only water came out. Ictinike wished to do just as Muskrat had done,
but he was unable. Then Muskrat had the kettle refilled, and when the
water boiled he upset it, and an abundance of wild rice was there,
which he gave to Ictinike. Thereupon Muskrat departed, leaving plenty
of wild rice.

On another day, Ictinike said to his wife, "I am going to see your
grandfather, Kingfisher." When he arrived there, Kingfisher stepped on
a bough of a large white willow, bending it down so far that it was
horizontal; and he dived from it into the water. He came up with a
fish, which he gave to Ictinike to eat. And as Ictinike was starting
home, he left one of his gloves, pretending he had forgotten it. So
Kingfisher directed one of his boys to take the glove and restore it
to the owner. But he charged the boy not to go near him, as Ictinike
was very talkative and might detain him too long. Just as the boy was
about to throw the glove, Ictinike called, "Come closer! Come closer!"
So the boy carried the glove closer. And Ictinike said, "Tell your
father that he is to visit me."

The boy said to his father, when he reached home, "Oh, father, he said
you were to visit him." Kingfisher replied, "As I feared that very
thing, I said 'Throw it to him while you stand at a great distance
from him.'"

Then Kingfisher went to see Ictinike. When he arrived there, the host
climbed upon a bough of a large white willow, bending it until it was
horizontal. Then he leaped from it and plunged into the water. It was
with great difficulty that Kingfisher seized him and brought him to
land. Ictinike had swallowed more of the water than he liked. Then
Kingfisher plunged into the stream, brought up a fish, which he gave
to Ictinike. But Kingfisher departed without eating any portion of it.




[Notes: OMAHA ASSAULT ON A DAKOTA VILLAGE

(Indian drawing)

_The single tepee represents the Dakota village; the single horseman,
covered by a shield, and hanging behind his horse's neck in a
characteristic way, represents the attacking Omahas. Bullets are
flying, the direction indicated by the head._]

[Illustration: _Enlarged from a sketch in Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology_]


[Illustration: "KILLED TEN MEN AND THREE WOMEN"

An Indian drawing with striking similarity to Egyptian drawing.

_Enlarged from a sketch in Report of the Bureau of Ethnology_]




HOW BIG TURTLE WENT ON THE WARPATH

_Omaha_


The people dwelt in a very populous village. Big Turtle joined them.
And people dwelling at another village came regularly to war against
them. Having killed one person they went homeward. Big Turtle cooked
for the warpath. He caused two persons to go after guests. The
servants whom he sent after guests were Redbreasted Turtle and Gray
Squirrel. He made two round bunches of grass and placed them at the
bottom of the stick to which the kettle was fastened.

Now they were coming. They came in sight.

"Ho, warriors!" said Big Turtle. "Warriors, when men are injured, they
always take revenge. I cook this for the warpath. I cook sweet corn
and a buffalo paunch. You will go after Corn Crusher for me," saying
this to his servants. "Call to Comb, Awl, Pestle, Firebrand, and
Buffalo Bladder also," said Big Turtle.

The two men went to call them. They called to Corn Crusher. "Corn
Crusher, be sure to bring your bowl! Corn Crusher, be sure to
bring your bowl! Corn Crusher, be sure to bring your bowl! Corn
Crusher, be sure to bring your bowl!" Four times they called.

They called to Comb. "Comb, be sure to bring your bowl!" So they
called four times.

They called to Awl. "Awl, be sure to bring your bowl!" So they called
four times.

Then they called to Pestle. "Pestle, be sure to bring your bowl!" So
they called four times.

They called to Firebrand, too. "Firebrand, be sure to bring your
bowl!" So they called four times.

Then they called to Buffalo Bladder. "Buffalo Bladder, be sure to
bring your bowl!" So they called four times to him.

Then the criers reached home, having invited the guests.

"Oh, war chief," they said, "all heard it."

All those who were called arrived at the lodge of Big Turtle.

"Ho! Oh, war chiefs! Corn Crusher, Comb, Awl, Pestle, Firebrand, and
Buffalo Bladder, though those people have been injured they do not
seem to stir. Let us go on the warpath for them," said Big Turtle.
"Let us go in four nights."

He commanded Corn Crusher to cook. "O war chief, Corn Crusher, you
will cook. And you, O Comb, will cook on the night after that. And
you, O Awl, will cook, and complete the number."

That many war chiefs, four, cooked. They were war chiefs. The rest
were servants.

The people of the village said, "Why! Of the persons who have been
called, who is cooking for the warpath?"

And one said, "Why! Big Turtle cooked. Pshaw! Has he gathered all
those who cannot move well enough, those who cannot move fast enough?
Pshaw! If the foe find them out, they will destroy them. When a war
chief has sense, he will carry on war."

Corn Crusher cooked. He cooked turnips, and he cooked a buffalo paunch
with them, just as Big Turtle had cooked one with sweet corn. Awl
cooked wild rice. Comb cooked other things.

Big Turtle said, "Time enough has passed. Let us go at night."

So they departed. Big Turtle made leggings with large flaps. He tied
short garters around them. He rubbed earth on his face and he reddened
it. He wore grass around his head. He put white feathers on top of his
head. He took his gourd rattle thus. He rattled it. He sang the song
of the war chief:

"Big Turtle is coming back from touching the foe, it is said, you
say. He is coming back from touching."

He walked, stepping very lively in the dance. He walked around them.
As they went, it was day.

At length a young Buffalo Bull came. "Warriors, wait for him," said
Big Turtle.

He said to Buffalo Bull, "While I walk on a journey, I am in a great
hurry. Speak rapidly. Why are you walking?"

"Yes, war chief, it is so. As they have told of you while you have
been walking, I thought that I would walk there with you, and I have
sought you," said Buffalo Bull.

"Do so," said Big Turtle. "I wish to see your movements."

Buffalo Bull rolled himself back and forth. He arose suddenly. He
thrust repeatedly at the ground with his horns. He pierced the ground
and threw pieces away suddenly. He stood with his tail in the air and
its tip bent downward. An ash tree stood there. He rushed on it.
Pushing against it, he sent it flying through the air to a great
distance.

"O war chief, I think I will do that, if they speak of vexing me," he
said.

"Look at the persons with whom I am traveling. There are none who are
faint-hearted in the least degree. You are not at all like them. You
have disappointed me. Come, begone," said Big Turtle.

Again Big Turtle sang the song. "Big Turtle is coming back from
touching the foe, it is said, you say. He is coming back from
touching," said he.

Again they departed. "Warriors, pass on!" said he.

There before them lay a stream, which was not small. They crossed it.
Firebrand was ahead, walking with a great effort. At length, because
he was weary, he plunged into the water and was extinguished.

"O war chief, I am not going beyond here with you," he said.

"Remain here for a while," said Big Turtle.

Having reached the other side, they departed. At length a Puma came.

"Warriors, wait for him. I suspect what he will say. Stand in a row,"
said he. "Speak quickly," he said, addressing Puma.

"Yes, O war chief," said Puma. "It was told of you regularly, saying
you walked on a journey. And there I wish to walk, so I have sought
you."

"Yes?" said Big Turtle. "Let me see your ways."

Puma made his hair bristle up all over his body. He bent his tail
backward and upward. He went leaping to the bottom of a small hill.
Having caught by the throat a fawn, about two years old, he came
back, making it cry out as he held it in his teeth.

"I think I will do that, O war chief, if anything threatens to vex
me," he said.

"Do something else," said Big Turtle.

"No, O war chief; that is all," said Puma.

"You have disappointed me," said Big Turtle. "Look at these persons
with whom I am. Where is one who is imperfect? You are very inferior.
Come, depart. You have disappointed me."

They departed. At length when they reached the foot of a hill, Black
Bear came.

"O war chief, again one has come," said the warriors.

"I suspect what he will say, warriors. Wait for him. Stand in a row,"
said Big Turtle. "Ho," he said, addressing Black Bear. "Come, speak
quickly. What is your business? When I walk on a journey, I am in a
great hurry," said Big Turtle.

"Yes, O warrior, it is so. It was told of you regularly that you
walked on a journey. And as I desired to walk there, I have sought you
diligently," said Black Bear.

"Ho! Do something," said Big Turtle. "You may have thought how you
would do it. I wish to see your ways."

Black Bear pierced the ground with his claws, and threw lumps of
earth to a great distance. And there stood an oak tree which had been
blackened by fire. He attacked it. Having hugged it, he threw it with
force to a great distance.

"O war chief, if anything vexes me, I think I will do that," said
Black Bear.

Big Turtle said, "Ho! warrior, you have disappointed me. These persons
with whom I am--look at them. There is none who is faint-hearted in
the least degree. You have disappointed me. Come, depart. Thus do I
regularly send off the inferior ones."

They went into a dense undergrowth. At length Buffalo Bladder was torn
open, making the sound, "_Qu´e._" "Alas! I am not going beyond with
you," said he.

"Ho, warrior. I will come back very soon. Remain here for a while,"
said Big Turtle.

Again they departed. As they went, they reached a bad path. Very high
logs were lying across it. Redbreasted Turtle failed to step over
them.

"Ho, O war chief," he said. "I am not going beyond here with you."

"Ho, warrior. I will come again very soon. Remain here for a while,"
said Big Turtle.

Again they departed. As they went, behold, a Big Wolf came.

"O war chief, again one has come," said they.

"I suspect what he will say, warriors. Wait for him. Stand in a row,"
said Big Turtle.

"Ho," he said, addressing Wolf, "Come, speak quickly, whatever may be
your business. When I walk on a journey, I am in a very great hurry."

"Yes, O war chief. It is so. It was told of you regularly, saying that
you walked on a journey; and as I desired to walk there, I have sought
you," said Wolf.

"Ho! Show me what you can do," said Big Turtle. "You may have been
thinking about it. I wish to see your ways."

Wolf decorated himself. He reddened his nose; he reddened all his
feet. He tied eagle feathers to his back.

"Well, do so. Do so. I wish to see your ways," said Big Turtle.

Wolf turned himself round and round. He went to the attack by the wood
on a small creek. He killed a deer. He brought it back, holding it
with his teeth.

"O war chief, I think I will do that, if anything vexes me," said
Wolf.

"You have disappointed me," said Big Turtle. "See these people with
whom I travel. There is none who is faint-hearted in the least
degree. Come, depart. Thus do I regularly send off the inferior ones.

"Warrior Gray Squirrel, go as a scout," said Big Turtle. Gray Squirrel
went as a scout. At length he was coming back, blowing a horn.

"Ho, war chief, he is coming back to you," they said. Big Turtle went
there. "Ho, warrior. Act very honestly. Tell me just how it is," said
Big Turtle.

"Yes, O war chief, it is just so. I have been there without their
finding me out at all," said he.

"Let us sit at the very boundary of their camp," said Big Turtle. He
spoke of going. "Warriors, I will look around to see how things are,
and how many persons there may be there," he said.

He came back. "Warriors, let us go in that direction. This far is a
good place for sitting," he said. So they moved forward. Then he said,
"O war chief Corn Crusher, go to the end lodge of the village before
us, and sit on the outside."

Corn Crusher did so. A woman came out of the lodge. When she saw him,
she said, "Oh! Heretofore have I desired mush. I have found for myself
an excellent corn crusher." But when she pounded on the corn with it,
she hurt her hand. Then she threw it out. "Bad Corn Crusher!" she
said.

He came back to Big Turtle, who was near. "He whom you call 'Corn
Crusher' has come back," he said, "having killed one right at the
lodge."

Big Turtle said, "O war chief Comb, make an attempt. Sit in the door
of the lodge where Corn Crusher sat."

Comb did so. He was very handsome. Then a woman came out of the lodge.
She found Comb. "Heretofore I have been without a comb. I have found a
good comb for myself," she said. Very soon she combed her hair with
it. Comb pulled out all the hair on one side by the roots.

She said, "A very bad comb, but I thought it was good." She threw him
away at the door. Then he went back. He went back with the hair he had
pulled out.

"He whom you call 'Comb,'" he said, "has come back, having snatched
all the hair from one at the lodge."

"Good!" said Turtle. "O war chief, when we reach home, we shall cause
the women to dance."

Then Big Turtle said, "O war chief Awl, make an attempt. Go sit in the
door of the lodge where war chief Comb sat."

Awl was very handsome. He was very good to look at. He sat in the door
of the lodge. A woman passing out, found him. "Oh! I have found a good
awl for myself," she said. "Heretofore I have had no awl. It makes me
thankful." She went back to the lodge with him. She spoke of sewing
her moccasins with him. "I will sew my moccasins with it," she said.
She sewed them. She pierced her fingers with him. She missed in
pushing him, sending him with force. There was much blood from her
fingers. She threw him away at the door. "The awl is indeed bad. I
have indeed hurt myself. I have wounded myself badly." She threw him
far out from the door, sending him homeward.

"He whom you have called 'Awl,' O war chief," he reported, returning
to Big Turtle. "I stabbed one right at the lodge; I killed her." He
returned with his spear very bloody.

"O war chief," said the others to Big Turtle. "Awl is coming back,
telling his own name. He has killed one."

Big Turtle said, "Ho! O war chief. You make me thankful. Since it is
you, I will blacken my face. The village shall be joyful. Ho! O
Pestle, make an attempt. You will lie in the door of the lodge where
Awl lay."

Now Pestle was very handsome. Then he arrived there. He lay where he
was commanded to lie. A woman went out and found Pestle. "Oh! I have
found a very good pestle for myself. I had no pestle heretofore," she
said.

She took him back to the lodge. She took some corn. She filled the
mortar and pounded the corn. She beat it fine. She thrust Pestle
beyond, right on her knee. She missed the mark in pushing, sending him
with force, and so she struck him on her knee.

"_Oh!_ A very bad pestle," she said. She threw him outside, sending
him homeward suddenly.

"You have been used to saying 'Pestle.' He is coming, having stabbed
one right at the lodge. He has killed one," said Pestle, returning. He
reached Big Turtle again. "O war chief, I have killed one."

"You make me thankful," said Big Turtle. "Ho! warrior Gray Squirrel,
make an attempt."

"O war chief, how can I do anything?" said Gray Squirrel. Now the
lodges were placed among the trees.

"You will pass along the trees above the smoke holes of the lodges. If
they find you, they will shoot at you. Do your best. Do your best to
evade the blows or arrows. If one goes aside, rush on him," said Big
Turtle.

At length a boy found Gray Squirrel. "This moving one is a gray
squirrel," he said. They went in a great uproar. They shot at him.
They even hit him with sticks. One boy stood aside. Gray Squirrel
attacked him and bit him. They said, "Wonderful! Heretofore the gray
squirrel has been very easy to approach, but we have failed. He has
bitten us; we have done nothing to him," they said.

"He whom you used to call 'Gray Squirrel' is coming back, having
killed one right among them," he called. He told it to Big Turtle.

"Ho! real warrior, act very honestly," said Big Turtle.

"O war chief, it is just so. I have killed one," said he.

"Ho! warrior, you make me thankful," said Big Turtle.

"Ho! warriors," said Big Turtle again. "I, even I, will make a trial.
I shall not come back for some time. Beware lest you go homeward.
Beware lest you leave me and go homeward."

He arrived there. Some ashes had been poured out. They were
extinguished. At length Big Turtle pushed his way through. He went
within. He sat within, with his eyes sticking out, looking around. A
woman approached when it was morning. She stood very close to where
Big Turtle sat.

"You will tread on my shield," he said. The woman looked around. "From
what place does he speak?" she thought; therefore she looked around.
Again he said to her, "You will tread on my shield. Stand further
away." And the woman found him.

"Oh!" she said.

"Stand still. I send you with a message," said Big Turtle. "Go home
and say, 'Big Turtle says he has come to war. He says he has come
desiring the chief's daughter, whose body has been placed on the bough
of a tree.'"

The people came. All the people said, "Break in his skull suddenly."
He said, "How is it possible for you to break in my skull suddenly? If
you let your weapons slip off suddenly from me each time, you will
break your legs with the blows."

They said, "When the water is hot, it will be good to put him in it."

"Fie!" said Big Turtle. "When the water is hot and I scatter it with
kicking, many of you will be scalded to death."

"He tells what is probably true," they said.

"And if it be so, it is good to burn him," said the people.

"For shame! If I scatter the fire by kicking, I will cause all the
land to blaze. Beware lest many of your children, too, die from the
fire," he said.

"He tells what is probably true," they said.

A child begged for water. "O mother, some water," it said. Big Turtle
said, "_Oh!_" He tempted them with reference to water.

"Cause the child to ask for water," said one.

"What do you mean by that?" said others.

"When the child said, 'O mother, some water,' this one, Big Turtle,
said '_Oh!_'" answered one.

"Wonderful!" they said. "He is fearing the sight of water." They took
him to the water, holding him by the tail. Notwithstanding Big Turtle
clung to the ground with his forelegs, they held his tail, and reached
the water with him. They threw him forcibly right into the water. He
walked the water for a while, crying a little, and pretended he did
not know how to swim. He said, "_Wi! wi! wi!_"

"Wonderful! Throw him out into the middle of the stream," they said.
Again they sent him headlong. He was wandering around. At length he
sank. They said, "He is dead," and went homeward. "You should have
done that to him at first," said the people.

When the people went homeward, some boys stood there. Big Turtle
approached, floating. He came peeping. Some boys stood looking at the
place where the deed was done.

Big Turtle said, "When Big Turtle came in the past to war on you, you
said that you killed him. Look here at me."

The boys went homeward to tell it. "You said that you killed Big
Turtle, but as this one behind us showed his body, he laughed at us.
Big Turtle is he who is alive."

"Ho! We attack him," said the people. They attacked him. They arrived
there.

"In what place?" said they.

"In this place," said the boys.

"Where is Otter? Where is Grass Snake? Let those two seek him," said
they.

Big Turtle sat under the mud at the bottom of the water. Only the tip
of his nose and his eyes were sticking out. Snake and Otter sought him
beneath the water. They passed very near to him, and stepped regularly
over his head. When Otter was about to pass the second time, Big
Turtle bit him in the stomach.

"Ho! elder brother, you give me pain," said Otter. Big Turtle said,
"Why do you seek me?"

"I did not seek you. As I desired food, we have met each other," said
Otter.

"No, you wished to join those who desire to kill me, so you sought
me," said Big Turtle.

"O elder brother! O elder brother! O elder brother! I pray to you. I
have not sought you," he said.

"I will by no means let you go from my mouth," said Big Turtle.

"Ho! elder brother! How long before you will open your mouth and let
me go?" said Otter.

"When the Thunder God has come back, I will let you go."

"Halloo!" shouted Otter to the people. "He will let me go when the
Thunder God comes back. Halloo! He bites me between the legs. Halloo!"
said he.

"He says that he is bitten," said the people. "He says that he is
bitten between the legs. Hit tent skins for him."

They made the tent skins resound by hitting them.

"Ho! elder brother, the Thunder God has come back," said Otter.

"They hit the tent skins," said the Big Turtle.

The people said, "It is good to fell trees." They began felling trees
here and there. The trees said, "_Qwi! qwi!_" as they fell.

"Ho! elder brother, the Thunder God has come back," said Otter.

"They are felling trees," said Big Turtle.

At length the Thunder God roared, very far away.

"Ho! elder brother, he has come back," said he. Big Turtle let him go.
Otter was very thin. He went homeward. He reached home very lean.

"Let the two birds drink the stream dry," said the people. "Bring the
Pelicans here."

When they came, the people said, "Drink the stream dry. A person came
here to war and we killed him, but he is alive. He laughs heartily at
us."

The birds drank the stream dry. There was only a very small quantity
left in which Big Turtle sat.

Big Turtle called, "Ho! warrior Gray Squirrel, be coming hither,
wherever you may be moving. They have almost killed me."

Gray Squirrel was coming back, crying loud. He was coming back to
attack them. He attacked the two birds. He tore open their water
pouches by biting. He bit holes in them. At length all the water
returned to its former place. At the creek and the lake it was as
before; they were filled with water.

"Sew up their pouches for them," said the people. So they sewed up the
water pouches of the Pelicans. They finished sewing them.

"Come, drink it dry again. Do your best. Beware lest we fail," said
the people. They drank the stream dry again. Again very little of the
water was left.

"Ho! warrior Gray Squirrel, wherever you may be moving. They have
nearly killed me. Be coming hither again," said Big Turtle. He came
back again. He bit and tore the throats in many places. It made their
throats very bad. He made them bad to be sewed at all. It was
difficult to sew them.

"Yet we shall fail," said the people. "Gray Squirrel is abominable! I
think Gray Squirrel is the only one with Big Turtle. I think he is the
only one siding with them. Therefore we have failed to hurt them,"
said the people.

They ceased. When it was night, Big Turtle went back. He reached his
comrades again.

"Ho! Warriors, when men get the better of their enemies in a fight,
they usually go homeward. I suspect that your sisters are tired of
waiting to dance!"

They went homeward. He walked around them, rattling his gourd.

"Warriors, I said that I would do thus, and so it is," he said. He
burnt the grass.

He burnt the grass so that they might think he was coming home after
killing the foe. At length they arrived at the village. They tied
scalps to a stick. Then those in the village said, "Yonder come those
who went to war!" The returning warriors raced around and around as
victorious warriors do. People said, "There they are coming home,
having killed the people of the enemy."

An old man shouted: "Corn Crusher says that he killed one. _Halloo!_
He says he killed her right at the lodge. _Halloo!_ Comb says he
killed one right at the lodge. _Halloo!_ Awl says he killed one right
at the lodge. _Halloo!_, Gray Squirrel says that he killed three
right in the midst of the people. _Halloo!_ It is said they held the
war chief, Big Turtle, right among them, in a great uproar. _Halloo!_
It is said they failed to injure him. _Halloo!_"

Big Turtle walked very proudly, carrying his shield. He went homeward
to enter the lodge. He sat there telling them about himself. As people
wished to hear it, they continued arriving there.

"Why did they fail, when they were so near you? If you sat very near
them, how is it that you are alive?" asked the people.

"I pretended to be afraid of water, so I am alive," he said.

"If so, then those over there have no eyes. How is it that they did
not find you when you were alive?"

"I sat in the ashes, therefore I am alive. I have come home, having
killed people. Why did you doubt me? As you did not take vengeance on
the people who used to kill you, I went to war on them myself. I
killed them. How can you doubt me? I will tell no more about myself,"
said Big Turtle. "I have ceased."


THE END




Transcriber's Note

Minor punctuation errors have been corrected without note. Hyphenation
has been made consistent, where there was a definite majority of one
form, again without note. The following amendments have also been made:

  Table of contents--Fallen-Star amended to The Fallen Star, with
  reference to the main story title.

  Page 80--name of nation (Cherokee) added to title, with reference
  to table of contents.

  Page 148--omitted word 'an' added--"Rabbit said he brought an
  important message."

  Page 195--omitted word 'said,' added--"... has come back," he said,
  "having killed one ..."

Some illustrations have been shifted to the beginning or end of tales
where previously they were in the middle. The short advert and
frontispiece illustration have been moved to follow the title page.
Some illustrations had a tissue paper sheet with an italicised note;
these have been moved to precede the illustration they refer to where
necessary. They are marked as [Notes: ...].





End of Project Gutenberg's Myths and Legends of the Great Plains, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYTHS AND LEGENDS ***

***** This file should be named 22083-8.txt or 22083-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/0/8/22083/

Produced by David Edwards, Sam W. and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
