The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Plain Cookery Book for the Working Classes, by 
Charles Elmé Francatelli

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Plain Cookery Book for the Working Classes

Author: Charles Elmé Francatelli

Release Date: July 21, 2007 [EBook #22114]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PLAIN COOKERY BOOK ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






                         PHILLIPS & COMPY.,

                           TEA MERCHANTS,

            8, KING WILLIAM STREET, CITY, LONDON, E.C.,

                          Invariably sell

                       THE BEST AND CHEAPEST

                    TEAS AND COFFEES IN ENGLAND.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                     GOOD STRONG USEFUL CONGOU,

            2s. 6d., 2s. 8d., 2s. 10d., 3s., and 3s. 4d.

                           PURE COFFEES,

                   1s., 1s. 2d., 1s. 4d., 1s. 6d.

                      _A PRICE-CURRENT FREE._

         Pure Preserving and other Sugars at Market Prices.

                 *       *       *       *       *

     ALL GOODS SENT CARRIAGE FREE WITHIN EIGHT MILES OF LONDON.

Teas and Coffees _Carriage Free_ to all England, if to value of 40s.

                 *       *       *       *       *

                       PHILLIPS AND COMPANY,

                           TEA MERCHANTS,

              KING WILLIAM STREET, CITY, LONDON, E.C.


The Best Food for Children, Invalids, and Others.


ROBINSON'S PATENT BARLEY,

For making superior Barley Water in Fifteen Minutes, has not only
obtained the Patronage of Her Majesty and the Royal Family, but has
become of general use to every class of the community, and is
acknowledged to stand unrivalled as an eminently pure, nutritious, and
light Food for Infants and Invalids; much approved for making a
delicious Custard Pudding, and excellent for thickening Broths or Soups.


ROBINSON'S PATENT GROATS,

For more than thirty years have been held in constant and increasing
public estimation, as the purest farina of the Oat, and as the best and
most valuable preparation for making a pure and delicate GRUEL, which
forms a light and nutritious support for the aged, is a popular recipe
for colds and influenza, is of general use in the sick chamber, and
alternately with the Patent Barley is an excellent Food for Infants and
Children. Prepared only by the Patentees,

ROBINSON, BELLVILLE, AND CO.,
PURVEYORS TO THE QUEEN,
64, RED LION STREET, HOLBORN, LONDON.

       *       *       *       *       *

EPPS'S COCOA,

(Commonly called Epps's Homoeopathic Cocoa),

IS DISTINGUISHED FOR ITS

DELICIOUS AROMA, GRATEFUL SMOOTHNESS, AND INVIGORATING POWER;

And to these qualities it is indebted for
the adoption it now obtains as a

BREAKFAST BEVERAGE,

       *       *       *       *       *

DIRECTIONS FOR USE.

Mix two tea-spoonfuls of the Powder with as much _cold_ Milk as will
form a stiff paste; then add, _all at once_, a sufficient quantity of
_boiling_ Milk, or Milk and Water in equal portions, to fill a breakfast
cup.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1/4-lb., 1/2-lb., and 1-lb. Packets, at 1s. 6d. per lb._

Sold by Grocers in every part of London, and by Grocers, Confectioners,
and Druggists in the Country.




[Illustration]




                          A PLAIN

                        COOKERY BOOK

                          FOR THE

                      WORKING CLASSES.


                             BY

                 CHARLES ELMÉ FRANCATELLI,

LATE MAÎTRE D'HÔTEL AND CHIEF COOK TO HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN.
     AUTHOR OF "THE MODERN COOK" AND "THE COOK'S GUIDE."


                        NEW EDITION.


                          LONDON:
              ROUTLEDGE, WARNE, AND ROUTLEDGE,
                     FARRINGDON STREET.




             Reprinted from the edition of 1852

                     Re-issued 1977 by
                        SCOLAR PRESS
            39 Great Russell Street, London WC1

                       Reprinted 1978

                     ISBN 0 85967 390 1

                     Printed in England
            by Shenval Press, London and Harlow




INTRODUCTION.


My object in writing this little book is to show you how you may prepare
and cook your daily food, so as to obtain from it the greatest amount of
nourishment at the least possible expense; and thus, by skill and
economy, add, at the same time, to your comfort and to your
comparatively slender means. The Recipes which it contains will afford
sufficient variety, from the simple every-day fare to more tasty dishes
for the birthday, Christmas-day, or other festive occasions.

In order to carry out my instructions properly, a few utensils will be
necessary. Industry, good health, and constant employment, have, in many
instances, I trust, enabled those whom I now address to lay by a little
sum of money. A portion of this will be well spent in the purchase of
the following articles:--A cooking-stove, with an oven at the side, or
placed under the grate, which should be so planned as to admit of the
fire being open or closed at will; by this contrivance much heat and
fuel are economized; there should also be a boiler at the back of the
grate. By this means you would have hot water always ready at hand, the
advantage of which is considerable. Such poor men's cooking-stoves
exist, on a large scale, in all modern-built lodging-houses. Also, a
three-gallon iron pot with a lid to it, a one-gallon saucepan, a
two-quart ditto, a frying-pan, a gridiron, and a strong tin baking-dish.

Here is a list of the cost prices at which the above-named articles, as
well as a few others equally necessary, may be obtained of all
ironmongers:--

                                                    £  _s._ _d._

A cooking-stove, 2 ft. 6 in. wide, with oven only   1   10    0
Ditto, with oven and boiler                         1   18    0
A three-gallon oval boiling pot                     0    4    6
A one-gallon tin saucepan, and lid                  0    2    6
A two-quart ditto                                   0    1    6
A potato steamer                                    0    2    0
An oval frying-pan, from                            0    0   10
A gridiron, from                                    0    1    0
A copper for washing or brewing, twelve gallons     1   10    0
A mash-tub, from                                    0   10    0
Two cooling-tubs (or an old wine or beer cask cut
  in halves, would be cheaper, and answer the same
  purpose), each 6_s._                              0   12    0
                                                   ------------
                                                   £6   12    4
                                                   ------------

To those of my readers who, from sickness or other hindrance, have not
money in store, I would say, strive to lay by a little of your weekly
wages to purchase these things, that your families may be well fed, and
your homes made comfortable.

And now a few words on baking your own bread. I assure you if you would
adopt this excellent practice, you would not only effect a great saving
in your expenditure, but you would also insure a more substantial and
wholesome kind of food; it would be free from potato, rice, bean or pea
flour, and alum, all of which substances are objectionable in the
composition of bread. The only utensil required for bread-making would
be a tub, or trough, capable of working a bushel or two of flour. This
tub would be useful in brewing, for which you will find in this book
plain and easy directions.

I have pointed out the necessity of procuring these articles for cooking
purposes, and with the injunction to use great care in keeping them
thoroughly clean, I will at once proceed to show you their value in a
course of practical and economical cookery, the soundness and plainness
of which I sincerely hope you will all be enabled to test in your own
homes.




COOKERY BOOK.


No. 1. BOILED BEEF.

This is an economical dinner, especially where there are many mouths to
feed. Buy a few pounds of either salt brisket, thick or thin flank, or
buttock of beef; these pieces are always to be had at a low rate. Let us
suppose you have bought a piece of salt beef for a Sunday's dinner,
weighing about five pounds, at 6-1/2_d._ per pound, that would come to
2_s._ 8-1/2_d._; two pounds of common flour, 4_d._, to be made into suet
pudding or dumplings, and say 8-1/2_d._ for cabbages, parsnips, and
potatoes; altogether 3_s._ 9_d._ This would produce a substantial dinner
for ten persons in family, and would, moreover, as children do not
require much meat when they have pudding, admit of there being enough
left to help out the next day's dinner, with potatoes.


No. 2. HOW TO BOIL BEEF.

Put the beef into your three or four gallon pot, three parts filled with
cold water, and set it on the fire to boil; remove all the scum that
rises to the surface, and then let it boil gently on the hob; when the
meat has boiled an hour and is about half done, add the parsnips in a
net, and at the end of another half hour put in the cabbages, also in a
net. A piece of beef weighing five or six pounds will require about two
hours' gentle boiling to cook it thoroughly. The dumplings may, of
course, be boiled with the beef, etc. I may here observe that the
dumplings and vegetables, with a small quantity of the meat, would be
all-sufficient for the children's meal.


No. 3. ECONOMICAL POT LIQUOR SOUP.

A thrifty housewife will not require that I should tell her to save the
liquor in which the beef has been boiled; I will therefore take it for
granted that the next day she carefully removes the grease, which will
have become set firm on the top of the broth, into her fat pot; this
must be kept to make a pie-crust, or to fry potatoes, or any remains of
vegetables, onions, or fish. The liquor must be tasted, and if it is
found to be too salt, some water must be added to lessen its saltness,
and render it palatable. The pot containing the liquor must then be
placed on the fire to boil, and when the scum rises to the surface it
should be removed with a spoon. While the broth is boiling, put as many
piled-up table-spoonfuls of oatmeal as you have pints of liquor into a
basin; mix this with cold water into a smooth liquid batter, and then
stir it into the boiling soup; season with some pepper and a good pinch
of allspice, and continue stirring the soup with a stick or spoon on the
fire for about twenty minutes; you will then be able to serve out a
plentiful and nourishing meal to a large family at a cost of not more
than the price of the oatmeal.


No. 4. POTATO SOUP FOR SIX PERSONS.

Peel and chop four onions, and put them into a gallon saucepan, with two
ounces of dripping fat, or butter, or a bit of fat bacon; add rather
better than three quarts of water, and set the whole to boil on the fire
for ten minutes; then throw in four pounds of peeled and sliced-up
potatoes, pepper and salt, and with a wooden spoon stir the soup on the
fire for about twenty-five minutes, by which time the potatoes will be
done to a pulp, and the soup ready for dinner or breakfast.


No. 5. PEA SOUP FOR SIX PERSONS.

Cut up two and a-half pounds of pickled pork, or some pork cuttings, or
else the same quantity of scrag end of neck of mutton, or leg of beef,
and put any one of these kinds of meat into a pot with a gallon of
water, three pints of split or dried peas, previously soaked in cold
water over-night, two carrots, four onions, and a head of celery, all
chopped small; season with pepper, but _no_ salt, as the pork, if pork
is used, will season the soup sufficiently; set the whole to boil very
gently for at least three hours, taking care to skim it occasionally,
and do not forget that the peas, etc., must be stirred from the bottom
of the pot now and then; from three to four hours' gentle boiling will
suffice to cook a good mess of this most excellent and satisfying soup.
If fresh meat is used for this purpose, salt must be added to season it.
Dried mint may be strewn over the soup when eaten.


No. 6. ONION SOUP FOR SIX PERSONS.

Chop fine six onions, and fry them in a gallon saucepan with two ounces
of butter or dripping fat, stirring them continuously until they become
of a very light colour; then add six ounces of flour or oatmeal, and
moisten with three quarts of water; season with pepper and salt, and
stir the soup while boiling for twenty minutes, and when done, pour it
out into a pan or bowl containing slices of bread.


No. 7. BROTH MADE FROM BONES FOR SOUP.

Fresh bones are always to be purchased from butchers at about a farthing
per pound; they must be broken up small, and put into a boiling-pot with
a quart of water to every pound of bones; and being placed on the fire,
the broth must be well skimmed, seasoned with pepper and salt, a few
carrots, onions, turnips, celery, and thyme, and boiled very gently for
six hours; it is then to be strained off, and put back into the pot,
with any bits of meat or gristle which may have fallen from the bones
(the bones left are still worth a farthing per pound, and can be sold to
the bone-dealers). Let this broth be thickened with peasemeal or
oatmeal, in the proportion of a large table-spoonful to every pint of
broth, and stirred over the fire while boiling for twenty-five minutes,
by which time the soup will be done. It will be apparent to all good
housewives that, with a little trouble and good management, a savoury
and substantial meal may thus be prepared for a mere trifle.


No. 8. THICK MILK FOR BREAKFAST.

Milk, buttermilk, or even skim-milk, will serve for this purpose. To
every pint of milk, mix a piled-up table-spoonful of flour, and stir the
mixture while boiling on the fire for ten minutes; season with a little
salt, and eat it with bread or a boiled potato. This kind of food is
well adapted for the breakfast of women and children, and is far
preferable to a sloppy mess of tea, which comes to more money.


No. 9. OATMEAL PORRIDGE FOR SIX PERSONS.

To five pints of skim or buttermilk, add a couple of onions chopped
fine, and set them to boil on the fire; meanwhile, mix six
table-spoonfuls of oatmeal with a pint of milk or water very smoothly,
pour it into the boiling milk and onions, and stir the porridge on the
fire for ten minutes; season with salt to taste.


No. 10. OX-CHEEK SOUP.

An ox-cheek is always to be bought cheap; let it be thoroughly washed in
several waters, place it whole in a three gallon boiling-pot filled up
with water, and set it to boil on the fire; skim it well, season with
carrots, turnips, onions, celery, allspice, pepper, and salt; and allow
the whole to boil very gently by the side of the hob for about three
hours and a-half, by which time the ox-cheek, etc., will be done quite
tender; the cheek must then be taken out on to a dish, the meat removed
from the bone, and after being cut up in pieces, put back into the soup
again. Next mix smoothly twelve ounces of flour with a quart of cold
water, pour this into the soup, and stir the whole on the fire, keeping
it boiling for about twenty-five minutes longer; when it will be ready
for dinner. One ox-cheek, properly managed, will, by attending to the
foregoing instructions, furnish an ample quantity of substantial and
nutritious food, equal to the wants of a large family, for three days'
consumption.


No. 11. SHEEP'S-HEAD BROTH.

Get the butcher to split the sheep's head into halves, wash these clean,
and put them into a boiling-pot with two gallons of water; set this on
the fire to boil, skim it well, add carrots, turnips, onions, leeks,
celery, thyme or winter savory, season with pepper and salt; add a pint
of Patna rice, or Scotch barley; and all the whole to keep gently
boiling by the side of the fire for three hours, adding a little water
to make up for the deficiency in quantity occasioned by boiling.


No. 12. COW-HEEL BROTH.

Put a couple of cow-heels into a boiling-pot, with a pound of rice, a
dozen leeks washed free from grit and cut into pieces, and some coarsely
chopped parsley; fill up with six quarts of water, set the whole to boil
on the fire, skim it well, season with thyme, pepper, and salt, and
allow the whole to boil very gently on the hob for about two hours. You
will thus provide a savoury meal at small cost.


No. 13. BACON AND CABBAGE SOUP.

When it happens that you have a dinner consisting of bacon and cabbages,
you invariably throw away the liquor in which they have been boiled, or,
at the best, give it to the pigs, if you possess any; this is wrong, for
it is easy to turn it to a better account for your own use, by paying
attention to the following instructions, viz.:--Put your piece of bacon
on to boil in a pot with two gallons (more or less, according to the
number you have to provide for) of water, when it has boiled up, and has
been well skimmed, add the cabbages, kale, greens, or sprouts, whichever
may be used, well washed and split down, and also some parsnips and
carrots; season with pepper, but _no_ salt, as the bacon will season the
soup sufficiently; and when the whole has boiled together very gently
for about two hours, take up the bacon surrounded with the cabbage,
parsnips, and carrots, leaving a small portion of the vegetables in the
soup, and pour this into a large bowl containing slices of bread; eat
the soup first, and make it a rule that those who eat most soup are
entitled to the largest share of bacon.


No. 14. STEWED LEG OF BEEF.

Four pounds of leg or shin of beef cost about one shilling; cut this
into pieces the size of an egg, and fry them of a brown colour with a
little dripping fat, in a good sized saucepan, then shake in a large
handful of flour, add carrots and onions cut up in pieces the same as
the meat, season with pepper and salt, moisten with water enough to
cover in the whole, stir the stew on the fire till it boils, and then
set it on the hob to continue boiling very gently for about an hour and
a half, and you will then be able to enjoy an excellent dinner.


No. 15. COCKY LEEKY.

I hope that at some odd times you may afford yourselves an old hen or
cock; and when this occurs, this is the way in which I recommend that it
be cooked, viz.:--First pluck, draw, singe off the hairs, and tie the
fowl up in a plump shape; next, put it into a boiling-pot with a gallon
of water, and a pound of Patna rice, a dozen leeks cut in pieces, some
peppercorns and salt to season; boil the whole very gently for three
hours, and divide the fowl to be eaten with the soup, which will prove
not only nourishing but invigorating to the system.


No. 16. ROAST FOWL AND GRAVY.

Let us hope that at Christmas, or some other festive season, you may
have to dress a fowl or turkey for your dinner. On such occasions I
would recommend the following method:--First, draw the fowl, reserving
the gizzard and liver to be tucked under the wings; truss the fowl with
skewers, and tie it to the end of a skein of worsted, which is to be
fastened to a nail stuck in the chimney-piece, so that the fowl may
dangle rather close to the fire, in order to roast it. Baste the fowl,
while it is being roasted, with butter, or some kind of grease, and when
nearly done, sprinkle it with a little flour and salt, and allow the
fowl to attain a bright yellow-brown colour before you take it up. Then
place it on its dish, and pour some brown gravy over it.


No. 17. THIS IS THE BROWN GRAVY FOR THE FOWL.

Chop up an onion, and fry it with a sprig of thyme and a bit of butter,
and when it is brown, add a good tea-spoonful of moist sugar and a drop
of water, and boil all together on the fire until the water is reduced,
and the sugar begins to bake of a dark brown colour. It must then be
stirred on the fire for three minutes longer; after which moisten it
with half-a-pint of water, add a little pepper and salt; boil all
together for five minutes, and strain the gravy over the fowl, etc.


No. 18. BREAD SAUCE FOR A ROAST FOWL.

Chop a small onion or shalot fine, and boil it in a pint of milk for
five minutes; then add about ten ounces of crumb of bread, a bit of
butter, pepper and salt to season; stir the whole on the fire for ten
minutes, and eat this bread sauce with roast fowl or turkey.


No. 19. EGG SAUCE FOR ROAST FOWLS, ETC.

Boil two or three eggs for about eight minutes; remove the shells, cut
up each egg into about ten pieces of equal size, and put them into some
butter-sauce made as follows:--viz., Knead two ounces of flour with one
ounce and-a-half of butter; add half-a-pint of water, pepper and salt to
season, and stir the sauce on the fire until it begins to boil; then mix
in the pieces of chopped hard-boiled eggs.


No. 20. PORK CHOPS, GRILLED OR BROILED.

Score the rind of each chop by cutting through the rind at distances of
half-an-inch apart; season the chops with pepper and salt, and place
them on a clean gridiron over a clear fire to broil; the chops must be
turned over every two minutes until they are done; this will take about
fifteen minutes. The chops are then to be eaten plain, or, if
convenient, with brown gravy, made as shown in No. 17.


No. 21. SHARP SAUCE FOR BROILED MEATS.

Chop fine an onion and a pennyworth of mixed pickles; put these into a
saucepan with half-a-gill of vinegar, a tea-spoonful of mustard, a small
bit of butter, a large table-spoonful of bread-raspings, and pepper and
salt to season; boil all together on the fire for at least six minutes;
then add a gill of water, and allow the sauce to boil again for ten
minutes longer. This sauce will give an appetizing relish to the
coarsest meats or fish when broiled or fried, and also when you are
intending to make any cold meat into a hash or stew. In the latter case,
the quantity of water and raspings must be doubled.


No. 22. ROAST VEAL, STUFFED.

A piece of the shoulder, breast, or chump-end of the loin of veal, is
the cheapest part for you, and whichever of these pieces you may happen
to buy, should be seasoned with the following stuffing:--To eight ounces
of bruised crumb of bread add four ounces of chopped suet, shalot,
thyme, marjoram, and winter savory, all chopped fine; two eggs, pepper
and salt to season; mix all these ingredients into a firm compact kind
of paste, and use this stuffing to fill a hole or pocket which you will
have cut with a knife in some part of the piece of veal, taking care to
fasten it in with a skewer. If you intend roasting the veal, and should
not possess what is called a bottle-jack, nor even a Dutch oven, in that
case the veal should be suspended by, and fastened to, the end of a
twisted skein of worsted, made fast at the upper end by tying it to a
large nail driven into the centre of the mantelpiece for that purpose.
This contrivance will enable you to roast the veal by dangling it before
your fire; the exact time for cooking it must depend upon its weight. A
piece of veal weighing four pounds would require rather more than an
hour to cook it thoroughly before your small fire.


No. 23. VEAL CUTLETS AND BACON.

You may sometimes have a chance to purchase a few trimmings or cuttings
of veal, or a small piece from the chump end of the loin, which you can
cut up in thin slices, and after seasoning them with pepper and salt,
and rolling them in flour, they are to be fried in the fat that remains
from some slices of bacon which you shall have previously fried; and,
after placing the fried veal and bacon in its dish, shake a
table-spoonful of flour in the frying-pan; add a few drops of ketchup or
vinegar and a gill of water; stir all together on the fire to boil for
five minutes, and pour this sauce over the cutlets. A dish of cutlets of
any kind of meat may be prepared as above.


No. 24. A PUDDING MADE OF SMALL BIRDS.

Industrious and intelligent boys who live in the country, are mostly
well up in the cunning art of catching small birds at odd times during
the winter months. So, my young friends, when you have been so fortunate
as to succeed in making a good catch of a couple of dozen of birds, you
must first pluck them free from feathers, cut off their heads and claws,
and pick out their gizzards from their sides with the point of a small
knife, and then hand the birds over to your mother, who, by following
these instructions, will prepare a famous pudding for your dinner or
supper. First, fry the birds whole with a little butter, shalot,
parsley, thyme, and winter savory, all chopped small, pepper and salt to
season; and when the birds are half done, shake in a small handful of
flour, add rather better than a gill of water, stir the whole on the
fire while boiling for ten minutes, and when the stew of birds is nearly
cold, pour it all into a good-sized pudding basin, which has been
ready-lined with either a suet and flour crust, or else a
dripping-crust, cover the pudding in with a piece of the paste, and
either bake or boil it for about an hour and-a-half.


No. 25. BAKED PIG'S HEAD.

Split the pig's head into halves, sprinkle them with pepper and salt,
and lay them with the rind part uppermost upon a bed of sliced onions in
a baking dish. Next bruise eight ounces of stale bread-crumb, and mix it
with four ounces of chopped suet, twelve sage leaves chopped fine,
pepper and salt to season, and sprinkle this seasoning all over the
surface of the pig's head; add one ounce of butter and a gill of vinegar
to the onions, and bake the whole for about an hour and-a-half, basting
the pig's head occasionally with the liquor.


No. 26. BAKED GOOSE.

Pluck and pick out all the stubble feathers thoroughly clean, draw the
goose, cut off the head and neck, and also the feet and wings, which
must be scalded to enable you to remove the pinion feathers from the
wings and the rough skin from the feet; split and scrape the inside of
the gizzard, and carefully cut out the gall from the liver. These
giblets well stewed, as shown in No. 62, will serve to make a pie for
another day's dinner. Next stuff the goose in manner following,
viz.:--First put six potatoes to bake in the oven, or even in a Dutch
oven; and, while they are being baked, chop six onions with four apples
and twelve sage leaves, and fry these in a saucepan with two ounces of
butter, pepper and salt; when the whole is slightly fried, mix it with
the pulp of the six baked potatoes, and use this very nice stuffing to
fill the inside of the goose. The goose being stuffed, place it upon an
iron trivet in a baking dish containing peeled potatoes and a few
apples; add half-a-pint of water, pepper and salt, shake some flour over
the goose, and bake it for about an hour and a-half.


No. 27. BAKED SUCKING PIG.

Let the pig be stuffed in the same manner as directed for a goose, as
shown in the preceding Number; score it all over crosswise, rub some
grease or butter upon it, place it upon a trivet in a dish containing
peeled potatoes and a few sliced onions, season with pepper and salt;
add half-a-pint of water, and bake the pig for about two hours, basting
it frequently with its own dripping, or, a bit of butter tied up in a
piece of muslin.


No. 28. BAKED OR ROAST DUCKS.

These are to be dressed in the same way as directed for dressing geese.


No. 29. HOW TO MAKE THE MOST OF A PIG, AFTER IT IS KILLED.

Cottagers sometimes feed a pig for their own consumption, and,
therefore, in the hope that many of you may have it in your power to do
so, I will give you proper instructions as to the best way to make the
most of it. First, when the pig is killed, should the hair or bristles
be wet, wipe them dry with a wisp of hay or straw, and having laid it on
the ground upon a narrow bed of dry straw three inches in thickness, and
laid some loose straw all over it, set fire to it, and as the upper
straw burns out, lay on another covering of loose straw, and, by the
time this has burnt out, all the hairs of the upper part of the pig will
probably be singed off, if not, burn a little more straw upon the
remaining parts; and, on turning the pig over, should it be found that
any of the hairs yet remain, let them be singed off with a lighted wisp
of straw. Throw a pail of water over the pig, and scrape it clean and
dry with an old knife. The next thing to be done, is to insert a stout
stick, pointed at the ends, into the hocks of the hind legs; fasten a
strong cord to the stick, and hoist up the pig so as to enable you to
stand up and finish your work with ease to yourself. With a sharp knife
rip up the belly, and stretch out the flaps with two sticks to enable
you to throw in some water to cleanse the pig's inside, having first
removed the guts, etc.; hang up the pluck to cool, and also the
chitterlings, and loose fat; and, after thoroughly wiping the pig, let
it hang in the draught to become quite cold. You then split the pig in
halves, commencing between the hind quarters; and, when this is done,
first cut off the hocks, then the hams, and the head; next cleverly
remove, slicing away, what is called the spare-rib--that is, the lean
meat about the ribs--reaching up about four inches toward the breast
part, and lay the spare-ribs aside to be sold or reserved for your own
use. The head may be baked as shown in No. 25. The spare-rib may be
dressed as in No. 27.


No. 30. HOW TO CURE HAMS.

To six pounds of common salt, add four ounces of saltpetre, eight ounces
of treacle, two ounces of salprunella, winter savory, bay-leaves, thyme,
marjoram, and a good table-spoonful of allspice, bruise all these things
well together, and thoroughly rub them over and into the hams, _with
very clean hands_. The rubbing-in must be repeated four or five
successive mornings, and the hams must remain in this pickle for ten
days longer.


No. 31. HOW TO SMOKE HAMS.

When the hams have been well pickled, as shown in the preceding Number,
they must be pressed between boards with heavy stones to render them
flat; the hams should remain in press for twenty-four hours; and, at the
end of that time, must be well rubbed all over with peasemeal mixed with
a little salt; they are then to be smoked in a close shed or in the
chimney, burning for that purpose some branches of juniper or any other
wood, and some sawdust. The smoking must last five days. The hams, when
sufficiently smoked, must be kept in a cool place. They will not be ripe
for cooking before six months after their curing. Remember that a couple
of well-cured hams, kept in reserve for a case of need, will always
prove a ready means to realize some twenty-five shillings towards paying
the rent, etc.


No. 32. HOW TO CURE BACON.

Mind that your pickling-trough is well scalded out before using it for
pickling the bacon. Allow at the rate of four ounces of salt to every
pound of meat, and to every ten pounds of salt six ounces of saltpetre,
two ounces of salprunella, and eight ounces of sugar; rub the salt,
etc., well into the bacon every morning for twelve successive days; and
at the end of that time, let the sides of bacon be pressed between
boards with heavy stones placed upon them to keep them flat; and at the
end of twenty-four hours, rub them over with peasemeal in which there
has been mixed a little salt, and smoke the bacon in the same manner as
the hams; and thus, by timely thriftiness, you will be provided with a
meat dinner for a long while.


No. 33. HOW TO DISPOSE OF THE PIG'S PLUCK.

See Nos. 72 and 73.


No. 34. HOW TO MAKE PORK SAUSAGES.

Take equal parts of fat and lean meat, such as the inferior end of the
spare-ribs and some of the loose fat; chop these well together, adding a
few sage leaves, a little thyme, pepper and salt, and one or two eggs;
when the whole is thoroughly mixed and chopped fine, use a sprinkle of
flour on a table or dresser, for the purpose of rolling the sausages
into shape of the size and form of a man's thumb. These sausages may be
fried in the ordinary way.


No. 35. BLACK PUDDINGS.

When a pig is killed, the blood should be caught in a pan, and a little
salt must be stirred in with it while yet warm, to prevent its
coagulation or thickening. This will serve to make you some hog's
puddings, excellent things in their way, and for the preparation of
which you must attend to the following instructions, viz.:--To every
pound of blood, add eight ounces of fat cut up in small squares, two
ounces of rice or grits, boiled quite soft in milk; season with pepper
and salt, chopped sage, thyme, and winter savory, and some chopped
onions boiled soft in a little milk or water; mix all these things well
together, and use a tin funnel for filling in the cleansed guts with the
preparation, taking care to tie the one end of each piece of gut with
string, to prevent waste. The puddings being thus prepared, tie them in
links, each pudding measuring about six inches in length, and when all
are tied, let them be dropped into a pot containing boiling-water, just
taken off the fire, and allow them to remain in this until they become
set, or slightly firm; the puddings must then be carefully lifted out,
and hung to a nail driven into the wall, to drain them from all excess
of moisture; and before they are fried or broiled, they must be slightly
scored with a sharp knife, to prevent them from bursting while they are
being cooked.


No. 36. HOW TO MELT DOWN THE SEAM, OR LOOSE FAT.

Cut up the seam in small pieces, put it into a pot with about a gill of
water, and set it over a slow fire to melt down, stirring it frequently
with a spoon to prevent it from burning; and as soon as all is melted,
let it be strained off into a jar for use. This will produce what is
called lard, and will serve for making lard cakes, pie or pudding
crusts, and also for general cooking purposes, instead of butter, etc.


No. 37. ITALIAN CHEESE.

This is prepared by chopping up the whole of the pig's pluck, the
chitterlings, and a couple of pounds of the fat; mix this in a pan with
seasoning composed of chopped sage, thyme, winter savory, allspice,
pepper, and salt, and with it fill earthen pots or jars having lids to
them; bake the contents in moderate heat; or if you have no oven of your
own, send them to the baker's. A jar containing two pounds would require
about an hour and three-quarters' baking. Italian cheese is to be eaten
cold, spread upon bread.


No. 38. PIG'S FEET.

These are to be well salted for about four days, and then boiled in
plenty of water for about three hours; they may be eaten either hot or
cold.


No. 39. CURRIED RICE.

Boil one or more pounds of rice, as directed in No. 92, and drain all
the water from it; slice some onions very thin, and fry them brown with
a little butter; then add the boiled rice, a spoonful of curry-powder,
and a little salt to season; mix all together. This is excellent with
boiled or fried fish.


No. 40. A PLAIN RICE PUDDING.

To every quart of milk add six ounces of rice, one ounce of brown sugar,
a pinch of allspice, and ditto of salt; put all these in a proper sized
pie-dish, with one ounce of butter, and set the pudding to bake for one
hour and-a-half. When the pudding has been in the oven half an hour,
stir it round with a fork.


No. 41. A GROUND RICE PUDDING.

Ingredients, eight ounces of ground rice, three pints of skim milk, one
ounce of butter, four ounces of sugar, a pinch of allspice or bit of
lemon-peel, a pinch of salt, and two or three eggs; mix all the above
ingredients (except the eggs) in a saucepan, and stir them on the fire
till the batter boils; then beat up the eggs with a fork in a basin, and
mix them well into the rice batter, and pour the whole into a
well-greased pie-dish, and bake the pudding for an hour.


No. 42. A BREAD PUDDING FOR A FAMILY.

Ingredients, a two-pound loaf, two quarts of milk, two ounces of butter,
four ounces of sugar, four ounces of plums or currants, three eggs, a
piece of lemon-peel chopped, and a spoonful of salt. Divide the loaf
into four equal-sized pieces, and soak them in boiling-water for twenty
minutes, then squeeze out the water, and put the bread into a saucepan
with the milk, butter, sugar, lemon-peel, and salt, and stir all
together on the fire till it boils; next add the beaten eggs and the
currants; pour the pudding into a proper sized greased baking-dish, and
bake it for an hour and a-quarter.


No. 43. A BATTER AND FRUIT PUDDING.

Ingredients, two quarts of milk, one pound of flour, four eggs, eight
ounces of sugar, one quart of fruit (either plums, gooseberries,
currants, &c.), one ounce of butter, a good pinch of salt. First, mix
the flour, eggs, sugar, salt, and a pint of the milk, by working all
together in a basin or pan, with a spoon, and when quite smooth, add the
remainder of the milk; work the batter thoroughly, and pour it into a
large pie-dish, greased with the butter; add the fruit, and bake the
pudding for an hour and a-quarter.


No. 44. A TREACLE PUDDING.

Ingredients, two pounds of flour, twelve ounces of treacle, six ounces
of suet or dripping fat, a quarter of an ounce of baking-powder, a pinch
of allspice, a little salt, one pint of milk, or water. Mix the whole of
the above-named ingredients in a pan, into a firm compact paste; tie it
up in a well-greased and floured pudding-cloth; boil the pudding for at
least two hours and a-half, and when done, cut it in slices, and pour a
little sweetened melted butter over it.


No. 45. APPLE PUDDING.

Ingredients, one pound and a-half of flour, six ounces of suet chopped
fine, two pounds of peeled apples, four ounces of sugar, a little salt,
and three gills of water. Mix the flour, suet, and salt with three
quarters of a pint of water into a firm paste; roll this out with flour
shaken over the table, using a rolling-pin to roll it out; and line a
greased cloth, which you have spread in a hollow form within a large
basin, with the rolled-out paste; fill up the hollow part of the paste
with the peeled apples, gather up the sides of the paste in a
purse-like form, and twist them firmly together; tie up the pudding in
the cloth, boil it in plenty of boiling water for two hours, and when it
is turned out of the cloth on to its dish, cut out a round piece from
the top, and stir in the sugar.


No. 46. RICE AND APPLES.

Ingredients, one pound of rice, twelve apples, two ounces of sugar. Tie
up the rice very loose in a pudding-cloth, so as to admit that while
boiling it may have sufficient room to swell out to five times its
original quantity. While the rice is boiling, which will take about one
hour, peel the apples, and put them in a saucepan with nearly
half-a-pint of water, a bit of butter, lemon-peel, and the sugar, and
stew them on the fire till dissolved, stirring them while boiling for a
few minutes. When your rice pudding is done and turned out on its dish,
pour the apple-sauce over it. This cheap kind of rice pudding may also
be eaten with all kinds of fruits, prepared in the same manner as herein
directed for apples.


No. 47. BROWN AND POLSON PUDDING.

Ingredients, six ounces of Brown and Polson's prepared Indian corn, two
quarts of milk, two ounces of sugar, a bit of cinnamon or lemon-peel, a
pinch of salt, three eggs. Mix all the above ingredients (except the
eggs) in a saucepan, and stir them on the fire till they come to a boil;
then add the eggs beat up; mix thoroughly, pour the batter into a
pie-dish greased with butter, and bake the pudding for one hour. Brown
and Polson's prepared Indian corn is a most excellent and economical
article of food, equal to arrow-root, and will prove, on trial, to be
both substantial and nutritive, and also easy of digestion to the most
delicate stomachs.


No. 48. BROWN AND POLSON FRUIT PUDDING.

Prepare the pudding batter as indicated in the foregoing Number, and
when you have poured one-half of it into the greased pie-dish, strew
about two pounds of any kind of fruit upon this, such as gooseberries,
currants, plums, cherries, etc., and then pour the remainder of the
batter all over the fruit. Bake the pudding an hour and a quarter.
Peeled apples or pears may be used for the same purpose.


No. 49. BROWN AND POLSON THICK MILK.

Ingredients, three ounces of Brown and Polson's prepared Indian corn,
one quart of milk, one ounce of sugar, a bit of cinnamon, a pinch of
salt. Mix all the above-named ingredients together in a saucepan, and
stir them constantly while boiling on the fire for ten minutes. This
thick milk is most excellent for children's breakfast or supper, and
would be found both cheaper and better for their health than a sloppy
mess of tea.


No. 50. POTATO PUDDING.

Ingredients, three pounds of potatoes, two quarts of milk, two ounces of
butter, two ounces of sugar, a bit of lemon-peel, a good pinch of salt,
and three eggs. First, bake the potatoes, if you have means to do so, or
let them be either steamed or boiled; when done, scoop out all their
floury pulp without waste into a large saucepan, and immediately beat it
up vigorously with a large fork or a spoon; then add all the remainder
of the above-named ingredients (excepting the eggs), stir the potato
batter carefully on the fire till it comes to a boil, then add the
beaten eggs; pour the batter into a greased pie-dish, and bake the
pudding for an hour in your oven, if you have one; if not, send it to
the baker's.


No. 51. YEAST DUMPLINGS.

Ingredients, two pounds of flour, a halfpenny worth of yeast, a pinch of
salt, one pint of milk or water. Put the flour into a pan, with your
fist hollow out a hole in the centre of the flour, place the yeast and
salt at the bottom, then add the milk (which should be lukewarm), and
with your clean hand gradually mix the whole well together, and work the
dough perfectly smooth and elastic. The pan containing the dough must
then be covered over with a cloth, and in the winter must be placed on a
stool in a corner near the fire, that it may rise, or increase in size
to nearly double its original quantity. When the dough has risen in a
satisfactory manner, which will take about an hour, dip your hand in
some flour and work it, or rather knead it together, without allowing it
to stick to your hands; divide it into about twelve equal parts; roll
these with flour into balls, and as you turn them out of hand, drop them
gently into a pot on the fire, half full of _boiling_ water; allow the
water to boil up once as you drop each dumpling in separately, before
you attempt to put in another, in order to prevent the dumplings from
sticking together, as this accident would produce a very unsatisfactory
result, and spoil your dinner. Yeast dumplings must not boil too fast,
as then they might boil out of the pot. They will require about
half-an-hour's boiling to cook them; they must be eaten immediately,
with a little butter or dripping, and salt or sugar.


No. 52. NORFOLK DUMPLINGS.

Ingredients, two pounds of flour, a pint of milk, a good pinch of salt.
Let all these ingredients be well mixed in a pan, and after dividing the
paste into twelve equal parts, roll these into balls, drop each of them
into a pot half full of _boiling_ water on the fire, and allow the
dumplings to continue boiling rather fast for half-an-hour, at the end
of which time they will be done. They should then be eaten while hot,
with a little butter or dripping, and either sugar, treacle, or salt.
Norfolk dumplings are most excellent things to eke out an insufficient
supply of baked meat for the dinner of a large family of children.


No. 53. STEWED EELS.

First skin, gut, and trim away the fins from the eels, and then cut them
into pieces three inches long; put these into a saucepan, add a bit of
butter, a spoonful of flour, some chopped parsley, pepper and salt, a
little mushroom ketchup, and enough water to cover the pieces of eel;
put them on the fire to boil gently for about ten minutes, shaking them
round in the saucepan occasionally until they are done.


No. 54. STEWED OYSTERS.

Put the oysters, with their liquor and a little water or milk, into a
saucepan; add a bit of butter kneaded, that is, well mixed with a
table-spoonful of flour; pepper, and a little salt; stir the oysters
over the fire until they have gently boiled for about five minutes, and
then pour them into a dish containing some slices of toasted bread.


No. 55. STEWED MUSCLES, OR MUSSELS.

Thoroughly wash the muscles, and pull off any weeds there may be hanging
to them; next put them in a clean saucepan with a little water, and salt
enough to season, and set them on the fire to boil, tossing them
occasionally, until you find that their shells begin to open; they must
then be taken off the fire, and their liquor poured off into a basin.
Next, after removing one of the shells from each muscle, put them back
into the saucepan; add the liquor, a bit of butter, a spoonful of
flour, some pepper, chopped parsley, and a little drop of vinegar, toss
the whole over the fire until the muscles have boiled five minutes, and
then you will enjoy a treat for supper. Cockles and whelks are cooked in
the same way.


No. 56. BAKED BEEF AND POTATOES.

The cheapest pieces of beef, suitable for baking or roasting, consist of
the thick part of the ribs, cut from towards the shoulder, the mouse
buttock and gravy pieces, and also what is commonly called the chuck of
beef, which consists of the throat boned and tied up with string in the
form of a small round. Whichever piece of beef you may happen to buy, it
should be well sprinkled over with pepper, salt, and flour, and placed
upon a small iron trivet in a baking dish containing peeled potatoes and
about half-a-pint of water, and either baked in your own oven or else
sent to the baker's. If you bake your meat in your own oven, remember
that it must be turned over on the trivet every twenty minutes, and that
you must be careful to baste it all over now and then with the fat which
runs from it into the dish, using a spoon for that purpose. It would be
very economical if, when you have baked meat for dinner, you were always
to make a Yorkshire pudding to be baked under it. There are baking
dishes made with a parting down the middle which just suit this purpose.
In this case the potatoes are put in one part and the pudding in the
other part.


No. 57. YORKSHIRE PUDDING.

To one pound of flour add three pints of skim milk, two eggs, nutmeg and
salt; mix smoothly, and pour the pudding into the greased dish, and bake
it under the meat, as recommended above.


No. 58. BAKED SUET PUDDING.

To one pound of flour add six ounces of chopped suet, three pints of
skim milk, nutmeg and salt; mix thoroughly and smoothly, and bake the
pudding in the dish under the meat.


No. 59. TOAD IN THE HOLE.

To make this a cheap dinner, you should buy 6_d._ or 1_s._ worth of bits
or pieces of any kind of meat, which are to be had cheapest at night
when the day's sale is over. The pieces of meat should be first
carefully overlooked, to ascertain if there be any necessity to pare
away some tainted part, or perhaps a fly-blow, as this, if left on any
one piece of meat, would tend to impart a bad taste to the whole, and
spoil the dish. You then rub a little flour, pepper, and salt all over
the meat, and fry it brown with a little butter or fat in the
frying-pan; when done, put it with the fat in which it has been fried
into a baking-dish containing some Yorkshire or suet pudding batter,
made as directed at Nos. 57 and 58, and bake the toad-in-the-hole for
about an hour and a half, or else send it to the baker's.


No. 60. BOILED SHOULDER OF MUTTON WITH ONIONS.

Put the shoulder of mutton to boil in your two-gallon pot, with a
handful of salt and plenty of water, allow it to boil gently for about
two hours, and when done, and placed on its dish, smother it over with
the following sauce:--Chop six or eight large onions, and boil them with
a pint of water for twenty minutes, by which time the water must be
reduced to half a pint; then add two ounces of butter, a pint of milk,
four ounces of flour, pepper, and salt, and stir the sauce whilst
boiling for ten minutes. A shoulder of mutton for boiling is all the
better for its being salted for two or three days previous to its being
cooked.


No. 61. MEAT PIE.

Of whatever kind, let the pieces of meat be first fried brown over a
quick fire, in a little fat or butter, and seasoned with pepper and
salt; put these into a pie-dish with chopped onions, a few slices of
half-cooked potatoes, and enough water just to cover the meat. Cover the
dish with a crust, made with two pounds of flour and six ounces of
butter, or lard, or fat dripping, and just enough water to knead it into
a stiff kind of dough or paste, and then bake it for about an hour and
a-half.


No. 62. GIBLET PIE.

Giblets of fowls are always to be bought at a low price at most
poulterers'; when you have a mind to lay out 6_d._ or 1_s._ in this way,
first scald the necks and feet, to remove the feathers from the head and
the rough skin from the feet; split the gizzard and scrape out the
stones, etc., and the yellow skin therefrom, and when the giblets are
thoroughly cleaned, put them into a saucepan with some thyme, winter
savory, chopped onions, pepper and salt, and about a quart of water, and
set them on the fire to stew very gently for an hour, by which time the
liquor should be boiled down to half that quantity; then add two ounces
of flour and a little mushroom ketchup; stir all together, and put the
giblets into a pie-dish; cover this over with a dripping crust, and bake
it for about an hour and a quarter.


No. 63. A FISH PIE.

Cut up any kind of fish into pieces the size of an egg; season these
with chopped parsley, thyme, a little onion, pepper and salt, and put
them into a pie-dish, with a pint of water, well mixed with three
ounces of flour and a little mushroom ketchup; cover the pie with a
flour crust, or else with stiff mashed potatoes, and bake it for an hour
and a quarter.


No. 64. POTATO PIE.

Slice up four onions and boil them in a saucepan with two ounces of
butter, a quart of water, and pepper and salt, for five minutes; then
add four pounds of potatoes, peeled and cut in slices; stew the whole
until the potatoes are done, and pour them into a pie-dish; cover this
with stiff mashed potatoes, and bake the pie of a light brown colour.


No. 65. BACON ROLL-PUDDING.

Boil a pound of fat bacon for half an hour, and then cut it up into thin
slices. Peel six apples and one onion, and cut them in slices. Make two
pounds of flour into a stiff dough, roll it out thin; first lay the
slices of bacon out all over this, and then upon the slices of bacon
spread out the slices of apples and the slices of onion; roll up the
paste so as to secure the bacon, etc., in it; place the bolster pudding
in a cloth, tied at each end, and let it boil for two hours in a
two-gallon pot, with plenty of water.


No. 66. RABBIT PUDDING.

Skin and wash the rabbit, and cut it up in pieces; fry these brown with
a bit of butter, season with chopped onions, parsley, and winter savory,
pepper and salt, shake in a good spoonful of flour, moisten with a
little ketchup and a gill of water; toss the saucepan about on the fire
while the pieces of rabbit boil for about ten minutes, and then pour the
whole into a proper sized basin lined with a suet or dripping crust; let
the pudding be covered in with some of the paste, put into a
baking-dish half full of hot water, and placed in the oven, to bake for
an hour and a-half.


No. 67. STEWED OX KIDNEY.

Cut up the kidney in thin slices, fry them brown with a bit of butter or
fat in a frying-pan, over a brisk fire, season with chopped parsley,
shalot, pepper and salt, shake in a good table-spoonful of flour, add a
few drops of vinegar, and nearly half a pint of water; stir the whole on
the fire, while it boils, very gently, for a quarter of an hour; this,
with a dish of well-boiled or baked potatoes, will produce a cheap and
excellent dinner sufficient for six persons.


No. 68. BAKED BULLOCK'S HEART.

Wash and wipe the heart, cut it into four pieces, season these with
pepper and salt, chopped thyme, and bay-leaves, add about two ounces of
dripping, eight onions cut in slices, and four parsnips cut also in
slices; let all this be placed in an earthen pot, with a pint of water,
and the lid being put on, set the stew in the oven to bake for two
hours.


No. 69. BULLOCK'S HEART STUFFED.

Chop fine four onions and twelve sage-leaves; put these into a saucepan
with a bit of fat or butter, and fry them for a few minutes on the fire;
then add eight ounces of crumb of bread, soaked in milk or water, pepper
and salt; stir this stuffing on the fire for a few minutes, add one egg,
put the stuffing inside the bullock's heart, place a round of greased
paper on the stuffing, and fasten it on with four wooden twigs. Next,
put the stuffed heart upon an iron trivet in a baking dish, containing
peeled potatoes, two ounces of dripping or butter, and half a pint of
water; season well with pepper and salt, and while baking let the heart
be frequently basted with the fat from the dish. In case you have no
oven, send it to the baker's.


No. 70. STEWED SHEEP'S TROTTERS.

Sheep's trotters are sold ready cleaned and very cheap at all tripe
shops. When about to cook them, by way of a treat, for supper, or
otherwise, let them be put on in two quarts of water and milk, seasoned
with peppercorns, salt, a good sprig of thyme, and a wine-glassful of
vinegar, and set them to boil very gently on the fire for three hours,
at least. When the trotters are done quite tender, skim off all the
grease, and boil down the liquor to a pint; then add two ounces of
flour, mixed with a gill of milk, some chopped parsley, and one ounce of
butter; stir all together while boiling on the fire for ten minutes, and
pour out into the dish.


No. 71. BAKED SHEEP'S HEADS.

Buy a couple of sheep's heads, get the butcher to split them for you,
place them in an earthen baking-dish, with two ounces of dripping, some
chopped shalots, thyme, bay-leaf, winter savory, pepper and salt, and a
good pinch of allspice; moisten with a quart of cider, or water, strew a
coating of bread-raspings all over the surface of the heads, and bake
them for two hours.


No. 72. SHEEP'S PLUCK.

A sheep's pluck, properly cooked, will furnish a meat dinner enough for
twelve persons, at a very moderate cost. Cut the whole of the pluck,
consisting of the heart, liver, lights, etc., into rather thick slices,
and season them well with pepper, salt, allspice, thyme, and winter
savory; grease the bottom of a baking-dish with two ounces of dripping,
lay a bed of slices of onions upon this, and then place the slices of
pluck, already seasoned, upon the onions; moisten with water enough to
reach half-way up the meat, strew a thick coating of bread-raspings all
over the top, and bake the savoury mess for an hour and a-half.


No. 73. BELGIAN FAGGOTS.

These may be prepared with sheep's pluck, or even with bullock's liver,
and other similar parts of meat; but a pig's pluck is preferable for the
purpose. Chop up the heart, liver, lights, and the fat crow; season well
with pepper, salt, allspice, thyme, sage, and shalots, and divide this
sausage-meat into balls the size of an apple, which must be each secured
in shape with a piece of pig's caul fastened with a wooden twig, or
skewer, and placed in rows in a tin baking-dish, to be baked for about
half an hour in a brisk oven. When the faggots are done, place them on
some well-boiled cabbages, chopped up, in an earthen dish, and having
poured the grease from the faggots over all, set them in the oven to
stew gently for half an hour.


No. 74. FRIED STEAKS AND ONIONS.

Season the steaks with pepper and salt, and when done brown on both
sides, without being overdone, place them in a dish before the fire
while you fry some sliced onions in the fat which remains in the pan; as
soon as the onions are done, and laid upon the steaks, shake a spoonful
of flour in the pan, add a gill of water and a few drops of vinegar;
give this gravy a boil up on the fire, and pour it over the steaks, etc.


No. 75. STEWED STEAKS.

Fry the steaks brown over a very brisk fire, without allowing them to be
hardly half done, and place them in a saucepan with onions, carrots,
turnips, and celery, all cut in pieces about the size of a pigeon's egg;
season with thyme, pepper, and salt, and two ounces of flour; moisten
with a quart of water, and stir the stew on the fire till it boils, and
then set it by the side of the fire on the hob, to simmer very gently
for an hour and a-half. It will then be ready for dinner.


No. 76. STEWED SAUSAGES.

First, prick your sausages well all over with a fork, and soak them in
very hot water, for two or three minutes, to swell them out; next, roll
them in flour, and fry them brown without overdoing them, as that
renders them dry, and spoils them. When the sausages are done and put on
a plate, fry some slices of bread, and put these on a dish; then put the
sausages on the fried bread, and shake a spoonful of flour in the pan;
add a pennyworth of chopped mixed pickles, a gill of water, and a little
pepper and salt; give this gravy a boil up, and pour it over the
sausages.


No. 77. PIG'S FRY.

A pig's fry consists of the heart, liver, lights, and some of the
chitterlings; these are to be first cut up in slices, then seasoned with
pepper and salt, rolled in a little flour, and fried with some kind of
grease in the frying-pan. As the pieces are fried, place them on their
dish to keep hot before the fire, and when all is done, throw some
chopped onions and sage leaves into the pan, to be fried of a light
colour; add a very little flour, pepper, and salt, a gill of water, and
a few drops of vinegar; boil up this gravy, and pour it over the pig's
fry.


No. 78. BEEFSTEAKS, PLAIN.

When you happen to have a clear fire, the steaks may be cooked on a
gridiron over the fire; the steaks must be turned on the gridiron every
two or three minutes. This precaution assists very much in rendering the
meat more palatable and tender, as it is by this frequent turning over
of the meat while broiling, that the juices are not allowed to run off
in waste, but are re-absorbed by the meat. When the steaks are cooked,
rub them over with a small bit of butter, season with pepper and salt. A
little chopped shalot sprinkled over steaks, imparts an extra relish.


No. 79. MUTTON CHOPS, OR STEAKS.

Mutton chops, properly speaking, are an expensive affair; but what I
recommend you to buy is, the chump end of the loin of mutton, which is
always to be had much cheaper. This weighs about one pound, at 6_d._,
and would cut into about three, or perhaps four steaks or chops; let
these be broiled in the same manner as recommended for beefsteaks.


No. 80. KIDNEY PUDDING.

Prepare an ox kidney as shown in No. 67, and use this to fill a good
sized pudding basin, which you shall have previously lined with a
dripping or suet crust; cover the meat in by placing a rolled-out piece
of the paste on the top, fasten it by pressing the two edges of the
paste together, tie the pudding up in a cloth, and take care to place
the bottom of the pudding-basin downward in the pot in which it is to be
boiled. It will take about two hours to boil a good sized pudding of
this kind; when you take it out of the pot, be very careful not to run
the fork through the crust, and pay great attention how you handle the
pudding while removing the cloth, so as not to spill or waste the gravy
it contains, as that would go very far towards spoiling the pudding you
have had all the trouble to prepare.


No. 81. HASHED MEATS.

I strongly recommend that you never allow yourselves to be persuaded,
that cold meat dinners are cheap dinners; just the reverse of this
assumption is the fact. And, let me tell you, that those who make the
former assertion, do so only because they know no better, and as an
excuse for their idleness. I am well aware that in your homes it is not
a common every-day occurrence for you to dress a large joint of meat,
from which enough would be left for one or more days' dinner; but still
it may, and does sometimes occur, that you have cold meat at your
disposal, upon which you may exercise your knowledge in domestic
economy. Besides, some of you who are living close to noblemen and
gentlemen's mansions in the country, or otherwise, may perhaps stand a
chance of now and then receiving a donation of this kind. And whenever
you have any cold meat, I advise you to cook it up into stews of the
various kinds described in this work, or else make it into a hash as
follows: First, chop two onions fine, and put them to boil with pepper
and salt and a pint of water, in a saucepan for ten minutes, then throw
in the meat cut in thin slices, mixed with a little flour; boil all
together gently for ten minutes longer, and pour the hash into a dish
containing either some ready boiled potatoes, or else some slices of
toasted bread.


No. 82. BOILED TRIPE.

Tripe is not exactly a cheap commodity for food; yet, as you may feel
occasionally inclined to indulge in a treat of this kind, I will give
you instructions to cook it in the most economical manner. When you have
procured any given quantity of tripe, cut it up in pieces the size of
two inches square, put these into a saucepan containing skim milk, or
milk and water, enough to swim the tripe; add some peeled onions,
pepper, and salt, and a sprig of thyme, and boil gently for at least an
hour; and when the tripe is done, eat it with mustard and some well
boiled potatoes.


No. 83. BAKED TRIPE.

Cut the tripe up in pieces, and put it into an earthen pot, with some
ale, cider, or water, enough to cover it in; add sliced onions, pepper,
and salt, and a good pinch of allspice; put the lid on the pot, and set
the tripe in the oven to bake for two hours.


No. 84. SAUSAGE DUMPLINGS.

Make one pound of flour and two ounces of dripping, or chopped suet,
into a firm paste, by adding just enough water to enable you to knead
the whole together. Divide this paste into twelve equal parts, roll each
of these out sufficiently large to be able to fold up one of the beef
sausages in it, wet the edge of the paste to fasten the sausage securely
in it, and, as you finish off each sausage dumpling, drop it gently into
a large enough saucepan, containing plenty of _boiling_ water, and when
the whole are finished, allow them to boil gently by the side of the
fire for one hour, and then take up the dumplings with a spoon free from
water, on to a dish, and eat them while they are hot.


No. 85. SAUSAGE ROLLS.

Procure a quartern of dough from the baker's, knead this with four
ounces of butter, dripping, or chopped suet; divide it into twelve equal
parts, and use each piece of paste to enfold a beef sausage in it; place
these rolls on a baking-tin, and bake them in the oven for about twenty
minutes or half an hour.


No. 86. ROAST PORK.

Let us suppose, or rather hope, that you may sometimes have a leg of
pork to cook for your dinner; it will eat all the better if it is scored
all over by cutting the rind, or rather slitting it crosswise, at short
distances, with the point of a sharp knife; it is to be well sprinkled
all over with salt, and allowed to absorb the seasoning during some
hours previously to its being cooked. Prepare some stuffing as
follows:--Chop six onions and twelve sage leaves fine, fry these with a
bit of butter, pepper, and salt, for five minutes; then add six ounces
of bread soaked in water; stir all together on the fire for five
minutes, and use this stuffing to fill up a hole or pocket, which you
will make by running the point of a knife down between the rind and the
flesh of the joint of pork; secure this by sewing it up, or else fasten
it securely in with a small wooden skewer or twig. The joint of pork, so
far prepared, must then be placed upon a trivet in a baking-dish
containing plenty of peeled potatoes, and, if possible, a few apples for
the children; add half a pint of water, pepper and salt, and if the
joint happens to be a leg, it will require about two hours to bake it.


No. 87. BUBBLE AND SQUEAK.

When you happen to have some cold boiled salt beef, cut this up in
slices; fry it on both sides, and dish it up round some cabbages or any
dressed vegetables ready to hand, which must be chopped up, seasoned
with pepper and salt, and fried.


No. 88. JUGGED HARE.

It does sometimes happen that when you are living in the country, in the
neighbourhood of considerate gentlefolks who possess game preserves,
that they now and then make presents of a hare and a few rabbits to the
poor cottagers in their vicinity. And when you are so fortunate as to
have a hare given to you, this is the way to cook it:--First, cut the
hare up into pieces of equal size, then cut up a pound of bacon into
small squares, and fry these in a saucepan for five minutes; next, add
the pieces of hare, and, stirring them round in the pot with a spoon,
fry them brown; add a good handful of flour, some pepper and allspice,
carrots and onions, and a sprig of winter savory; moisten the stew with
nearly three pints of water, and stir it all together on the fire till
it boils, and then set it on the hob to continue gently simmering for
about an hour and a-half or two hours; the jugged hare will then be
ready for dinner.


No. 89. BOILED BACON AND CABBAGES.

Put a piece of bacon in a pot capable of containing two gallons; let it
boil up, and skim it well; then put in some well-washed split cabbages,
a few carrots and parsnips also split, and a few peppercorns; when the
whole has boiled gently for about an hour and a-half, throw in a dozen
peeled potatoes, and by the time that these are done, the dinner will be
ready. And this is the way in which to make the most of this excellent
and economical dinner. First, take up the bacon, and having placed it on
its dish, garnish it round with the cabbages, carrots, parsnips, and
potatoes, and then add some pieces of crust, or thin slices of bread, to
the liquor in which the bacon-dinner has been cooked, and this will
furnish you with a good wholesome soup with which to satisfy the first
peremptory call of your healthy appetites.


No. 90. ECONOMICAL VEGETABLE POTTAGE.

In France, and also in many parts of Europe, the poorer classes but very
seldom taste meat in any form; the chief part of their scanty food
consists of bread, vegetables, and more especially of their soup, which
is mostly, if not entirely, made of vegetables, or, as is customary on
the southern coasts of France, Italy, and Spain, more generally of
fish, for making which kinds of soup see Nos. 4, 6, 118, etc.

The most common as well as the easiest method for making a good mess of
cheap and nutritious soup is the following:--If you are five or six in
family, put a three-gallon pot on the fire rather more than half full of
water, add four ounces of butter, pepper and salt, and small sprigs of
winter savory, thyme, and parsley; and when this has boiled, throw in
any portion or quantity, as may best suit your convenience, of such of
the following vegetables as your garden can afford:--Any kind of
cabbages cleaned and split, carrots, turnips, parsnips, broad beans,
French beans, peas, broccoli, red cabbages, vegetable marrow, young
potatoes, a few lettuce, some chervil, and a few sprigs of mint. Allow
all this to simmer by the side of the hob for about two hours, and then,
after taking up the more considerable portion of the whole vegetables on
to a dish, eat one half, or as much as you may require, of the soup with
bread in it, and make up your dinner with the whole vegetables and more
bread. The remainder will serve for the next day. Let me persuade you,
my friends, to try and persevere in adopting this very desirable kind of
food, when in your power, for your ordinary fare. I, of course, intend
this remark more particularly for the consideration of such of my
readers as are or may be located in the country, and who may have a
little garden of their own.


No. 91. HOW TO MAKE A FISH CURRY.

Slice up six onions fine, and fry them with a little butter or grease
over a slow fire until they become very lightly coloured; then add three
or four green apples in slices, and when these are dissolved, place your
pieces of any kind of fish, which you have previously fried in a
frying-pan, on the top of the onions, etc., sprinkle a spoonful of curry
powder all over the fish, put the lid on the saucepan, and set the
whole on the hob of a moderate fire, or in the oven, if you have one, to
remain simmering for about half an hour; the curry will then be ready to
be eaten with well-boiled rice.


No. 92. THIS IS THE WAY TO BOIL RICE.

I recommend you to buy Patna rice, as it is the cheapest; it is best to
soak it in water over-night, as it then requires less time to boil it,
and moreover, when soaked, the rice becomes lighter, from the fact that
the grains separate more readily while boiling. Put the rice on to boil
in plenty of cold water, stirring it from the bottom of the saucepan
occasionally while it is boiling fast; when the grains separate at the
ends, and thus appear to form the letter X, the rice will be done; it
requires about half an hour's gentle boiling. When the rice is done,
drain it in a colander, and place it before the fire, stirring it now
and then with a fork.


No. 93. RICE DUMPLINGS.

Boil one pound of rice as directed in the foregoing Number, and when
thoroughly drained free from excess of moisture, knead the rice with a
spoon in a basin into a smooth, compact kind of paste, and use this to
cover some peeled apples with in the same way as you would make an
ordinary apple dumpling. In order the better to enable you to handle the
rice-paste with ease, I recommend that each time previously to shaping
one of the dumplings, you should first dip your clean hands in cold
water. Let the dumplings, when finished, be tied up in small cloths, and
boiled in plenty of hot water for about three-quarters of an hour. The
cloths used for these dumplings must be greased.


No. 94. PLUM OR CURRANT DOUGH PUDDING.

Ingredients, two pounds of dough from the baker's, four ounces of plums
or currants, a pinch of allspice, ditto of salt, a gill of milk. Mix all
the above ingredients together in a pan; tie up the pudding in a
well-greased pudding-cloth, and place it in a pot containing _boiling_
water, and allow it to continue boiling for two hours; at the end of
this time the pudding will be done, and may be turned out on its dish.


No. 95. CHRISTMAS PLUM PUDDING.

Ingredients, two pounds of flour, twelve ounces of raisins, twelve
ounces of currants, twelve ounces of peeled and chopped apples, one
pound of chopped suet, twelve ounces of sugar, four eggs, one pint and
a-half of milk or beer, one ounce of salt, half an ounce of ground
allspice. Boil the pudding four hours. First, put the flour, suet, and
all the fruit in a large pan; mix these well together, and having made a
deep hole in the middle thereof with your fist, add the salt, sugar, and
allspice, and half a pint of the milk, or beer, to dissolve them; next,
add the four eggs, and the remaining pint of milk, or beer; mix all
vigorously together with the hand, tie up the pudding in a well-greased
and floured cloth, boil it for at least four hours, taking care that the
water boils before the pudding is put into the pot to boil. When done,
turn the pudding out on its dish, and, if you can afford it, pour over
it the following sauce:--


No. 96. SWEET PUDDING SAUCE.

Ingredients, two ounces of common flour, ditto of butter, ditto of
sugar, chopped lemon-peel, half a gill of any kind of spirits, and half
a pint of water. First mix the flour, butter, and sugar in a small
saucepan by kneading the ingredients well together with a wooden spoon,
then add the water, spirits, and lemon-peel; stir the sauce on the fire
till it comes to a boil, and then pour it all over the pudding.


No. 97. JAM PUDDING.

Ingredients, one pound of flour, six ounces of suet, half a pint of
water, a pinch of salt, one pound of any kind of common jam, at 7_d._
Mix the flour, suet, water, and salt into a firm, compact kind of paste;
roll this out with a rolling-pin, sprinkling some flour on the table to
prevent the paste from sticking to either; fold up the paste, and roll
it out again; repeat the rolling-out and folding three times; this
operation will make the paste lighter. Next, roll out the paste one foot
long by eighteen inches wide, spread the jam all over this, roll up the
pudding in the form of a bolster, roll it up in a well-greased and
floured cloth, tie it up tightly at both ends; put the pudding into a
pot of _boiling_ water, and boil it for nearly two hours; when done,
turn out carefully on to its dish, without breaking the crust.


No. 98. RHUBARB PIE.

A bundle of rhubarb, one pound of flour, six ounces of butter, or lard,
or dripping, half a pint of water, a pinch of salt, ditto of
baking-powder, eight ounces of moist sugar. First, cut up the rhubarb in
pieces about an inch long, wash them in plenty of water, and drain them
in a colander, or sieve. Next, place the flour in a pan, or on the
table, make a hollow in the middle with your fist, place the salt and
the baking-powder in it, pour in the water to dissolve them, then add
the butter; mix all together by working the ingredients with the fingers
of both hands, until the whole has become a firm, smooth, compact kind
of paste. You now put the cleaned rhubarb into a pie-dish, with the
sugar and a gill of water, roll out the paste to the exact size of the
dish, and after wetting the edges of the dish all round, place the
rolled-out paste upon it, and by pressing the thumb of the right hand
all round the upper part of the edge, the paste will be effectually
fastened on, so as to prevent the juice from running out at the sides; a
small hole the size of a sixpence must be made at the top of the pie,
for ventilation, or otherwise the pie would burst. Bake the pie for an
hour and a quarter.


No. 99. FRUIT PIES IN GENERAL.

All kinds of fruit pies are made as shown in the foregoing Number.


No. 100. A CHEAP KIND OF MINCE-MEAT.

Ingredients, eight ounces of stoned raisins, eight ounces of washed and
dried currants, one pound of tripe, one pound of apples, one pound of
chopped suet, four ounces of shred candied peel, one pound of moist
sugar, one ounce of allspice, the juice and the chopped rind of three
lemons, half a gill of rum. First chop the raisins, currants, apples,
and the tripe all together, or separately, until well mixed; then place
these in a pan, add the remainder of the ingredients, mix them
thoroughly until well incorporated with each other; put the mince-meat
into a clean dry stone jar, tie some thick paper, or a piece of bladder
over the top, and keep it in a cool place till wanted for use.


No. 101. MINCE-PIE PASTE.

Ingredients, one pound of flour, eight ounces of butter or lard, three
gills of water, half an ounce of salt, a tea-spoonful of baking-powder.
Place the flour on the table, hollow out a hole or well in the centre
with your fist, place the salt and baking-powder in this, add the water
and the butter, work all together lightly with the fingers, without
positively absorbing or entirely uniting the butter with the flour,
but, on the contrary, keeping the butter in distinct pieces here and
there; then roll up the paste in the form of a ball of dough, spread it
out on the floured table, and, with a rolling-pin, roll it out to the
extent of eighteen inches in length, by eight inches wide; then fold the
paste in three equal folds, roll it out the reverse way, fold it up
again as before, and after repeating the rolling out and folding up a
third time, the paste will be ready for use.


No. 102. TO MAKE A MINCE-PIE.

Having prepared the paste according to the directions given in the
foregoing Number, divide it in two equal parts, roll these out either
round or square, place one of the flats on a tin baking-dish, wet all
round the edge of the paste, spread some of the mince-meat about half an
inch thick all over the paste to within an inch of its edge, then cover
all in by laying the other flat of paste evenly upon the whole, press
all round the edge of the pie with your thumb to secure the mince-meat
from running out at the sides, score the pie neatly over the surface, in
the form of reversed strokes, and bake it for an hour.


No. 103. JAM TART.

Prepare some paste, as in No. 101, and use this to make a jam tart, as
directed for making a mince-pie, using any kind of common jam, instead
of mince-meat, for the purpose.


No. 104. BAKED APPLE DUMPLINGS.

Ingredients, one pound of flour, four ounces of chopped suet, half a
pint of water, a pinch of salt, eight or ten large apples peeled. With
the above ingredients prepare some suet paste, as directed in No. 97;
divide the paste into about eight equal parts, first make these into
balls with the hand, and then roll them out with a rolling-pin to the
size of a large saucer, envelop an apple in each flat of paste, and,
wetting the edges with water, gather them round in a purse-like form,
and twist the ends tightly together to fasten them securely. The
dumplings, thus formed, must be placed on the twisted end, at equal
distances of three inches apart from each other, upon a tin baking-dish,
and baked in the oven for about three-quarters of an hour.


No. 105. PANCAKES FOR SHROVE TUESDAY.

Ingredients, twelve ounces of flour, three eggs, one pint of milk, a
tea-spoonful of salt, a little grated nutmeg, and chopped lemon-peel.
First, put the flour into a basin, hollow out the centre, add the salt,
nutmeg, lemon-peel, and a drop of milk, to dissolve them; then break in
the eggs, work all together, with a spoon, into a smooth soft paste, add
the remainder of the milk, and work the whole vigorously until it forms
a smooth liquid batter. Next, set a frying-pan on the fire, and, as soon
as it gets hot, wipe it out clean with a cloth, then run about a
tea-spoonful of lard all over the bottom of the hot frying-pan, pour in
half a small tea-cupful of the batter, place the pan over the fire, and,
in about a minute or so, the pancake will have become set sufficiently
firm to enable you to turn it over in the frying-pan, in order that it
may be baked on the other side also; the pancake done on both sides,
turn it out on its dish, and sprinkle a little sugar over it: proceed to
use up the remaining batter in the same manner.


No. 106. RAISINET--A PRESERVE FOR WINTER.

Ingredients, twelve pounds of fruit, consisting of peeled apples, pears,
plums, and blackberries, in equal proportion; six pounds of raw sugar,
at 4-1/2_d._ per pound; one quart of water. Bake three hours in a slack
or slow oven. First, prepare the fruit, and put it in mixed layers of
plums, pears, berries, apples, alternating each other, in stone jars.
Next, put the six pounds of sugar in a clean saucepan, with the quart of
water, and stir it with a spoon on the fire till it comes to a gentle
boil; remove the dirty scum from the surface of the sugar; and, after
allowing it to boil for ten minutes, pour it in equal proportions into
the jar or jars containing the fruits, and place them in a moderate heat
to bake slowly for three hours at least. When boiling the sugar for this
purpose, remember that it is most prudent to use a saucepan capable of
containing double the quantity, as sugar is very liable to boil over and
waste. When the fruit is nearly dissolved, the raisinet will be done; it
must then be removed to a cool place until it has become thoroughly cold
and partially set firm; the jars should then be tied down with thick
paper, or bladder, and kept in the cellar for winter use, either for
making puddings or tarts, or for spreading on bread for the children.


No. 107. CURRANT JAM.

Ingredients, twelve pounds of picked currants, either red, black, or
white, or, if agreeable, mixed; eight pounds of raw sugar, three pints
of water. If you could borrow what is called a preserving-pan from a
neighbour, it would suit the purpose better than a pot; but, failing the
preserving-pan, put the eight pounds of sugar in a four-gallon iron pot,
with the three pints of water; stir these on the fire till the sugar
boils; remove the scum from the surface, and, when it has boiled for
about ten minutes, add the currants, and keep stirring the jam, while it
boils for half an hour; and then, if it presents the appearance of being
rather thick, and the currants partly dissolved, it will be ready to
pour into stone jars, which, after being allowed to cool all night, are
to be tied down with paper, and kept in a cold place for winter's use.
All kinds of seed fruit can be prepared in the same manner, as well as
all kinds of plums.


No. 108. HOW TO PRESERVE RHUBARB.

Free the rhubarb from leaves, cut it up in inch lengths, wash and drain
it in a sieve or colander. Next, put the rhubarb into a sufficiently
large pot, or preserving-pan, with a little water--say a pint of water
to ten pounds of rhubarb, and put this on the fire, with the lid on, to
boil until dissolved to a pulp, stirring it occasionally; as soon as all
the rhubarb is dissolved, add six pounds of moist sugar, and stir the
whole continuously on the fire while boiling fast, until reduced to a
rather stiff paste or marmalade--this will require about half an hour's
boiling; the preserve or jam must then be immediately put into jars, or
gallipots, and, when cold, is to be covered with stiff paper, and tied
round with string. Keep the jam in a cold place, for use.


No. 109. HOW TO MAKE GOOSEBERRY JAM.

Pick ten pounds of ripe gooseberries, put them in a covered pot, with a
pint of water, and set them on the fire to boil to a pulp, stirring them
frequently, and, when they are thoroughly dissolved, add six pounds of
sugar, and stir the whole continuously while boiling on the fire, until
the jam is reduced to a rather stiff paste; it must then be poured into
gallipots, and, when cold, is to be covered with paper, and tied round
with string.


No. 110. BAKED PEARS.

Put the pears, standing up side by side in rows, with their stalks
uppermost, in an earthenware baking dish; add a sprinkle of moist
sugar, a few cloves, and a pint of cider or water, and bake them until
they are done. The time for cooking them depends upon their size and
kind.


No. 111. BAKED APPLES.

Put the apples on a baking-dish, with a sprinkle of sugar, and a drop of
cider or water, and set them in the oven to bake. Baked apples or pears,
with bread, form a cheap, wholesome, and proper kind of supper for
children.


No. 112. TO MAKE ELDER WINE.

Ingredients, two gallons of elderberries, two quarts of damsons, eight
pounds of raw sugar, at 4-1/2_d._ per pound, two gallons of water, two
ounces of ginger, one ounce of cloves, and half a pint of fresh yeast.
To make this quantity of elder wine, you must have a copper, a tub, a
large canvas or loose flannel bag, and a five-gallon barrel. First,
crush the elderberries and damsons thoroughly in the pot or copper in
which they are to be boiled; then add the water, and keep stirring all
together as it boils, until the fruit is well dissolved; then use a
wooden bowl or a basin to pour the whole into a loose flannel bag,
steadily fixed across two stout sticks, resting safely on two chairs,
or, if you have one, a large coarse sieve instead. When all the liquor
has passed through into the tub, put the dregs back into the copper, to
be boiled up with a couple of quarts of water, and then to be strained
to the other liquor. The next part of the process is to put the whole of
the elderberry juice back into the clean pot or copper, with the sugar,
and the spice, well bruised with a hammer; stir all together, on the
fire, and allow the wine to boil gently for half an hour, then pour it
into the clean tub to cool; the half-pint of yeast must then be added,
and thoroughly mixed by stirring. At the end of two days, skim off the
yeast which, by that time, will have risen to the surface. The elder
wine must now be put into the barrel, and kept in the cellar with the
bung-hole left open for a fortnight; at the end of this time, a stiff
brown paper should be pasted over the bung-hole, and after standing for
a month or six weeks, the wine will be ready for use. To be obliged to
buy all the ingredients for making elder wine, would render it a matter
of great difficulty--perhaps, in some cases, an impossibility; but,
remember, that when living in the country, where in some parts
elderberries grow in the hedge-rows, you may have them for the trouble
of gathering them, in which case the elder wine would be cheaper, and
more easily within your means.


No. 113. VEGETABLE PORRIDGE.

Scrape and peel the following vegetables:--six carrots, six turnips, six
onions, three heads of celery, and three parsnips; slice up all these
very thinly, and put them into a two-gallon pot, with four ounces of
butter, a handful of parsley, ditto of chervil, and a good sprig of
thyme, and fill up with water or pot liquor, if you happen to have any;
season with pepper and salt, and put the whole to boil very gently on
the fire for two hours; at the end of this time the vegetables will be
done to a pulp, and the whole must be rubbed through a colander with a
wooden spoon, and afterwards put back into the pot and stirred over the
fire, to make it hot for dinner.


No. 114. PUMPKIN PORRIDGE.

I am aware that pumpkins are not generally grown in this country as an
article of food for the poorer classes, and more is the pity, for they
require but little trouble to rear, and yield an abundance of nutritious
and cooling food, at a small cost; the chief reason for the short
supply is, I imagine, the want of knowledge for turning the pumpkin to
good account as an article of food. I am now about to supply easy
instruction to convey that knowledge to whomsoever may stand in need of
it. Peel and slice up as much pumpkin as will produce about eight ounces
for each person, and put this into a boiling pot, with two ounces of
butter, and a quart of water; set the whole to boil very gently on the
fire, until the pumpkin is reduced to a pulp, and then add half-a-pint
of buttermilk, or skim milk, to every person who is to partake of the
porridge. You then stir the porridge over the fire for about fifteen
minutes longer, taking care that it does not boil over; season with salt
and a little nutmeg, and eat it with toasted bread for breakfast, or any
other meal.


No. 115. RICE-MILK FOR SIX PERSONS.

Put one pound of Patna rice into a boiling pot with two ounces of
butter, two quarts of water, a small bit of cinnamon or lemon-peel, and
a little salt; put the lid on, and set the rice to boil very gently
indeed close to the hob, until the rice is done quite soft; this will
take about one hour and a quarter; then add three pints of skim milk,
and after having stirred the rice-milk over the fire for ten minutes
longer, it may be sweetened with a little honey or sugar, and will
produce an excellent breakfast for at least six persons.


No. 116. KNUCKLE OF VEAL AND RICE.

A small knuckle, or scrag-end of neck of veal, is sometimes to be
purchased very cheap; I will therefore suppose that you may, once in a
way, provide such a thing, and this is the way you should cook it to the
best advantage. Put the knuckle of veal into a boiling pot, with a pound
of bacon, two pounds of rice, six onions, three carrots cut in pieces,
some peppercorns, and salt in moderation on account of the bacon; add
three or four quarts of water, and set the whole to stew very gently
over a moderate fire for about three hours. This will produce a good
substantial dinner for at least ten persons.


No. 117. IRISH STEW.

Inferior parts of any kind of meat make a good Irish stew. Let the meat
be cut in pieces the size of an egg, well rubbed all over with pepper
and salt, and placed in a good-sized pot or saucepan; add peeled onions
in the proportion of six to the pound of meat, and enough water just to
cover in the whole. Next, set the stew on the fire to boil very gently
for an hour and a-half, then add such quantity of peeled and split
potatoes as you may think will suffice for the number of persons about
to dine off the stew, and put the whole back on the fire to boil briskly
until the potatoes are thoroughly done soft; the Irish stew will then be
ready to eat.


No. 118. FISH SOUP.

Cod-fish cuttings, Dutch plaice, skate, dabs, haddocks, cod's-heads,
cod's-tails, or any fresh-water fish you may happen to catch when
fishing, conger eels cut in slices, and almost any kind of fish which
may come within reach of your means, are all more or less fit for making
a good mess of soup for a meal. First, chop fine some onions, and put
them into a pot with enough water to furnish about half a pint for each
person to be provided for, and set this on the fire to boil for ten
minutes; then add your pieces of fish, of about four ounces each; season
with thyme, pepper, and salt, and boil the soup for about fifteen
minutes longer, when it will be ready for dinner. Some well-boiled
potatoes will prove a welcome addition to this soup.

_Note._--This kind of fish soup will prove the more advantageous near
the sea-coast, where inferior kinds of fish are always very cheap.


No. 119. SOUSED MACKEREL.

When mackerel are to be bought at six for a shilling, this kind of fish
forms a cheap dinner. On such occasions, the mackerel must be placed
heads and tails in an earthen dish or pan, seasoned with chopped onions,
black pepper, a pinch of allspice, and salt; add sufficient vinegar and
water in equal proportions to cover the fish. Bake in your own oven, if
you possess one, or send them to the baker's.

_Note._--Herrings, sprats, or any other cheap fish, are soused in the
same manner.


No. 120. A DINNER OF RED HERRINGS.

The cheaper sort of red herrings are always too salty, and unpleasantly
strong-flavoured, and are therefore an indifferent kind of food, unless
due precaution is taken to soak them in water for an hour before they
are cooked. First, soak the red herrings in water for an hour; wipe, and
split them down the back; toast or broil them on both sides for two or
three minutes, and having placed them on a dish, put a bit of butter and
some chopped onion upon each herring; pour a little vinegar over all,
and this will make a cheap and savoury dish to be eaten with well-boiled
potatoes.


No. 121. TO FRY FISH.

For this purpose you must have some kind of fat. Either lard, butter, or
dripping fat, would be excellent; but they must be bought, and cost a
little money. True; but then, if you can afford yourselves a bit of
meat occasionally, by dint of good thrift you should save the fat from
the boiled meat, or the dripping from your baked meats, and thus furnish
yourselves with fat for frying your fish twice a-week; and let me tell
you that by introducing fish as an occasional part of your daily food,
your health, as well as your pockets, would feel the benefit of such a
system of economy. Suppose, then, that you have bought some cheap kind
of fish, such as herrings, large flounders, plaice, small soles, or any
other small or flat fish. First of all, let the fish be washed and wiped
dry, and rubbed all over with a little flour. Next, put about two ounces
of fat, free from water, in a frying-pan on the fire, and, as soon as it
is hot, put the fish in to fry, one or two at a time, according to their
size, as, unless they have room enough in the frying-pan they do not fry
well; this must be carefully attended to, and when the fish is a little
browned on one side, turn it over with a tin fish-slice, that it may be
fried on the other side also; and, as soon as done, place the fried fish
on a dish and then fry the others. When all your fish are fried, with
what fat remains in the pan fry some onions, and place them round the
fish, and, by way of adding an extra relish to your meal, just throw a
few table-spoonfuls of vinegar, some pepper and salt, into the
frying-pan, give it a boil up, and pour this round the fish.


No. 122. SALT FISH WITH PARSNIPS.

Salt fish must always be well soaked in plenty of cold water the whole
of the night before it is required for the following day's dinner. The
salt fish must be put on to boil in plenty of cold water, without any
salt, and when thoroughly done, should be well-drained free from any
water, and placed on a dish with plenty of well-boiled parsnips. Some
sauce may be poured over the fish, which is to be made as follows:
viz.--Mix two ounces of butter with three ounces of flour, pepper and
salt, a small glassful of vinegar, and a good half-pint of water. Stir
this on the fire till it boils. A few hard-boiled eggs, chopped up and
mixed in this sauce, would render the dish more acceptable.


No. 123. BAKED FISH.

Wash and wipe the fish, and lay it, heads and tails, in a baking-dish,
the bottom of which has been spread all over with a little butter or
dripping, add a little vinegar and water, and, when procurable, some
mushroom ketchup. Season with chopped onions and parsley, shake plenty
of raspings of bread all over the top of the fish, and bake it in your
oven, or send it to the baker's.


No. 124. BAKED COD'S HEAD.

First, make some stuffing with one pound of bruised crumb of bread,
mixed with six ounces of chopped suet, two eggs, chopped parsley, onions
and thyme, and seasoned with pepper and salt. Put this stuffing inside
the cod's head, and place it in a baking-dish with two ounces of butter,
a gill of vinegar, and a pint and a half of water. Spread a little of
the butter all over the cod's head, and then a thick coating of
bread-raspings all over it; bake it for an hour in the oven. A few
oysters would be an improvement.


No. 125. BOUILLABAISSE SOUP.

Put the following ingredients into a saucepan to boil on the fire:--four
onions and six tomatoes, or red love-apples, cut in thin slices, some
thyme and winter savory, a little salad-oil, a wine-glassful of vinegar,
pepper and salt, and a pint of water to each person. When the soup has
boiled fifteen minutes, throw in your fish, cut in pieces or slices,
and, as soon as the fish is done, eat the soup with some crusts of
bread or toast in it. All kinds of fish suit this purpose.


No. 126. TO BOIL FISH.

Put the fish on in sufficient water to cover it, add a small handful of
salt, and, providing that the fish is not larger than mackerel, soles,
or whiting, it will be cooked by the time that the water boils. Yet it
is always best to try whether it requires to boil a little longer, as
underdone fish is unwholesome. Boiled fish requires some kind of sauce.
Try the following, viz:--


No. 127. PARSLEY SAUCE.

Chop a handful of parsley and mix it in a stewpan with two ounces of
butter, two ounces of flour, pepper and salt; moisten with half a pint
of water and a table-spoonful of vinegar. Stir the parsley-sauce on the
fire till it boils, and then pour it over the fish, drained free from
water, on its dish.


No. 128. ANCHOVY SAUCE.

Mix two ounces of butter with two ounces of flour, in a saucepan. Add a
spoonful of essence of anchovy, and half a pint of water. Stir the sauce
on the fire till it boils.


No. 129. BAKED SKATE.

Chop three onions, and fry them of a light-brown colour in two ounces of
butter, then add half a pint of vinegar, pepper and salt, and allow the
whole to boil on the fire for five minutes. Put the skate in a baking
dish, pour the sauce over it, and also just enough water to reach to its
surface. Strew a thick coating of bread-raspings on the fish, and bake
it for an hour and a half at rather moderate heat.


No. 130. HOW TO BREW YOUR OWN BEER.

The first preparatory step towards brewing is to gather your necessary
plant together in proper working order, and thoroughly clean. Your plant
or utensils must consist of the following articles, viz.:--A
thirty-gallon copper, two cooling-tubs capable of holding each about
thirty gallons; a mash-tub of sufficient size to contain fifty-four
gallons, and another tub of smaller size, called an underback; a bucket
or pail, a wooden hand-bowl, a large wooden funnel, a mash-stirrer, four
scraped long stout sticks, a good-sized loose-wrought wicker basket for
straining the beer, and another small bowl-shaped wicker basket, called
a tapwaist, to fasten inside the mash-tub on to the inner end of the
spigot and faucet, to keep back the grains when the wort is being run
off out of the mash-tub. You will also require some beer barrels, a
couple of brass or metal cocks, some vent-pegs, and some bungs. I do not
pretend to assert that the whole of the foregoing articles are
positively indispensable for brewing your own beer. I merely enumerate
what is most proper to be used; leaving the manner and means of
replacing such of these articles as may be out of your reach very much
to your intelligence in contriving to use such as you possess, or can
borrow from a neighbour, instead. Spring water, from its hardness, is
unfit for brewing; fresh fallen rain water, caught in clean tubs, or
water fetched from a brook or river, are best adapted for brewing; as,
from the fact of their being free from all calcareous admixture, their
consequent softness gives them the greater power to extract all the
goodness and strength from the malt and hops.

In order to ensure having good wholesome beer, it is necessary to
calculate your brewing at the rate of two bushels of malt and two pounds
of hops to fifty-four gallons of water; these proportions, well
managed, will produce three kilderkins of good beer. I recommend that
you should use malt and hops of the best quality only; as their
plentiful yield of beneficial substance fully compensates for their
somewhat higher price. A thin shell, well filled up plump with the
interior flour, and easily bitten asunder, is a sure test of good
quality in malt; superior hops are known by their light greenish-yellow
tinge of colour, and also by their bright, dry, yet somewhat gummy feel
to the touch, without their having any tendency to clamminess. The day
before brewing, let all your tackle be well scrubbed and rinsed clean,
the copper wiped out, and all your tubs and barrels half filled with
cold water, to soak for a few hours, so as to guard against any chance
of leakage, and afterwards emptied, and set to dry in the open air,
weather permitting; or otherwise, before the fire. Fasten the tapwaist
inside the mash-tub to the inner end of the faucet and spigot, taking
care to place the mash-tub in an elevated position, resting upon two
benches or stools. Early in the dawn of morning, light the fire under
your copper, filled with water over-night, and, as soon as it boils,
with it fill the mash-tub rather more than three-parts full; and as soon
as the first heat of the water has subsided, and you find that you are
able to bear your fingers drawn slowly through it without experiencing
pain, you must then throw in the malt, stirring it about for ten minutes
or so; then lay some sticks across the mash-tub, and cover it with sacks
or blankets, and allow it to steep for three hours. At the end of the
three hours, let off the wort from the mash-tub into the underback-tub,
which has been previously placed under the spigot and faucet ready to
receive it; pouring the first that runs out back into the mash, until
the wort runs free from grains, etc.; now put the hops into the
underback-tub and let the wort run out upon them. Your copper having
been refilled, and boiled again while the mash is in progress, you must
now pour sufficient boiling water into the grains left in the mash-tub
to make up your quantity of fifty-four gallons; and when this second
mashing shall have also stood some two hours, let it be drawn off, and
afterwards mixed with the first batch of wort, and boil the whole at two
separate boilings, with the hops equally divided; each lot to be allowed
to boil for an hour and a-half after it has commenced boiling. The beer
is now to be strained through the loose wicker basket into your cooling
tubs and pans; the more you have of these the better the beer, from its
cooling quickly. And when the beer has cooled to the degree of water
which has stood in the house in summer-time for some hours, let it all
be poured into your two or three largest tubs, keeping back a couple or
three quarts in a pan, with which to mix a pint of good yeast and a
table-spoonful of common salt; stir this mixture well together, keep it
in rather a warm part of the house, and in the course of half an hour or
so, it will work up to the top of the basin or pan. This worked beer
must now be equally divided between the two or three tubs containing the
bulk of the beer, and is to be well mixed in by ladling it about with a
wooden hand-bowl for a couple of minutes. This done, cover over the beer
with sacks or blankets stretched upon sticks across the tubs, and leave
them in this state for forty-eight hours. The next thing to be seen to
is to get your barrels placed in proper order and position for being
filled; and to this end attend strictly to the following directions,
viz.:--First, skim off the scum, which is yeast, from the top or surface
of the tubs, and next, draw off the beer through the spigot, and with
the wooden funnel placed in the bung-hole, proceed to fill up the
barrels not quite full; and, remember, that if a few hops are put into
each before filling in the beer, it will keep all the better. Reserve
some of the beer with which to fill up the barrels as they throw up the
yeast while the beer is working; and when the yeast begins to fall, lay
the bungs upon the bung-holes, and at the end of ten days or a
fortnight, hammer the bungs in tight, and keep the vent-pegs tight also.
In about two months' time after the beer has been brewed, it will be in
a fit condition for drinking.


No. 131. HOW TO BAKE YOUR OWN BREAD.

Put a bushel of flour into a trough, or a large pan; with your fist make
a deep hole in the centre thereof; put a pint of good fresh yeast into
this hollow; add thereto two quarts of warm water, and work in with
these as much of the flour as will serve to make a soft smooth kind of
batter. Strew this over with just enough flour to hide it; then cover up
the trough with its lid, or with a blanket to keep all warm, and when
the leaven has risen sufficiently to cause the flour to crack all over
its surface, throw in a handful of salt, work all together; add just
enough lukewarm soft water to enable you to work the whole into a firm,
compact dough, and after having kneaded this with your fists until it
becomes stiff and comparatively tough, shake a little flour over it, and
again cover it in with a blanket to keep it warm, in order to assist its
fermentation. If properly managed, the fermentation will be accomplished
in rather less than half an hour. Meanwhile that the bread is being thus
far prepared, you will have heated your oven to a satisfactory degree of
heat, with a sufficient quantity of dry, small wood faggots; and when
all the wood is burnt, sweep out the oven clean and free from all ashes.
Divide your dough into four-pound loaves, knead them into round shapes,
making a hole at the top with your thumb, and immediately put them out
of hand into the oven to bake, closing the oven-door upon them. In about
two hours' time they will be thoroughly baked, and are then to be taken
out of the oven, and allowed to become quite cold before they are put
away in the cupboard.


No. 132. YORKSHIRE PIE-CLATES FOR TEA.

Ingredients, one pound of flour, two ounces of grocer's currants, three
gills of milk, and a pinch of baking-powder. Mix the above ingredients
together in a pan into a firm, smooth, compact paste. Divide this into
eight equal parts, roll each into a ball with the hand previously dipped
in flour, then roll them out with a rolling-pin, with a little flour
shaken on the table to prevent the paste from sticking, to the size of a
tea-saucer, and bake the pie-clates upon a griddle-iron fixed over a
clear fire to the upper bar of the grate. In about two or three minutes'
time they will be done on the underside; they must then be turned over
that they may be also baked on the other side, then taken off the
griddle-iron, placed on a plate, and a little butter spread upon each as
they are done out of hand.


No. 133. HARD BISCUITS.

Ingredients, one pound of flour, half a pint of hot milk, a tea-spoonful
of salt, a pinch of baking-powder; bake them a quarter of an hour. Mix
the above ingredients into a firm paste, well kneaded until it becomes
quite tough; then let the paste rest covered over with a cloth for half
an hour, after which it is to be divided into eight equal parts, rolled
out to the size of tea-saucers, placed upon baking-tins, pricked all
over with a fork, and baked in a brisk oven for about fifteen minutes.


No. 134. GINGERBREAD NUTS.

Ingredients, one pound of flour, half a pint of treacle, two ounces of
butter, half an ounce of ground ginger, a pinch of allspice, a
tea-spoonful of carbonate of soda, and a pinch of salt. Mix all the
above ingredients into a firm, well-kneaded stiff paste, divide this
into about twenty-four parts, roll these into shape like walnuts, place
them upon greased baking-tins at distances of two inches apart from each
other, and bake the gingerbread nuts in a rather brisk oven for about
fifteen minutes.


No. 135. HOW TO STEAM POTATOES.

Peel the potatoes thinly, wash them clean, put them in the steamer, over
_boiling_ water, which must be kept briskly boiling until the potatoes
are thoroughly done, the length of time depending very much on their
size. I am aware that it is not in the power of all to possess a
potato-steamer, although one may be purchased at Adams & Son's, in the
Haymarket, for a few shillings; and therefore I will give you
instructions how to boil potatoes.


No. 136. HOW TO BOIL POTATOES.

Wash the potatoes clean, and put them on to boil in a saucepan, with
cold water just enough to cover them; place the saucepan on the hob,
close to the fire, and allow them to remain in that position for a
quarter of an hour, by which time the water will have gradually reached
to the boiling point; the saucepan should now be allowed to boil until
the potatoes are done through, and then pour off the water; put the lid
on again with a cloth on the top, place the saucepan close to the fire
for about five minutes, and when you turn them out on their dish you
will find that you have a well-boiled, mealy potato before you.


No. 137. BAKED OR ROASTED POTATOES.

You do not require that I should tell you that when you have no oven you
can easily roast your potatoes by placing them on the hobs, bars, and
under the fire-grate; and if you are attentive to their being well
roasted, by turning them about now and then, so that they may be done
all over alike, you need not be deprived of a baked potato for the want
of an oven. When the potatoes are roasted, slightly squeeze each
separately in a cloth, to make them mealy, then split them open; season
them with a bit of butter, or dripping, a little bit of chopped shalot,
pepper, and salt, and this will afford you a nice relish for supper.


No. 138. HOW TO FRY POTATOES.

Peel, split, and cut the potatoes into slices of _equal_ thickness, say
the thickness of two penny pieces; and as they are cut out of hand, let
them be dropped into a pan of cold water. When about to fry the
potatoes, first drain them on a clean cloth, and dab them all over, in
order to absorb all moisture; while this has been going on, you will
have made some kind of fat (entirely free from water or gravy, such as
lard, for instance) very hot in a frying-pan, and into this drop your
prepared potatoes, only a good handful at a time; as, if you attempt to
fry too many at once, instead of being crisp, as they should be, the
potatoes will fry flabby, and consequently will be unappetising. As soon
as the first lot is fried in a satisfactory manner, drain them from the
fat with a skimmer, or spoon, and then fry the remainder; and when all
are fried, shake a little salt over them.


No. 139. HOW TO FRY POTATOES AN EASIER WAY.

When it happens that you have some cold boiled potatoes, this is the way
to fry them:--First cut the potatoes in thick slices, and fry them in a
frying-pan with butter or dripping, just enough to season them, and as
they fry, lift or scrape them from the bottom of the pan with an iron
spoon, to prevent them from sticking to the bottom and burning, which,
by imparting a bitter taste, would spoil them; when all are fried of a
very light brown colour, season with pepper and salt.


No. 140. HOW TO MASH POTATOES.

Either steam or boil the potatoes, as indicated in Nos. 135 and 136, and
immediately after they are done, while steaming hot, put the potatoes
into a clean saucepan, and break or mash them by stirring them
vigorously with a fork; when all are broken smooth and mealy, add a
little _hot_ milk, with a bit of butter, pepper, and salt; work the
whole well together for a few minutes, and eat the mashed potatoes while
hot.


No. 141. BAKED MASHED POTATOES.

Prepare the mashed potatoes as shown in the preceding Number, put them
in a dish, smooth them over with a knife, put some bits of butter on the
top, and set them before the fire, turning them occasionally to brown
them equally all round.


No. 142. MASHED POTATOES WITH LING.

Ling is a kind of dried salt fish; it is cheaper than the ordinary sort
of salted codfish. It should be washed and well soaked in plenty of
tepid water for six hours before it is boiled in cold water; when taken
out of the pot it should be divided into large flakes, mixed with mashed
potatoes, and baked in a dish, as directed in the preceding Number.


No. 143. HOW TO STEW POTATOES.

First boil the potatoes, and then put a little butter, a chopped onion,
half a pint of milk, or water, pepper and salt to season; boil this for
ten minutes, then add the potatoes, previously cooked; boil all together
for ten minutes, and dish them up.


No. 144. BUTTERED PARSNIPS.

Scrape or peel the parsnips, and boil them in hot water till they are
done quite tender, then drain off all the water, add a bit of butter,
some chopped parsley, pepper and salt; shake them together on the fire
until all is well mixed.


No. 145. BUTTERED SWEDISH TURNIPS.

Swedish turnips are mostly given as food to cattle; true, but there is
no good reason why they should not be considered as excellent food for
man, for they are sweeter, and yield more substance than the ordinary
turnips; let them be peeled, boiled in plenty of water, and when done,
mashed with a little milk, butter, pepper, and salt.


No. 146. HOW TO COOK SPINACH.

Pick it thoroughly, wash the spinach, boil it in plenty of hot water
with salt in it, and when it is done, drain it free from all moisture,
chop it up, put it in a saucepan with butter, pepper, and salt; stir all
together on the fire for five minutes.


No. 147. FRIED CABBAGE AND BACON.

First, boil the cabbage, and when done and drained free from water, chop
it up. Next fry some rashers of bacon, and when done, lay them on a
plate before the fire; put the chopped cabbage in the frying-pan, and
fry it with the fat from the bacon, then put this on a dish with the
rashers upon it.


No. 148. PEAS AND BACON.

Shave off any brown rancid part from the bacon, and put it on to boil in
plenty of cold water; when it is nearly done put in the peas with a good
bunch of mint, and let all boil together until the peas are done soft;
then dish up the peas round the bacon.


No. 149. BAKED OR ROASTED ONIONS.

Do not peel the onions, but put them in their natural state to roast on
the hobs, turning them round to the fire occasionally, in order that
they may be equally roasted all over and through; when they are well
done, remove the outer skin, split them open, add a bit of butter,
pepper and salt, and a few drops of vinegar.


No. 150. HOW TO COOK BROAD BEANS.

Boil the beans in hot water with a bunch of winter savory and some salt,
and when done and drained, put them into a saucepan with the chopped
savory, butter, a pinch of flour, pepper and salt, and toss all together
for a few minutes over the fire.


No. 151. HOW TO COOK FRENCH BEANS.

String the beans and boil them in hot water with salt; when done and
drained, put them into a saucepan, with butter, a pinch of flour,
chopped parsley, pepper and salt, and stir them gently on the fire for
two or three minutes.


No. 152. HOW TO COOK VEGETABLE MARROW.

This is a cheap and excellent vegetable; let them be peeled, split them,
and remove the seedy part; boil them in hot water with salt, and when
done, eat them with a bit of butter, pepper, and salt.


No. 153. WHITE HARICOT BEANS.

In France, haricot beans form a principal part in the staple articles of
food for the working-classes, and indeed for the entire population; it
is much to be desired that some effectual means should be adopted, for
the purpose of introducing and encouraging the use of this most
excellent vegetable among the people of England as a general article of
daily food, more especially in the winter. If this desideratum could be
accomplished, its beneficial result would go far to assist in rendering
us in a measure independent of the potato crop, which, of late years,
has proved so uncertain. I am aware that haricot beans, as well as
lentils, as at present imported and retailed as a mere luxury to such as
possess cooks who know how to dress them, might lead to the rejection of
my proposal that they should, or could, be adopted as food by the
people; but I see no reason why haricot beans should not be imported to
this country in such quantities as would enable the importers to retail
them at a somewhat similar low price as that in which they are sold at
in France. In that case, they would become cheap enough to come within
the reach of the poorest. And under the impression that this wish of
mine may be eventually realized, I will here give you instructions how
to cook haricot beans to the greatest advantage.


No. 154. HOW TO DRESS HARICOT BEANS.

Put a quart of white haricot beans in plenty of cold water in a pan in
order that they may soak through the night; the next day drain off the
water in which they have soaked, and put them into a pot with three
quarts of _cold_ water, a little grease or butter, some pepper and salt,
and set them on the fire to boil _very gently_ until they are thoroughly
done; this will take about two hours' gentle boiling; when done, the
haricot beans are to be drained free from excess of moisture, and put
into a saucepan with chopped parsley, butter, pepper and salt; stir the
whole carefully on the fire for five minutes, and serve them for dinner
with or without meat as may best suit your means.


No. 155. HARICOT BEANS, ANOTHER WAY.

When the haricot beans have been boiled as shown in the preceding
Number, chop fine a couple of onions, and fry them in a saucepan with a
bit of butter, then add the haricot beans, pepper and salt; stir all
together and serve them out to your family.


No. 156. A SALAD OF HARICOT BEANS.

Well-boiled haricot beans, cold, are made into an excellent salad, as
follows:--Put the haricot beans into a bowl, season with chopped
parsley, green onions, salad oil, vinegar, pepper and salt, and slices
of beet-root. Mix thoroughly.


No. 157. LENTILS.

Lentils are a species of vetches much in use in France as a staple
article of food in the winter; there are two sorts, those denominated
"_à la reine_," a small brown flat-looking seed, while the other sort is
somewhat larger--of the size of small peas, and flat; both sorts are
equally nutritious, and are to be treated in exactly the same way as
herein indicated for cooking haricot beans.

These, as well as haricot beans, may be boiled with a piece of bacon.


No. 158. A RELISH FOR SUPPER.

Prepare some oysters, as shown in No. 54, and when poured upon the toast
in their dish, strew all over their surface equal quantities of bread
raspings and grated cheese; hold a red-hot shovel over the top until it
becomes slightly coloured, and eat this little delicacy while hot.


No. 159. HOW TO MAKE AN OMELET.

Break three or four eggs into a basin, add a little chopped shalot, and
parsley, pepper, and salt; put an ounce of butter in a frying-pan on the
fire, and as soon as the butter begins to fry, beat up the eggs, etc.,
with a fork for two minutes; immediately pour the whole into the
frying-pan, and put it on the fire, stirring the eggs with an iron spoon
as they become set and the omelet appears nearly done; fold all together
in the form of a bolster, and turn it out on to its dish.


No. 160. FRIED EGGS AND BACON.

First, fry the rashers of bacon, and then break the eggs into the
frying-pan without disturbing the yolks, and as soon as these are just
set, or half-done, slip them out on to the rashers of bacon which you
have already placed in a dish.


No. 161. BUTTERED EGGS.

Fry half an ounce of butter in a frying-pan, then break three or four
eggs into this; season with chopped parsley, pepper and salt, and again
set the pan on the fire for two minutes. At the end of this time the
eggs will be sufficiently set to enable you to slip them gently out of
the pan upon a plate; and to finish cooking the eggs, it will be
necessary to place them or hold them in front of the fire for a couple
of minutes longer.


No. 162. EGGS WITH BROWN BUTTER.

Cook the eggs as directed in the foregoing Number, and when you have
slipped them out on to a dish, put a piece of butter into the
frying-pan, and stir it on the fire until it becomes quite brown (_not
burnt_); then add two table-spoonfuls of vinegar, pepper, and salt; boil
for two minutes, and pour this over the eggs.


No. 163. EGGS STEWED WITH CHEESE.

Fry three eggs in a pan with one ounce of butter, seasoned with pepper
and salt, and when the eggs are just set firm at the bottom of the pan,
slip them off on to a dish, cover them all over with some very thin
slices of cheese, set the dish before the fire to melt the cheese, and
then eat this cheap little tit-bit with some toast.


No. 164. HOW TO MAKE A WELSH RAREBIT.

First, make a round of hot toast, butter it, and cover it with thin
slices of cheese; put it before the fire until the cheese is melted,
then season with mustard, pepper, and salt, and eat the rarebit while
hot.


No. 165. EGG-HOT.

Put a pint of beer on the fire to warm, break an egg into a jug, add a
table-spoonful of sugar and some grated nutmeg or ginger; beat all
together with a fork for three minutes; then add a drop of the beer,
stir well together, and pour the remainder of the hot beer to this, and
continue pouring the egg-hot out of the warming-pot into the jug for two
minutes, when it will be well mixed and ready to drink.


No. 166. GINGER-POP.

Put a _very clean_ pot containing a gallon of water to boil on the fire,
and as soon as it begins to boil, add twelve ounces of brown sugar, and
one ounce of bruised ginger, and two ounces of cream of tartar; stir
well together; pour the whole into an earthen pan, cover it over with a
cloth, and let the mash remain in this state until it has become quite
cold; then stir in half a gill of fresh yeast; stir all well together
until thoroughly mixed, cover the pan over with a cloth, and leave the
ginger-beer in a cool place to work up; this will take from six to eight
hours; the scum which has risen to the top must then be carefully
removed with a spoon without disturbing the brightness of the beer; it
is then to be carefully poured off bright into a jug with a spout, to
enable you easily to pour it into the bottles. These must be immediately
corked down tight, tied across the corks with string, and put away,
lying down in the cellar. The ginger-pop will be fit to drink in about
four days after it has been bottled.


No. 167. PLUM BROTH.

Boil one quart of any kind of red plums in three pints of water with a
piece of cinnamon and four ounces of brown sugar until the plums are
entirely dissolved; then rub the whole through a sieve or colander, and
give it to the children to eat with bread.


No. 168. PLUM PORRIDGE, COLD.

Boil a quart of red plums in a pint of water, with a bit of cinnamon and
four ounces of sugar, until dissolved to a pulp; then rub the whole
through a sieve or colander into a large basin, and when this is quite
cold, mix in with it about a quart of good milk, and give it to the
children to eat with bread for either breakfast or supper.


No. 169. STEWED PRUNES OR PRUENS.

Purchase the cheaper kind of small prunes sold at 4_d._ per lb.; put
them into a saucepan with a pint of water, a bit of lemon-peel, and two
ounces of sugar, and allow them to simmer and stew very gently for about
half an hour, and then let them become nearly cold. Boil some rice in a
cloth, as directed in No. 92, and when done and turned out on its dish,
pour the prunes over it for the children's dinner. Once in a way, this
cheap and wholesome meal would prove a great treat.


No. 170. A SUMMER SALAD.

Rinse and well shake off all moisture from a couple of cos lettuce, cut
them up into a bowl or basin, add a few roughly-chopped green onions,
half a gill of cream, a table-spoonful of vinegar, pepper and salt to
taste. Mix all together.


No. 171. A BACON SALAD.

Having prepared any kind of salad you may happen to have, such as
endive, corn salad, lettuce, celery, mustard and cress, seasoned with
beet-root, onions, or shalot; let the salad be cut up into a bowl or
basin ready for seasoning in the following manner:--Cut eight ounces of
fat bacon into small square pieces the size of a cob-nut, fry these in a
frying-pan, and as soon as they are done, pour the whole upon the salad;
add two table-spoonfuls of vinegar, pepper and salt to taste. Mix
thoroughly.


No. 172. A PLAIN SALAD.

Cos lettuce cut up in a bowl or basin, seasoned with chopped green mint
and green onions, a spoonful of moist sugar, vinegar, pepper and salt.
Mix thoroughly.


No. 173. CELERY CRAB SALAD.

First thoroughly wash and wipe clean, and then cut a stick of celery
into a basin; add two ounces of any kind of cheese sliced very thinly,
season with a good tea spoonful of made mustard, a table-spoonful of
salad oil, ditto of vinegar, with pepper and salt. Mix thoroughly.


No. 174. HOW TO MIX MUSTARD.

Put half an ounce of mustard into a tea-cup, or a small basin, add a
little salt; mix thoroughly with just enough boiling water to work the
whole into a smooth compact soft paste.




COOKERY AND DIET FOR THE SICK ROOM.


No. 175. BEEF TEA.

Chop up a pound of lean beef, and put it on to boil in a saucepan with a
quart of water, stirring it on the fire occasionally while it boils
rather fast, for at least half an hour; at the end of this time the beef
tea will have become reduced to a pint; season with salt to taste,
strain it through a clean bit of muslin or rag, and give a tea-cupful of
it with dry toast to the patient.


No. 176. MUTTON BROTH.

Chop a pound of scrag end of neck of mutton into small pieces, and put
it into a saucepan, with two ounces of barley, and rather better than a
quart of water; set the broth to boil gently on the fire, skim it well,
season with a little salt, thyme, parsley, and a couple of turnips; the
whole to continue gently boiling on the side of the hob for an hour and
a-half; at the end of this time serve some of the broth strained through
a clean rag into a basin; or, if the patient is allowed it, serve the
broth with some of the barley and pieces of the meat in it.


No. 177. CHICKEN BROTH.

Draw, singe, and cut a chicken into four quarters; wash these, put them
into a clean saucepan with a quart of water, and set the broth to boil
on the fire; skim it well, season with two ounces of sago, a small sprig
of thyme and parsley, and a little salt. Allow the broth to boil very
gently for an hour, and then serve some of it with the sago in a cup,
and, if allowed, give the patient the chicken separately.


No. 178. A CHEAPER KIND OF CHICKEN BROTH.

In large towns it is easy to purchase sixpenny-worth of fowls' necks,
gizzards, and feet, which, prepared as indicated in the foregoing
Number, make excellent broth at a fourth part of the cost occasioned by
using a fowl for the same purpose.


No. 179. VEAL AND RICE BROTH.

Cut up one pound and a-half of knuckle of veal, and put it on to boil in
a saucepan with a quart of water, four ounces of rice, a small sprig of
thyme, and a little parsley; season with a few peppercorns and a little
salt; boil very gently for two hours.


No. 180. MEAT PANADA FOR INVALIDS AND INFANTS.

First, roast whatever kind of meat is intended to be made into panada,
and, while it is yet hot, chop up all the lean thereof as fine as
possible, and put this with all the gravy that has run from the meat on
the plate into a small saucepan with an equal quantity of crumb of bread
previously soaked in hot water; season with a little salt (and, if
allowed, pepper), stir all together on the fire for ten minutes, and
give it in small quantities at a time. This kind of meat panada is well
adapted as a nutritious and easily-digested kind of food for old people
who have lost the power of mastication, and also for very young
children.


No. 181. HOW TO PREPARE SAGO FOR INVALIDS.

Put a large table-spoonful of sago into a small saucepan with half a
pint of hot water, four lumps of sugar, and, if possible, a small glass
of port wine; stir the whole on the fire for a quarter of an hour, and
serve it in a tea-cup.


No. 182. HOW TO PREPARE TAPIOCA.

This may be prepared in the same manner as sago; It may also be boiled
in beef tea, mutton broth, or chicken broth, and should be stirred while
boiling.

Arrow-root is to be prepared exactly after the directions given for the
preparation of sago and tapioca.


No. 183. HOW TO MAKE GRUEL.

Mix a table-spoonful of Robinson's prepared groats or grits with a
tea-cupful of cold water, pour this into a saucepan containing a pint of
hot water, and stir it on the fire while it boils for ten minutes;
strain the gruel through a sieve or colander into a basin, sweeten to
taste, add a spoonful of any kind of spirits, or else season the gruel
with salt and a bit of butter.


No. 184. BROWN AND POLSON GRUEL.

Brown and Polson's excellent preparation of Indian corn is to be
purchased of all grocers throughout the kingdom. Mix a dessert-spoonful
of the prepared Indian corn with a wine-glassful of cold water, and pour
this into a small saucepan containing half a pint of hot water; stir on
the fire for ten minutes, sweeten with moist sugar, flavour with nutmeg
or a spoonful of spirits.


No. 185. GRUEL MADE WITH OATMEAL.

In the absence of groats, oatmeal furnishes the means of making
excellent gruel. Mix two table-spoonfuls of oatmeal with a gill of cold
water; pour this into a saucepan containing a pint of hot water, stir
the gruel on the fire while it boils very gently for about a quarter of
an hour, then sweeten with moist sugar, or, if preferred, the gruel may
be eaten with a little salt and a bit of butter.


No. 186. HOW TO MAKE CAUDLE.

Mix four ounces of prepared groats or oatmeal with half a pint of cold
ale in a basin, pour this into a saucepan containing a quart of boiling
ale, or beer, add a few whole allspice, and a little cinnamon, stir the
caudle on the fire for about half an hour, and then strain it into a
basin or jug; add a glass of any kind of spirits, and sugar to taste.


No. 187. RICE GRUEL, A REMEDY FOR RELAXED BOWELS.

Boil very gently eight ounces of rice in a quart of water for about an
hour in a saucepan covered with its lid, and placed on the side of the
hob; the rice must be so thoroughly done as to present the appearance of
the grains being entirely dissolved; a bit of orange-peel or cinnamon
should be boiled with the rice, and when quite soft, the gruel is to be
sweetened with loaf sugar, and a table-spoonful of brandy added.


No. 188. HOW TO PREPARE ARROW-ROOT.

Mix a piled-up dessert-spoonful of arrow-root with half a gill of cold
water, and pour this into a small saucepan containing nearly half a pint
of boiling water, four lumps of sugar, and a glass of wine; stir the
arrow-root while it is boiling on the fire for a few minutes, and then
give it to the patient.

Observe that it is essential to perfection in the preparation of
arrow-root, and, indeed, of all farinaceous kinds of food, that the
whole of the ingredients used in the preparation should be boiled
together.


No. 189. HOW TO MAKE GRUEL WITH PEARL BARLEY.

Put four ounces of pearl barley in a saucepan with two quarts of cold
water and a small stick of cinnamon, and set the whole to boil very
gently by the side of the fire (partly covered with the lid) for two
hours; then add the sugar and the wine, boil all together a few minutes
longer, and then strain the gruel through a colander into a jug, to be
kept in a cool place until required for use; when it can be warmed up in
small quantities.

As this kind of gruel is a powerful cordial, it is to be borne in mind
that it should never be administered unless ordered by a medical man.


No. 190. COW-HEEL BROTH.

Put a cow-heel into a saucepan with three quarts of water, and set it to
boil on the fire; skim it well, season with a few peppercorns, a sprig
of thyme and parsley, and a dessert-spoonful of salt; boil gently for
two hours; at the end of this time the broth will be reduced to half its
original quantity; skim off all the grease, and serve the broth with the
glutinous part of the heel in it. This kind of broth is both
strengthening and healing to the stomach.


No. 191. HOW TO MAKE CALF'S-FEET JELLY.

Boil two calf's feet in two quarts of water very gently for at least two
hours; at the end of this time the liquid will be boiled down to one
half of its original quantity; it is then to be strained into a pan,
and left to cool till the next day. Scrape and wash off all grease, dab
a clean cloth all over the surface to absorb any remaining grease, put
the calf's-foot stock or broth into a very clean saucepan, add three
ounces of lump sugar, a bit of lemon-peel, the juice of a lemon, a
little bruised cinnamon, and half a pint of white wine; boil all
together for ten minutes, skim, strain through a doubled piece of muslin
into a basin; set the jelly in a very cold place to cool and become
firm.


No. 192. HOW TO MAKE ICELAND-MOSS JELLY.

Iceland moss is to be had of all chemists. Put four ounces of Iceland
moss to boil in one quart of water, stirring it the whole time it is on
the fire; and when it has boiled about three-quarters of an hour, add
two ounces of lump sugar and a glass of white wine; strain the jelly
through a piece of muslin into a basin, and when it is set firm and
cold, let it be given to the patient. This kind of jelly is most
beneficial in cases of severe colds, catarrhs, and all pulmonary
diseases of the lungs and chest.


No. 193. HOW TO MAKE BLANCMANGE.

Scald, skin, wash, and thoroughly bruise one ounce of sweet almonds with
a rolling-pin on a table; put this into a basin with one ounce of lump
sugar, and three gills of cold water, and allow the whole to stand and
steep for three hours. Next, boil one ounce of shred isinglass, or
gelatine, in a gill of water, by stirring it on the fire, while boiling,
for ten minutes; pour this to the milk of almonds; strain all through a
muslin into a basin, and when the blancmange has become stiff and cold,
let it be given to the patient in cases of fevers, or extreme delicacy.


No. 194. HOW TO MAKE SICK-DIET JELLY.

Take of sago, tapioca, eringo root, and hartshorn shavings, of each one
ounce; and boil the whole in three pints of water until reduced to one
pint, stirring all the time; then strain the jelly through a muslin into
a basin, and set it aside to become cold. A table-spoonful of this jelly
may be given at a time, mixed in broth, milk, chocolate, cocoa, or tea.
It is considered to be very strengthening.


No. 195. HOW TO PREPARE ISINGLASS JELLY.

Put one ounce and a-half of isinglass, with two ounces of lump sugar and
half a pint of water, into a small stewpan, and stir the whole on the
fire while it boils gently for ten minutes; then remove the jelly from
the fire, add the juice of three oranges, and the thin pared rind of one
orange; stir well together for five minutes, strain through a muslin
into a basin, and set the jelly in a cold place to become stiff.


No. 196. HOW TO MAKE GROUND-RICE MILK.

Put a pint of milk with a bit of cinnamon to boil, mix a large
table-spoonful of ground rice quite smooth with a tea-cupful of milk,
pour this into the boiling milk, stirring quickly all the time in order
to render it smooth; add sugar to sweeten, and stir the ground-rice milk
on the fire while boiling for ten minutes. Remember, that whenever you
are stirring any kind of sauce, gruel, porridge, or thick milk, etc., on
the fire, it is most essential that you should bear with some weight on
the edge of the bowl of the spoon to prevent whatever is being stirred
from burning at the bottom of the saucepan, as such an accident would
infallibly spoil the gruel, etc.


No. 197. HOW TO MAKE A SMALL BATTER-PUDDING.

Beat up in a basin an egg with a large table-spoonful of flour, and a
grain of salt; add, by degrees, a tea-cupful of milk, working all
together vigorously; pour this batter into a ready greased inside of a
tea-cup, just large enough to hold it; sprinkle a little flour on the
top, place a small square clean rag on it, and then, with the spread-out
fingers of the right hand, catch up both cloth and tea-cup, holding them
up in order to enable you to gather up the ends of the rag tight in your
left hand, while with a piece of string held in the right hand, you tie
up the pudding securely, and put it on to boil, in boiling water, for a
good half-hour; at the end of this time the pudding will be done, and
should be eaten immediately with sugar, and a few drops of wine, if
allowed and procurable.


No. 198. HOW TO MAKE A TEA-CUP BREAD-PUDDING.

Bruise a piece of stale crumb of bread the size of an egg, in a basin,
add four lumps of sugar and a very little grated nutmeg, pour half a
gill of boiling milk upon these, stir all well together until the sugar
is melted, then add an egg, beat up the whole thoroughly until well
mixed; pour the mixture into a buttered tea-cup, tie it up in a small
cloth as directed in the preceding Number, boil the pudding for twenty
minutes, at least, and, as soon as done, turn it out on a plate. This,
or any similar light kind of pudding, constitutes safe food for the most
delicate.


No. 199. HOW TO MAKE A TAPIOCA PUDDING.

Put two table-spoonfuls of tapioca into a basin with four lumps of
sugar, a grain of salt, and a lump of sugar rubbed on the rind of a
lemon; pour a gill of boiling milk over these ingredients and cover them
up with a saucer to steep for ten minutes, then add one egg; beat up all
together, and boil the pudding in a buttered tea-cup tied up in a
cloth, for nearly half an hour.


No. 200. HOW TO MAKE AN ARROW-ROOT PUDDING.

Mix a large dessert-spoonful of arrow-root with the same quantity of
bruised sugar, and a tea-cupful of milk, in a small clean saucepan; stir
this on the fire until it boils, and keep on stirring it, off the fire,
for five minutes, until the heat has subsided; then add an egg, beat up
and thoroughly mix it into the batter, and then boil the pudding as
shown in the preceding Numbers.


No. 201. HOW TO MAKE A SAGO PUDDING.

Soak two table-spoonfuls of pearl sago with a tea-spoonful of hot milk,
in a covered basin, for a quarter of an hour; then add a very little
grated nutmeg or lemon-peel, sugar to sweeten, and an egg; beat up all
together until thoroughly mixed, and then boil the pudding in a buttered
basin or tea-cup, as directed in preceding cases.


No. 202. HOW TO MAKE A GROUND-RICE PUDDING.

Mix a large table-spoonful of ground rice with half a pint of milk, six
lumps of sugar, and a very little nutmeg; stir this in a saucepan on the
fire until it has boiled for five minutes; then mix in an egg, and boil
the pudding for twenty-five minutes.


No. 203. BROWN AND POLSON TEA-CUP PUDDING FOR INFANTS.

Mix a good dessert-spoonful of Brown and Polson's corn-flour with half a
pint of milk, six lumps of sugar, a grain of salt, and a very little
grated orange-peel; stir these on the fire to boil for five minutes,
then add one egg, beat up until well mixed; pour this batter into a
buttered tea-cup, tie it up in a small cloth, boil it for twenty-five
minutes, and serve it while hot.




MEDICINAL, HERBACEOUS, AND OTHER DRINKS FOR INVALIDS, ETC.


No. 204. BRAN TEA: A REMEDY FOR COLDS, ETC.

Boil a large handful of bran in a quart of water for ten minutes, then
strain off the water into a jug, sweeten it with one ounce of gum arabic
and a good spoonful of honey; stir all well together, and give this kind
of drink in all cases of affections of the chest, such as colds,
catarrhs, consumption, etc., and also for the measles.


No. 205. ORANGEADE, OR ORANGE DRINK.

Peel off the rind of one orange very thinly without any of the white
pith, and put the rind into a jug, pare off all the white pith from
three oranges so as to lay the pulp of the fruit quite bare, cut them in
slices, take out all the seeds, or, as they are more generally termed,
the pips, as their bitterness would render the drink unpalatable; add
one ounce of sugar, or honey, pour a quart of boiling water to these,
cover up the jug, and allow the orangeade to stand and steep until quite
cold; it may then be given to the patient. This is a cooling beverage,
and may be safely given in cases of fever.


No. 206. HOW TO MAKE LEMONADE.

Proceed in all particulars as directed for making orangeade, using, for
the purpose, lemons instead of oranges.


No. 207. APPLE-WATER DRINK.

Slice up thinly three or four apples without peeling them, and boil
them in a very clean saucepan with a quart of water and a little sugar
until the slices of apples are become soft; the apple water must then be
strained through a piece of clean muslin, or rag, into a jug. This
pleasant beverage should be drunk when cold; it is considered beneficial
in aiding to allay scorbutic eruptions.


No. 208. HOW TO MAKE A SOOTHING DRINK FOR COUGHS.

Take of marsh-mallow roots and of liquorice roots each one ounce; of
linseed, half an ounce; shave the roots very thinly; put them and the
linseed into a clean earthen pot with one quart of hot water, cover with
the lid, and set the whole on the hob of the fire to simmer for half an
hour or more; then strain the drink into a clean jug, sweeten with
honey, and when it has become quite cold, let it be given in small
quantities several times in the course of the day. This mucilaginous
beverage is most beneficial in relieving persons who are suffering from
cold on the chest, and also those who are afflicted with gravel, etc.


No. 209. LINSEED TEA.

Put a table-spoonful of linseed into a clean earthen pot or pipkin with
a quart of water, and a little orange or lemon rind; boil this gently
for about ten minutes, and then strain it through muslin into a jug;
sweeten with honey or sugar, add the juice of a lemon, stir all
together, and give this beverage to allay irritation of the chest and
lungs--in the latter case, the lemon juice had better be omitted.
Linseed tea in its purest form is an excellent accessory in aiding to
relieve such as are afflicted with gout, gravel, etc.


No. 210. CAMOMILE TEA.

Put about thirty flowers into a jug, pour a pint of boiling water upon
them, cover up the tea, and when it has stood about ten minutes, pour it
off from the flowers into another jug; sweeten with sugar or honey;
drink a tea-cupful of it fasting in the morning to strengthen the
digestive organs, and restore the liver to healthier action. A
tea-cupful of camomile tea, in which is stirred a large dessert-spoonful
of moist sugar, and a little grated ginger, is an excellent thing to
administer to aged people a couple of hours before their dinner.


No. 211. BALM AND BURRAGE TEA.

These, as well as all other medicinal herbs, may easily be cultivated in
a corner of your garden, when you are so fortunate as to live in a
cottage of your own in the country; they are also to be obtained from
all herbalists in large towns. Take of balm and burrage a small handful
each, put this into a jug, pour in upon the herbs a quart of boiling
water, allow the tea to stand for ten minutes, and then strain it off
into another jug, and let it become cold. This cooling drink is
recommended as a beverage for persons whose system has become heated
from any cause.


No. 212. SAGE OR MARYGOLD TEA.

Put a dozen sage leaves into a tea-pot, pour boiling water upon them,
and, after allowing the tea to stand for five or ten minutes, it may be
drunk with sugar and milk, in the same way and instead of the cheaper
kinds of teas, which are sold for foreign teas, but which are too often
composed of some kind of leaf more or less resembling the real plant,
without any of its genuine fragrance, and are, from their spurious and
almost poisonous nature, calculated to produce evil to all who consume
them, besides the drawback of their being expensive articles.

Teas made from sage leaves, dried mint, marygolds, and more
particularly the leaf of the black currant tree, form a very pleasant as
well as wholesome kind of beverage; and, if used in equal proportions,
would be found to answer very well as a most satisfactory substitute for
bad and expensive tea.


No. 213. HOW TO STEW RED CABBAGES.

The use of the red cabbage in this country is confined to its being
pickled almost raw, and eaten in that detestable and injurious state,
whereby its anti-scorbutic powers are annulled.

The red cabbage, when merely boiled with bacon, or with a little butter
and salt, is both nutritious and beneficial in a medicinal point of
view, inasmuch as that it possesses great virtue in all scorbutic and
dartrous affections. On the Continent it is customary to administer it
in such cases in the form of a syrup, and also in a gelatinized state.
The red cabbage, stewed in the following manner, will be found a very
tasty dish:--Slice up the red cabbage rather thin, wash it well, drain
it, and then put it into a saucepan with a little dripping or butter, a
gill of vinegar, pepper and salt; put the lid on, and set the cabbage to
stew slowly on the hob, stirring it occasionally from the bottom to
prevent it from burning; about an hour's gentle stewing will suffice to
cook it thoroughly. All kinds of cabbage or kail are anti-scorbutic
agents.


No. 214. HOW TO MAKE TOAST WATER.

Toast a piece of bread thoroughly browned to its centre without being
_burnt_, put it into a jug, pour boiling water upon it, cover over and
allow it to stand and steep until it has cooled; it will then be fit to
drink.


No. 215. HOW TO MAKE BARLEY WATER.

Boil one ounce of barley in a quart of water for twenty minutes; strain
through muslin into a jug containing a bit of orange or lemon peel.


No. 216. HOW TO MAKE RICE WATER.

To six ounces of rice add two quarts of water, and two ounces of
Valentia raisins; boil these very gently for about half an hour, or
rather more; strain off the water into a jug, add about two
table-spoonfuls of brandy. Rice water, prepared as above, is recommended
in cases of dysentery and diarrhoea.


No. 217. HOW TO MAKE TREACLE POSSET.

Sweeten a pint of milk with four table-spoonfuls of treacle, boil this
for ten minutes; strain it through a rag; drink it while hot, and go to
bed well covered with blankets; and your cold will be all the less and
you the better for it.


No. 218. HOW TO MAKE WHITE WINE WHEY.

Put a pint of milk into a very clean saucepan or skillet, to boil on the
fire; then add half a gill of any kind of white wine; allow the milk to
boil up, then pour it into a basin, and allow it to stand in a cool
place, that the curd may fall to the bottom of the basin; then pour off
the whey--which is excellent as an agent to remove a severe cough or
cold.


No. 219. HOW TO MAKE A CORDIAL FOR COLDS.

First, prepare a quart of the juice of black currants, by bruising and
boiling them for twenty minutes, and then straining off the juice with
great pressure through a sieve into a basin. Next, boil four ounces of
linseed in a quart of water until reduced to one-third of its original
quantity, taking care that it does not boil fast, and, when done, strain
the liquid into a very clean saucepan; add the currant juice, two pounds
of moist sugar, and half an ounce of citric acid, or one pint of lemon
juice; boil all together until reduced to a thick syrup--that is, when
it begins to run rather thick from the spoon without resembling treacle;
as soon as the syrup has reached this stage, remove it from the fire,
and pour it into a jug to become quite cold. This syrup will keep good
for any length of time, if bottled and corked down tight, and kept in a
cool place. A tea-spoonful taken occasionally will soon relieve the most
troublesome cough.

This cordial may also be prepared in winter, using for the purpose black
currant jam, or preserved black currant juice, instead of the juice of
fresh-gathered currants.


No. 220. HOW TO MAKE A STRINGENT GARGLE.

Put the following ingredients into a very clean earthen pipkin:--Twenty
sage leaves, a handful of red rose leaves, and a pint of water; boil
these for twenty minutes, then add a gill of vinegar, and two
table-spoonfuls of honey; boil again for ten minutes, and strain the
gargle through a muslin rag, to be used when cold.


No. 221. A SIMPLE REMEDY AGAINST WIND ON THE STOMACH.

A few drops (say four) of essence of peppermint on a lump of sugar.


No. 222. A CURE FOR A HARD DRY COUGH.

Take of each one table-spoonful--spermaceti grated, honey, and
peppermint water; mix all together with the yolks of two eggs in a
gallipot. A tea-spoonful to be taken on the tongue, and allowed to be
swallowed slowly as it dissolves.


No. 223. A COOLING DRINK.

To half an ounce of cream of tartar, add one ounce of loaf sugar, and a
bit of orange or lemon peel; put these into a jug, pour upon them a
quart of boiling water; stir all together, and allow the beverage to
become cold.


No. 224. HOP TEA.

Pour a quart of boiling water upon half an ounce of hops, cover this
over, and allow the infusion to stand for fifteen minutes; the tea must
then be strained of into another jug. A small tea-cupful may be drunk
fasting in the morning, which will create an appetite, and also
strengthen the digestive organs.


No. 225. LIME-FLOWER TEA.

To half an ounce of lime-flowers, placed in a tea-pot or jug, pour a
pint of boiling water, and when the infusion has stood for ten minutes,
sweeten with honey or sugar, and drink the tea hot, to assuage the pains
in the stomach and chest, arising from indigestion. This beverage may
also be successfully administered in attacks of hysteria.


No. 226. HYSSOP TEA: A REMEDY FOR WORMS.

To a quarter of an ounce of dried hyssop flowers, pour one pint of
boiling water; allow the tea to infuse for ten minutes, pour it off,
sweeten with honey, and take a wine-glassful three times in the course
of the day; this will prove an effectual cure when children are troubled
with worms.


No. 227. ICELAND-MOSS JELLY.

Boil four ounces of Iceland moss in one quart of water very slowly for
one hour, then add the juice of two lemons and a bit of rind, four
ounces of sugar, and a gill of sherry; boil up, and remove the scum from
the surface; strain the jelly through a muslin bag into a basin, and set
it aside to become cold; in which state it may be eaten, but it is far
more efficacious in its beneficial results when taken warm. The use of
Iceland moss jelly is strongly recommended in cases of consumption, and
in the treatment of severe colds, catarrhs, and all phlegmatic diseases
of the chest.


No. 228. ANTISPASMODIC TEA.

Infuse two-pennyworth of hay saffron (sold at all chemists') in a gill
of boiling water in a tea-cup for ten minutes; add a dessert-spoonful of
brandy, and sugar to sweeten, and drink the tea hot. This powerful yet
harmless remedy will quickly relieve you from spasmodic pains occasioned
by indigestion.


No. 229. DANDELION TEA.

Infuse one ounce of dandelion in a jug with a pint of boiling water for
fifteen minutes; sweeten with brown sugar or honey, and drink several
tea-cupfuls during the day. The use of this tea is recommended as a safe
remedy in all bilious affections; it is also an excellent beverage for
persons afflicted with dropsy.


No. 230. REFRESHING DRINK FOR SORE THROAT ATTENDED WITH FEVER.

Boil two ounces of barberries with half an ounce of violets in a quart
of water for ten minutes; sweeten with honey, strain off into a jug, and
drink several glasses during the day.


No. 231. A CURE FOR SPRAINS.

Bruise thoroughly a handful of sage-leaves, and boil them in a gill of
vinegar for ten minutes, or until reduced to half the original quantity;
apply this in a folded rag to the part affected, and tie it on securely
with a bandage.


No. 232. A CURE FOR CHILBLAINS.

The pulp of a baked turnip beat up in a tea-cup with a table-spoonful
of salad oil, ditto of mustard, and ditto of scraped horse-radish; apply
this mixture to the chilblains, and tie it on with a piece of rag.


No. 233. A CURE FOR BURNS OR SCALDS.

Thoroughly bruise a raw onion and a potato into a pulp, by scraping or
beating them with a rolling-pin; mix this pulp with a good
table-spoonful of salad oil, and apply it to the naked burn or scald;
secure it on the part with a linen bandage.


No. 234. A CURE FOR COLD IN THE HEAD.

Thirty drops of camphorated sal volatile in a small wine-glassful of hot
water, taken several times in the course of the day.


No. 235. A CURE FOR THE STING OF WASPS OR BEES.

Bruise the leaf of the poppy, and apply it to the part affected.


No. 236. A CURE FOR TOOTHACHE.

Roll a small bit of cotton wadding into a ball the size of a pea, dip
this in a very few drops of camphorated chloroform, and with it fill the
hollow part of the decayed tooth.


No. 237. HOW TO MAKE COFFEE.

Mix one ounce of ground coffee in a clean pot with a pint of cold water,
stir this on the fire till it boils, then throw in a very little more
cold water, and after allowing the coffee to boil up twice more, set it
aside to settle, and become clear and bright. The dregs saved from twice
making, added to half the quantity of fresh coffee, will do for the
children. It is best to make your coffee over-night, as it has then
plenty of time to settle. If, as I recommend, you grind your coffee at
home, you will find Nye's machines very good.


No. 238. HOW TO PREPARE COCOA NIBS.

Boil gently two ounces of cocoa nibs in three pints of water for two
hours and a-half, without allowing it to reduce more than one-third;
that is, the three pints should be boiled down to one quart. When
sufficiently boiled, strain the cocoa from the nibs, mix it with equal
proportions of milk, and sweeten with sugar. Two ounces of cocoa nibs
cost a penny three-farthings, one quart of skim milk twopence (in the
country one penny), two ounces of moist sugar three-farthings; thus, for
about fourpence halfpenny, you may prepare sufficient cocoa for the
breakfasts of four persons. This would be much wholesomer and cheaper
than tea. To be sure, it would take some trouble and care to prepare it,
and this should be attended to over-night.




ECONOMICAL AND SUBSTANTIAL SOUP FOR DISTRIBUTION TO THE POOR.


I am well aware, from my own experience, that the charitable custom of
distributing wholesome and nutritious soup to poor families living in
the immediate neighbourhood of noblemen and gentlemen's mansions in the
country, already exists to a great extent; yet, it is certainly
desirable that this excellent practice should become more generally
adopted, especially during the winter months, when their scanty means of
subsistence but insufficiently yield them food adequate in quantity to
sustain the powers of life in a condition equal to their hard labour. To
afford the industrious well-deserving poor a little assistance in this
way, would call forth their gratitude to the givers, and confer a
blessing on the needy. The want of knowing how to properly prepare the
kind of soup best adapted to the purpose has, no doubt, in a great
measure, militated against its being more generally bestowed throughout
the kingdom; and it is in order to supply that deficient knowledge, that
I have determined on giving easy instructions for its preparation.


No. 239. HOW TO PREPARE A LARGE QUANTITY OF GOOD SOUP FOR THE POOR.

It is customary with most large families, while living in the country,
to kill at least some portion of the meat consumed in their households;
and without supposing for a moment that any portion of this is ever
wasted, I may be allowed to suggest that certain parts, such as sheep's
heads, plucks, shanks, and scrag-ends, might very well be spared towards
making a good mess of soup for the poor. The bones left from cooked
joints, first baked in a brisk oven for a quarter of an hour, and
afterwards boiled in a large copper of water for six hours, would
readily prepare a gelatinized foundation broth for the soup; the bones,
when sufficiently boiled, to be taken out. And thus, supposing that your
copper is already part filled with the broth made from bones (all the
grease having been removed from the surface), add any meat you may have,
cut up in pieces of about four ounces weight, garnish plentifully with
carrots, celery, onions, some thyme, and ground allspice, well-soaked
split peas, barley, or rice; and, as the soup boils up, skim it well
occasionally, season moderately with salt, and after about four hours'
gentle and continuous boiling, the soup will be ready for distribution.
It was the custom in families where I have lived as cook, to allow a
pint of this soup, served out with the pieces of meat in it, to as many
as the recipients' families numbered; and the soup was made for
distribution twice every week during winter.


No. 240. ANOTHER METHOD FOR MAKING ECONOMICAL SOUP.

In households where large joints of salt beef, or pork, are cooked
almost daily for the family, the liquor in which they have been boiled
should be saved, all grease removed therefrom, and put into the copper
with a plentiful supply of carrots, parsnips, celery, and onions, all
cut in small pieces, the whole boiled and well skimmed till the
vegetables are done; the soup is then to be thickened with either
oatmeal, peasemeal, or Indian corn meal, seasoned with pepper and ground
allspice, and stirred continuously until it boils up again; it must then
be skimmed, and the best pieces of meat selected from the stock-pot
should be kept in careful reserve, to be added to the soup, and allowed
to boil therein for half an hour longer.


No. 241. HOW TO MAKE FISH SOUP IN LARGE QUANTITIES FOR DISTRIBUTION TO
THE POOR.

This kind of soup, it will be easily understood, is applicable only on
the sea-coast, and wherever fish is to be had very cheap. Chop fine a
dozen onions, some thyme, and winter savory, and put these into a
copper, or some large pot, with about six gallons of water, one pound of
butter, pepper and salt enough to season; allow the whole to boil for
ten minutes, then thicken the broth with about four pounds of oatmeal,
peasemeal, or flour; stir the soup continuously until it boils, and then
throw in about fifteen pounds of fish cut up in one-pound size pieces,
and also some chopped parsley; boil all together until the fish is done,
and then serve out the soup to the recipients. All kinds of fish, except
sprats, herrings, and pilchards, are equally well adapted for making
fish soup, but codfish, cod's heads, skate, eels, etc., and all
glutinous fish, suit the purpose best.




INDEX.


Anchovy Sauce, 64

Antispasmodic Tea, 97

Apples, baked, 57

Apple Dumplings, baked, 53

Apple Pudding, 30

Apple-water Drink, 90

Arrow-root, how to prepare, 84

Arrow-root Pudding, 89


Bacon and Cabbages, boiled, 47

Bacon and Cabbage Soup, 18

Bacon, how to cure, 26

Bacon Roll-pudding, 38

Balm and Burrage Tea, 92

Barley Water, 93

Batter and Fruit Pudding, 30

Batter-pudding, how to make a small, 87

Beef and Potatoes, baked, 35

Beef, boiled, 13

Beef, how to boil, 13

Beefsteaks, plain, 42

Beef Tea, 81

Beer, how to brew your own, 65

Belgian Faggots, 41

Biscuits, hard, 69

Black Puddings, 27

Blancmange, how to make, 86

Bouillabaisse Soup, 63

Bran Tea, a Remedy for colds, etc., 90

Bread, how to bake your own, 68

Bread Pudding, for a family, 29

Bread-pudding, how to make a tea-cup, 88

Bread Sauce, for a Roast Fowl, 20

Broad Beans, how to cook, 74

Broth made from bones for Soup, 16

Brown and Polson Fruit Pudding, 32

Brown and Polson Pudding, 31

Brown and Polson Tea-cup Pudding for infants, 89

Brown and Polson Thick Milk, 32

Bullock's Heart, baked, 39

Bullock's Heart, stuffed, 39

Bubble and Squeak, 46

Burns or Scalds, a Cure for, 98


Cabbage and Bacon, fried, 73

Calf's-feet Jelly, how to make, 85

Camomile Tea, 91

Caudle, how to make, 84

Cheese, Italian, 28

Chicken Broth, 82

Chicken Broth, cheap, 82

Chilblains, a Cure for, 97

Christmas Plum Pudding, 50

Cocky Leeky, 19

Cocoa Nibs, how to prepare, 99

Cod's Head, baked, 63

Coffee, how to make, 98

Cold in the Head, a Cure for, 98

Colds, how to make a cordial for, 94

COOKERY AND DIET FOR THE SICK-ROOM, 81

Cough, a Cure for a hard dry, 95

Cow-heel Broth, 18, 85

Currant Jam, 55


Dandelion Tea, 97

Drink, a cooling, 95

Ducks, baked or roast, 24

Dumplings, Norfolk, 33

Dumplings, Yeast, 33


ECONOMICAL AND SUBSTANTIAL SOUP FOR DISTRIBUTION TO THE POOR, 99

Economical Pot Liquor Soup, 14

Eels, stewed, 34

Egg-hot, 78

Eggs and Bacon, fried, 77

Eggs, buttered, 77

Egg Sauce for Roast Fowls, etc., 20

Eggs stewed with Cheese, 78

Eggs with Brown Butter, 77

Elder Wine, how to make, 57


Fish, baked, 63

Fish Curry, how to make a, 48

Fish Pie, 37

Fish, salt, with Parsnips, 62

Fish Soup, 60

Fish Soup, how to make large quantities for distribution to the poor, 101

Fish, to boil, 64

Fish, to fry, 61

French Beans, how to cook, 74

Fruit Pies in general, 52


Gargle, how to make a stringent, 95

Giblet Pie, 37

Gingerbread Nuts, 70

Ginger-pop, 78

Goose, baked, 23

Gooseberry Jam, how to make, 56

Gravy, brown, for Roast Fowls, etc., 20

Ground-rice Milk, how to make, 87

Ground-rice Pudding, 89

Gruel, Brown and Polson, 83

Gruel, how to make, 83

Gruel, how to make with Pearl Barley, 85

Gruel made with Oatmeal, 84


Hams, how to cure, 25

Hams, how to smoke, 26

Hare, jugged, 46

Haricot Beans, a Salad of, 76

Haricot Beans, how to dress, 75, 76

Haricot Beans, white, 75

Hashed Meats, 43

Herrings, red, a dinner of, 61

Hop Tea, 96

Hyssop Tea, a Remedy for Worms, 96


Iceland-moss Jelly, 86, 96

Irish Stew, 60

Isinglass Jelly, how to prepare, 87


Jam Pudding, 51

Jam Tart, 53


Kidney Pudding, 43


Leg of Beef, stewed, 18

Lemonade, how to make, 90

Lentils, 76

Lime-flower Tea, 96

Linseed Tea, 91


Mackerel, soused, 61

Meat Panada for Invalids and Infants, 82

Meat Pie, 37

MEDICINAL, HERBACEOUS, AND OTHER DRINKS FOR INVALIDS, ETC., 90

Milk, thick for breakfast, 16

Mince-meat, a cheap kind of, 52

Mince-pie, how to make a, 53

Mince-pie Paste, 52

Muscles, or Mussels, stewed, 34

Mustard, how to mix, 81

Mutton Broth, 81

Mutton Chops, or Steaks, 43

Mutton, Shoulder of, boiled, and Onions, 36


Oatmeal Porridge for Six Persons, 16

Omelet, how to make an, 77

Onions, baked or roasted, 74

Onion Soup for Six Persons, 15

Orangeade, or Orange Drink, 90

Ox-cheek Soup, 17

Ox Kidney, stewed, 39

Oysters, stewed, 34


Pancakes for Shrove Tuesday, 54

Parsley Sauce, 64

Parsnips, buttered, 73

Pears, baked, 56

Peas and Bacon, 74

Pea Soup for Six Persons, 15

Pig's Feet, 28

Pig's Fry, 42

Pig's Head, baked, 23

Pig, how to make the most of, after it is killed, 24

Pig's Pluck, how to dispose of, 27

Pig, Sucking, baked, 24

Plum Broth, 79

Plum or Currant Dough Pudding, 50

Plum Porridge, cold, 79

Pork Chops, grilled or boiled, 20

Pork, roast, 45

Potatoes, baked or roasted, 71

Potatoes, baked, mashed, 72

Potatoes, how to boil, 70

Potatoes, how to fry, 71

Potatoes, how to mash, 72

Potatoes, how to steam, 70

Potatoes, how to stew, 72

Potatoes, mashed with Ling, 72

Potato Pie, 38

Potato Pudding, 32

Potato Soup for Six Persons, 14

Prunes, or Pruens, stewed, 79

Pudding, baked Suet, 36

Pudding made of small Birds, 22

Pudding, Yorkshire, 35

Pumpkin Porridge, 58


Rabbit Pudding, 38

Raisinet, a Preserve for Winter, 54

Red Cabbages, how to stew, 93

Rhubarb, how to preserve, 56

Rhubarb Pie, 51

Rice and Apples, 31

Rice, curried, 28

Rice Dumplings, 49

Rice Gruel, a Remedy for Relaxed Bowels, 84

Rice-milk for Six Persons, 59

Rice Pudding, a Ground, 29

Rice Pudding, a Plain, 29

Rice, the way to boil, 49

Rice Water, 94

Roast Fowl and Gravy, 19


Sage or Marygold Tea, 92

Sago for Invalids, how to prepare, 83

Sago Pudding, 89

Salad, a Bacon, 80

Salad, a Plain, 80

Salad, a Summer, 80

Salad, Celery Crab, 80

Sauce for Sweet Puddings, 50

Sausage Dumplings, 45

Sausages, Pork, how to make, 27

Sausage Rolls, 45

Sausages, stewed, 42

Seam, or Loose Fat, how to melt down, 28

Sharp Sauce for Broiled Meats, 21

Sheep's-head Broth, 17

Sheep's Heads, baked, 40

Sheep's Pluck, 40

Sheep's Trotters, stewed, 40

Sick-diet Jelly, how to make, 87

Skate, baked, 64

Soothing Drink for Coughs, 91

Sore Throat attended with Fever, refreshing Drink for, 97

Soup for the Poor, how to prepare a large quantity of good, 100, 101

Spinach, how to cook, 73

Sprains, a Cure for, 97

Steaks, fried, and Onions, 41

Steaks, stewed, 41

Sting of Wasps or Bees, a Cure for, 98

Supper, a Relish for, 76

Swedish Turnips, buttered, 73


Tapioca, how to prepare, 83

Tapioca Pudding, 88

Toad in the Hole, 36

Toast Water, 93

Toothache, a Cure for, 98

Treacle Posset, 94

Treacle Pudding, 30

Tripe, baked, 45

Tripe, boiled, 44


Veal and Rice Broth, 82

Veal Cutlets and Bacon, 22

Veal, Knuckle of, and Rice, 59

Veal, roast, stuffed, 21

Vegetable Marrow, how to cook, 74

Vegetable Porridge, 58

Vegetable Pottage, economical, 47


Welsh Rarebit, how to make a, 78

White Wine Whey, 94

Wind on the Stomach, a simple Remedy against, 95


Yorkshire Pie-clates for Tea, 69


THE END.


Thomas Harrild, Printer, Shoe Lane, Fleet Street, London.




[Illustration]

TO THE FACULTY.

J. & J. COLMAN'S

GENUINE MUSTARD.

The Lancet, by its resumed inquiries upon the subject of adulterations,
has again called attention of the Public to a variety of articles of
daily use.

To Mustard great prominence has been given, from the fact that
thirty-three samples were examined. The Report states that _four_ only
were found to be _genuine_: of which, _two_ samples were of the
manufacture of J. and J. COLMAN, being respectively "Colman's Genuine
London Mustard, Warranted Pure," and "Colman's Brown Mustard, Warranted
Pure."

We also learn that manufactured Mustard extends from the _pure_ and
_genuine_ to the _injurious combination_ exposed in _The Lancet_ (see
27th Sample examined); to which disclosure the attention of Medical Men
is invited (whether practising privately or in Hospitals and
Infirmaries) when prescribing Mustard as a remedial agent. The fact is
also equally important to the Vendor and his customer, the Public.

And further, as to _quality_--_The Lancet_, in substance, reports that
_genuine Mustard_ will be as _varied_ in strength, pungency, and
flavour, as are the known differences between the finest and most
inferior qualities of seed; it results, then, that _genuine_ does not
necessarily imply high quality.

J. and J. COLMAN submit, that in their _Pure Mustards_ nothing that
known skill and improved machinery can obtain from finest seed remains
unsecured, and, whether for prompt and specific _medical_ effects, or as
a table condiment, these Mustards are equally valuable.

J. and J. COLMAN offer to the Public not only "Genuine" and "Pure"
Mustard in the highest perfection, but also their other varieties of
Mustard Condiments, known as "Double Superfine," "Superfine," "Fine,"
etc., in which delicacy, flavour, and strength will be found in
agreeable combination. These Mustards may be obtained of any Grocer,
Chemist, or Italian Warehouseman in the kingdom; and when sold in tins
or packets, J. and J. COLMAN's _trade mark_, the "Bull's Head," is a
guarantee upon which the Public may rely.

J. & J. COLMAN, 26, Cannon Street, London, E.C.


                     CONSUMPTION IN ALL ITS STAGES,

        Coughs, Whooping Cough, Asthma, Bronchitis, Fever, Ague,
          Diphtheria, Hysteria, Rheumatism, Diarrhoea, Spasms,
            Colic, Renal and Uterine Diseases, are immediately
                         relieved by a dose of

                             =CHLORODYNE.=

                            (_Trade Mark._)

Discovered and named by DR. J. COLLIS BROWNE, M.R.C.S.L., Ex-Army
Medical Staff.

The question asked by invalids, families, and households is, What is the
best medicine to give in the above diseases, and what to have always
ready? Medical testimony, the reply of thousands of sufferers and
invalids, is confirmatory of the invaluable relief afforded by this
remedy above all others.

CHLORODYNE is a liquid taken in drops according to age. It invariably
relieves pain of whatever kind; creates a calm, refreshing sleep; allays
irritation of the nervous system when all other remedies fail; leaving
no bad effects, like opium or laudanum, and can be taken when none other
can be tolerated. Its value in saving life in infancy is not easily
estimated; a few drops will subdue the irritation of Teething, prevent
and arrest Convulsions, cure Whooping Cough, Spasms, and Flatus at once.

Among invalids it allays the pain of Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Gout, etc.
It soothes the weary achings of Consumption, relieves the Soreness of
the Chest, Cough, and Expectoration; and cures all Chest Affections,
such as Asthma, Bronchitis, Palpitation, etc. It checks Diarrhoea,
Alvine Discharges, or Spasms, and Colics of the Intestines, etc.

The extensive demand for this remedy, known as Dr. J. COLLIS BROWNE'S
CHLORODYNE, by the Medical Profession, Hospitals, Dispensaries--Civil,
Military, and Naval--and Families especially, guarantees that this
statement of its extreme importance and value is a _bona fide_ one, and
worthy the attention of all.

EXTRACTS OF MEDICAL OPINIONS.

From W. VESALIUS PETTIGREW, M.D.--"I have no hesitation in stating that
I have never met with any medicine so efficacious as an anti-spasmodic
and sedative. I have used it in Consumption, Asthma, Diarrhoea, and
other diseases, and am most perfectly satisfied with the results."

From DR. M'MILMAN, of New Galloway, Scotland.--"I consider it the most
valuable medicine known."

G. HAYWARD, Esq., Surgeon, Stow-on-ye-Wold.--"I am now using Dr. J.
Collis Browne's Chlorodyne with marvellous good effects in allaying
inveterate sickness in pregnancy."

DR. M'GRIGOR CROFT, late Army Staff, says:--"It is a most valuable
medicine."

J. C. BAKER, Esq., M.D., Bideford.--"It is without doubt the most
valuable and certain anodyne we have."

DR. GIBBON, Army Medical Staff, Calcutta.--"Two doses completely cured
me of Diarrhoea."

From G. V. RIDOUT, Esq., Surgeon, Egham.--"As an astringent in severe
Diarrhoea, and an anti-spasmodic in Colic, with Cramps in the Abdomen,
the relief is instantaneous. As a sedative in Neuralgia and Tic-Doloreux
its effects were very remarkable. In Uterine Affections I have found it
extremely valuable."

CAUTION.--Beware of Spurious Compounds or Imitations of "Chlorodyne."
Dr. Browne placed the Recipe for making "Chlorodyne" in the hands of Mr.
Davenport ONLY; consequently, there can be no other Manufacturer. The
genuine bears the words, "Dr. J. Collis Browne's Chlorodyne," on the
Government Stamp of each Bottle.--Sold only in Bottles at 2_s._ 9_d._,
and 4_s._ 6_d._, by the Sole Agent and Manufacturer,

J. T. DAVENPORT,

33, GREAT RUSSELL STREET, BLOOMSBURY SQUARE, LONDON.


BE CAREFUL WHAT YOU EAT.

BORWICK'S is _the_ BAKING POWDER recommended by Dr. Hassall (Analyst to
the _Lancet_, Author of "Adulterations Detected," etc.) It was the
_first_, and is the _best_ Baking Powder--often imitated, but never
equalled. Its merits are too well known to require any _puffing_ by the
Proprietor. Warranted free from alum, found in most of the worthless
imitations. Try it once, and you will never use the trash made from
inexpensive materials, and recommended by unprincipled shopkeepers,
because they realize a larger profit by the sale. As you value your
health, insist upon having BORWICK's Baking Powder only.

Sold retail by most Druggists, Grocers, and Oilmen, in 1d., 2d., 4d.,
and 6d. packets, and 1s. boxes. Wholesale by G. BORWICK, 21, Little
Moorfields, E. C.


LIFE FOR THE CONSUMPTIVE.

One Tablespoonful of the PATENT OZONIZED COD LIVER OIL, three times a
day, conveys artificially to the lungs of the Consumptive and delicate,
the vital properties of Oxygen without the effort of inhalation, and has
the wonderful effect of reducing the pulse while it strengthens the
system. The highest Medical authorities pronounce it the nearest
approach to a specific for Consumption yet discovered--in fact, it will
restore to health when all other remedies fail. See _Lancet_, March 9th,
1861.

Sold by all Chemists, in 2s. 6d., 4s. 9d., and 9s. bottles. Wholesale by
G. BORWICK, Sole Licensee, 21, Little Moorfields, London.


FRAMPTON'S PILL OF HEALTH.

This excellent FAMILY PILL is a Medicine of long-tried efficacy for
purifying the blood, and correcting all Disorders of the Stomach and
Bowels. Two or three doses will convince the afflicted of its salutary
effects. The stomach will speedily regain its strength; a healthy action
of the liver, bowels, and kidneys will rapidly take place; and renewed
health will be the quick result of taking this medicine, according to
the directions accompanying each box.

PERSONS OF A FULL HABIT, who are subject to headache, giddiness,
drowsiness, and singing in the ears, arising from too great a flow of
blood to the head, should never be without them, as many dangerous
symptoms will be entirely carried off by their timely use; and for
elderly people, where an occasional aperient is required, nothing can be
better adapted.

For FEMALES these Pills are truly excellent, removing all obstructions,
the distressing headache so prevalent with the sex, depression of
spirits, dulness of sight, nervous affections, blotches, pimples, and
sallowness of the skin, and give a healthy juvenile bloom to the
complexion.

Sold by all medicine vendors. Observe the name of "THOMAS PROUT, 229,
Strand, London," on the Government Stamp. Price 1s. 1-1/2d. and 2s 9d.
per box.


BLAIR'S GOUT AND RHEUMATIC PILLS.

Price 1s. 1-1/2d. and 2s. 9d. per box.

This preparation is one of the benefits which the Science of modern
Chemistry has conferred upon mankind; for during the first twenty years
of the present century to speak of a cure for the Gout was considered a
romance; but now the efficacy and safety of this Medicine is so fully
demonstrated, by unsolicited testimonials from persons in every rank of
life, that public opinion proclaims this as one of the most important
discoveries of the present age.

These Pills require no restraint of diet or confinement, during their
use, and are certain to prevent the disease attacking any vital part.

Sold by all medicine vendors. Observe "THOMAS PROUT, 229, Strand,
London," on the Government Stamp.


SILVER MEDAL, FIRST-CLASS, PARIS, 1855.

[Illustration]

S. NYE AND Co.'s PATENT MACHINES,

OF VARIOUS SIZES,

For Mincing Meat, Vegetables, etc.; for making Sausages, Mince-meat,
Force-meat, Potted-meat, and various dishes for Families, Hotel-keepers,
Confectioners, Butchers, and also for Hospitals, Lunatic Asylums, and
all large Establishments.

Price £1. 10s., £2. 2s., £3. 3s., and £7. 7s.

SMALL MINCER OR MASTICATOR,

TO ASSIST DIGESTION Price 30s.

79, WARDOUR STREET, LONDON.


[Illustration]

S. NYE'S IMPROVED MILLS,

For Coffee, Pepper, Spice, Rice, etc.,

ARE THE BEST AND MOST CONVENIENT MADE.

Price 8s., 10s., and 14s. each.

79, WARDOUR STREET, LONDON.


COUGHS, ASTHMA, AND INCIPIENT CONSUMPTION ARE EFFECTUALLY CURED BY

KEATING'S COUGH LOZENGES,

Judged by the IMMENSE DEMAND, this UNIVERSAL REMEDY now stands the first
in public favour and confidence; this result has been acquired by the
test of fifty years' experience. These Lozenges may be found on sale in
every British Colony, and throughout India and China they have been
highly esteemed wherever introduced. For COUGHS, ASTHMA, and all
affections of the Throat and Chest, they are the most agreeable and
efficacious remedy.

Prepared and Sold in Boxes, 1s. 1-1/2d., and Tins, 2s. 9d., 4s. 6d., and
10s. 6d. each, by THOMAS KEATING, Chemist, etc., 79, St. Paul's
Churchyard, London. Retail by all Druggists and Patent Medicine Vendors
in the World.


KEATING'S PALE NEWFOUNDLAND COD LIVER OIL.

PERFECTLY PURE, NEARLY TASTELESS, and FREE FROM ADULTERATIONS OF ANY
KIND, having been analyzed, reported on, and recommended by Professors
TAYLOR and THOMSON, of Guy's and St. Thomas's Hospitals, and also quite
recently examined by Dr. EDWIN PAYNE, who, in the words of the late Dr.
PEREIRA, say, that "The finest oil is that most devoid of _colour_,
_odour_, and _flavour_," characters this will be found to possess in a
high degree.

Half-pints 1s. 6d., Pints 2s. 6d., Quarts 4s. 6d., and Five-pint Bottles
10s. 6d., Imperial Measure. 79, St. Paul's Churchyard, London.


BROWN & POLSON'S

PATENT CORN FLOUR

Being first of the kind manufactured in the United Kingdom and France,
it is in both Countries not only

THE ORIGINAL,

but is indisputably the Only article of the kind, which by its own
merit, and the simple publicity of its uses, has been adopted by the
best families as an invariable table delicacy. It is prepared by a
process to which long experience has given the greatest perfection, and
from grain carefully selected from the choicest European crops; these
advantages are so appreciable, that its quality has by comparison been
preferred to all others, and

THE LANCET,

in a notice given July 24, 1858, states, "=This is superior to anything
of the kind known="--an opinion indisputably confirmed by scientific
tests and public appreciation.

THE ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS,

AND

THE LEISURE HOUR,

have given most interesting notices accompanied by engravings,
explanatory of the process of manufacture; and Dr. LANKESTER, F.R.S.,
F.L.S., speaks of it in the highest terms of praise in his Lectures at
the South Kensington Museum, on "Food."--(Hardwicke, Piccadilly, pp.
71-80.)

       *       *       *       *       *

Families by writing on their orders ... _packets' Brown and Polson_, and
refusing to receive any but the packages which bear BROWN and POLSON'S
name in full and Trade Mark, would discourage the fraudulent means by
which the substitution of inferior kinds are encouraged.

Many Grocers, Chemists, etc., who supply the best quality, in preference
to best profit articles, sell none but BROWN and POLSON'S.




[Illustration]

My object in writing this little book is to show you how you may prepare
and cook your daily food, so as to obtain from it the greatest amount of
nourishment at the least possible expense; and thus, by skill and
economy, add, at the same time, to your comfort and to your
comparatively slender means. The Recipes which it contains will afford
sufficient variety, from the simple every-day fare to more tasty dishes
for the birthday, Christmas-day, or other festive occasions.

To those of my readers who, from sickness or other hindrance, have not
money in store, I would say, strive to lay by a little of your weekly
wages ... that your families may be well fed, and your homes made
comfortable.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Plain Cookery Book for the Working
Classes, by Charles Elmé Francatelli

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PLAIN COOKERY BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 22114-8.txt or 22114-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/1/1/22114/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
