Project Gutenberg's Uncle Remus and Brer Rabbit, by Joel Chandler Harris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Uncle Remus and Brer Rabbit

Author: Joel Chandler Harris

Release Date: August 9, 2007 [EBook #22282]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNCLE REMUS AND BRER RABBIT ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, LN Yaddanapudi and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file made using scans of public
domain works at the University of Georgia.)






[Illustration]

UNCLE REMUS _and_ BRER RABBIT

_By_

Joel Chandler Harris

  NEW YORK
  FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY
  PUBLISHERS

  Copyright, 1906, by
  Joel Chandler Harris

  Copyright, 1907, by
  Frederick A. Stokes Company
  September, 1907




THE CREETURS GO TO THE BARBECUE


[Illustration]

"Once 'pon a time," said Uncle Remus to the little boy--"But when was
once upon a time?" the child interrupted to ask. The old man smiled. "I
speck 'twuz one time er two times, er maybe a time an' a half. You know
when Johnny Ashcake 'gun ter bake? Well, 'twuz 'long in dem days. Once
'pon a time," he resumed, "Mr. Man had a gyarden so fine dat all de
neighbors come ter see it. Some 'ud look at it over de fence, some 'ud
peep thoo de cracks, an' some 'ud come an' look at it by de light er de
stars. An' one un um wuz ol' Brer Rabbit; starlight, moonlight,
cloudlight, de nightlight wuz de light fer him. When de turn er de
mornin' come, he 'uz allers up an' about, an' a-feelin' purty well I
thank you, suh!

[Illustration]

"Now, den, you done hear what I say. Dar wuz Mr. Man, yander wuz de
gyarden, an' here wuz ol' Brer Rabbit." Uncle Remus made a map of this
part of the story by marking in the sand with his walking-cane. "Well,
dis bein' de case, what you speck gwineter happen? Nothin' in de roun'
worl' but what been happenin' sence greens an' sparrer-grass wuz planted
in de groun'. Dey look fine an' dey tas'e fine, an' long to'rds de shank
er de mornin', Brer Rabbit 'ud creep thoo de crack er de fence an'
nibble at um. He'd take de greens, but leave his tracks, mo' speshually
right atter a rain. Takin' an' leavin'--it's de way er de worl'.

[Illustration]

"Well, one mornin', Mr. Man went out in his truck patch, an' he fin'
sump'n missin'--a cabbage here, a turnip dar, an' a mess er beans
yander, an' he ax how come dis? He look 'roun', he did, an' he seed Brer
Rabbit's tracks what he couldn't take wid 'im. Brer Rabbit had lef' his
shoes at home, an' come bar'footed.

[Illustration]

"So Mr. Man, he call his dogs 'Here, Buck! Here, Brinjer! Here, Blue!'
an' he sicc'd um on de track, an' here dey went!

[Illustration]

"You'd 'a' thunk dey wuz runnin' atter forty-lev'm rhinossyhosses fum de
fuss dey made. Brer Rabbit he hear um comin' an' he put out fer home,
kinder doublin' 'roun' des like he do deze days.

[Illustration]

"When he got ter de p'int whar he kin set down fer ter rest his face an'
han's, he tuck a poplar leaf an' 'gun ter fan hisse'f. Den Brer Fox come
a-trottin' up. He say, 'Brer Rabbit, what's all dis fuss I hear in de
woods? What de name er goodness do it mean?' Brer Rabbit kinder scratch
his head an' 'low, 'Why, deyer tryin' fer drive me ter de big bobbycue
on de creek. Dey all ax me, an' when I 'fuse dey say deyer gwine ter
make me go any how. Dey aint no fun in bein' ez populous ez what I is,
Brer Fox. Ef you wanter go, des git in ahead er de houn's an' go
lickity-split down de big road!'

[Illustration]

"Brer Fox roll his little eyes, an' lick his chops whar he dribble at de
mouf, an put out ter de bobbycue, an' he aint mo' dan made his
disappearance, 'fo' here come Brer Wolf, an' when he got de news, off he
put.

"An' he aint mo'n got out'n sight, 'fo' here come ol' Brer B'ar, an'
when he hear talk er de bakin' meat an' de big pan er gravy, he sot up
on his behime legs an' snored. Den off he put, an' he aint got out'n
hearin', 'fo' Brer Coon come rackin' up, an' when he got de news, he put
out.

[Illustration]

"So dar dey wuz an' what you gwine do 'bout it? It seem like dey all got
in front er de dogs, er de dogs got behime um, an' Brer Rabbit sot by de
creek-side laughin' an' hittin' at de snake doctors. An' dem po'
creeturs had ter go clean past de bobbycue--ef dey wuz any bobbycue,
which I don't skacely speck dey wuz. Dat what make me say what I
does--when you git a invite ter a bobbycue, you better fin' out when an'
whar it's at, an' who runnin' it."




BRER RABBIT'S FROLIC


[Illustration]

The little boy, when he next saw Uncle Remus, after hearing how the
animals went to the barbecue, wanted to know what happened to them: he
was anxious to learn if any of them were hurt by the dogs that had been
chasing Brother Rabbit. The old darkey closed his eyes and chuckled.
"You sho is axin' sump'n now, honey. Und' his hat, ef he had any, Brer
Rabbit had a mighty quick thinkin' apple-ratus, an' mos' inginner'lly,
all de time, de pranks he played on de yuther creeturs pestered um bofe
ways a-comin' an' a-gwine. De dogs done mighty well, 'long ez dey had
dealin's wid de small fry, like Brer Fox, an' Brer Coon, an' Brer Wolf,
but when dey run ag'in' ol' Brer B'ar, dey sho struck a snag. De mos'
servigrous wuz de identual one dat got de wust hurted. He got too close
ter Brer B'ar, an' when he look at hisse'f in runnin' water, he tuck
notice dat he wuz split wide open fum flank ter dewlap.

[Illustration]

"Atter de rucus wuz over, de creeturs hobbled off home de best dey
could, an' laid 'roun' in sun an' shade fer ter let der cuts an' gashes
git good an' well. When dey got so dey could segashuate, an' pay der
party calls, dey 'gree fer ter insemble some'rs, an' hit on some plan
fer ter outdo Brer Rabbit. Well, dey had der insembly, an' dey jower'd
an' jower'd des like yo' pa do when he aint feelin' right well; but,
bimeby, dey 'greed 'pon a plan dat look like it mought work. Dey 'gree
fer ter make out dat dey gwine ter have a dance. Dey know'd dat ol' Brer
Rabbit wuz allers keen fer dat, an' dey say dey'll gi' him a invite, an'
when he got dar, dey'd ax 'im fer ter play de fiddle, an' ef he 'fuse,
dey'll close in on 'im an' make way wid 'im.

[Illustration]

"So fur, so good! But all de time dey wuz jowerin' an' confabbin', ol'
Brer Rabbit wus settin' in a shady place in de grass, a-hearin' eve'y
word dey say. When de time come, he crope out, he did, an' run 'roun',
an' de fust news dey know'd, here he come down de big
road--bookity-bookity--same ez a hoss dat's broke thoo de pastur' fence.
He say, sezee, 'Why, hello, frien's! an' howdy, too, kaze I aint seed
you-all sence de last time! Whar de name er goodness is you been deze
odd-come-shorts? an' how did you far' at de bobbycue? Ef my two eyeballs
aint gone an' got crooked, dar's ol' Brer B'ar, him er de short tail an'
sharp tush--de ve'y one I'm a-huntin' fer! An' dar's Brer Coon! I sho is
in big luck. Dar's gwineter be a big frolic at Miss Meadows', an' her
an' de gals want Brer B'ar fer ter show um de roas'n'-y'ar shuffle; an'
dey put Brer Coon down fer de jig dey calls rack-back-Davy.

[Illustration]

"'I'm ter play de fiddle--sump'n I aint done sence my oldest gal had de
mumps an' de measles, bofe de same day an' hour! Well, dis mornin' I
tuck down de fiddle fum whar she wuz a-hangin' at, an' draw'd de bow
backerds an' forerds a time er two, an' den I shot my eyes an' hit some
er de ol'-time chunes, an' when I come ter myse'f, dar wuz my whole
blessed fambly skippin' an' sasshayin' 'roun' de room, spite er de fack
dat brekkus wuz ter be cooked!'

[Illustration]

"Wid dat, Brer Rabbit bow'd, he did, an' went back down de road like de
dogs wuz atter 'im."

[Illustration]

"But what happened then?" the little boy asked. "Nothin' 't all,"
replied Uncle Remus, taking up the chuckle where he had left off. "De
creeturs aint had no dance, an' when dey went ter Miss Meadows', she put
her head out de winder, an' say ef dey don't go off fum dar she'll have
de law on um!"




BROTHER BEAR'S BIG HOUSE


[Illustration]

"Uv all de creeturs", said Uncle Remus, in response to a questioning
took on the part of the little boy, "ol Brer B'ar had de biggest an' de
warmest house. I dunner why ner wharfo', but I'm a-tellin' you de plain
fack, des ez dey to!' it unter me. Ef I kin he'p it I never will be
deceivin' you, ner lead you inter no bad habits. Yo' pappy trotted wid
me a mighty long time, an' ef you'll ax him he'll tell you dat de one
thing I never did do wuz ter deceive him whiles he had his eyes open;
not ef I knows myse'f. Well, ol' Brer B'ar had de big house I'm
a-tellin' you about. Ef he y'ever is brag un it, it aint never come down
ter me. Yit dat's des what he had--a big house an' plenty er room fer
him an' his fambly; an' he aint had mo' dan he need, kaze all er his
fambly wuz fat an' had what folks calls heft--de nachal plunkness.

[Illustration]

"He had a son name Simmon, an' a gal name Sue, not countin' his ol'
'oman, an' dey all live wid one an'er day atter day, an' night atter
night; an' when one un um went abroad, dey'd be spected home 'bout
meal-time, ef not befo', an' dey segashuated right along fum day ter
day, washin' der face an' han's in de same wash-pan in de back po'ch,
an' wipin' on de same towel same ez all happy famblies allers does.

[Illustration]

"Well, time went on an' fotched de changes dat might be spected, an' one
day dar come a mighty knockin' on Brer B'ar's do'. Brer B'ar, he holla
out, he did. 'Who dat come a-knockin' dis time er de year, 'fo' de
corn's done planted, er de cotton-crap's pitched?' De one at de do' make
a big noise, an' rattle de hinges. Brer B'ar holla out, he did, 'Don't
t'ar down my house! Who is you, anyhow, an' what you want?' An' de
answer come, 'I'm one an' darfo' not two; ef youer mo' dan one, who is
you an' what you doin' in dar?' Brer B'ar, he say, sezee, 'I'm all er
one an' mighty nigh two, but I'd thank you fer ter tell me yo' full
fambly name.' Den de answer come.

[Illustration]

"'I'm de knocker an' de mover bofe, an' ef I can't clim' over I'll crawl
under ef you do but gi' me de word. Some calls me Brer Polecat, an' some
a big word dat it aint wuff while ter ermember, but I wanter move in.
It's mighty col' out here, an' all I meets tells me it's mighty warm in
dar whar you is.' Den ol' Brer B'ar say, sezee. 'It's warm nuff fer dem
what stays in here, but not nigh so warm fer dem on de outside. What
does you reely want?' Brer Polecat 'spon', he did, 'I wants a heap er
things dat I don't git. I'm a mighty good housekeeper, but I takes
notice dat dar's mighty few folks dat wants me ter keep house fer um.'
Brer B'ar say, sezee, 'I aint got no room fer no housekeeper; we aint
skacely got room fer ter go ter bed. Ef you kin keep my house on de
outside, you er mighty welcome.'

[Illustration]

"Brer Polecat say, 'You may think you aint got no room, but I bet you
got des ez much room ez anybody what I know. Ef you let me in dar one
time, I boun' you I'll make all de room I want.'"

[Illustration]

Uncle Remus paused to see what effect this statement would have on the
little boy. He closed his eyes, as though he were tired, but when he
opened them again, he saw the faint shadow of a smile on the child's
face. "'Taint gwine ter hurt you fer ter laugh a little bit, honey. Brer
Polecat come in Brer B'ar's house, an' he had sech a bad breff dat dey
all hatter git out--an' he stayed an' stayed twel time stopped runnin'
ag'in' him."




BRER RABBIT TREATS THE CREETURS TO A RACE


[Illustration]

One sultry summer day, while the little boy was playing not far from
Uncle Remus's cabin, a heavy black cloud made its appearance in the
west, and quickly obscured the sky. It sent a brisk gale before it, as
if to clear the path of leaves and dust. Presently there was a blinding
flash of lightning, a snap and a crash, and, with that, the child took
to his heels, and ran to Uncle Remus, who was standing in his door. "Dar
now!" he exclaimed, before the echoes of the thunder had rolled away,
"Dat dust an' win', an' rain, puts me in mind er de time when ol' Brer
Rabbit got up a big race fer ter pleasure de yuther creeturs. It wuz de
mos' funniest race you ever hear tell on. Brer Rabbit went 'way off in
de woods twel he come ter de Rainmaker's house. He knocked an' went in,
an' he ax de Rainmaker ef he can't fix it up so dey kin have a race
'tween Brer Dust an' Cousin Rain, fer ter see which kin run de fastes'.
De Rainmaker growled an' jowered, but bimeby he 'gree, but he say that
ef 'twuz anybody but Brer Rabbit, he wouldn't gi' it but one thunk.

[Illustration]

"Well, dey fix de day, dey did, an' den Brer Rabbit put out ter whar de
creeturs wuz stayin' at, an' tol' um de news. Dey dunner how Brer Rabbit
know, but dey all wanter see de race. Now, him an' de Rainmaker had fixt
it up so dat de race would be right down de middle er de big road, an'
when de day come, dar's whar he made de creeturs stan'--Brer B'ar at de
bend er de road, Brer Wolf a leetle furder off, an' Brer Fox at a p'int
whar de cross-roads wuz. Brer Coon an' Brer Possum an' de yuthers be
scattered about up an' down de Road.

[Illustration]

"Ter dem what has ter wait, it seem like de sun stops an' all de clocks
wid 'im. Brer B'ar done some growlin'; Brer Wolf some howlin' an' Brer
Possum some laughin'; but atter while a cloud come up fum some'rs.
'Twant sech a big cloud, but Brer Rabbit know'd dat Cousin Rain wuz in
dar 'long wid Uncle Win'. De cloud crope up, it did, twel it got right
over de big road, an' den it kinder drapped down a leetle closer ter de
groun'. It look like it kinder stop, like a buggy, fer Cousin Rain ter
git out, so der'd be a fa'r start. Well, he got out, kaze de creeturs
kin see 'im, an' den Uncle Win', he got out.

[Illustration]

"An' den, gentermens! de race begun fer ter commence. Uncle Win' hep'd
um bofe; he had his bellows wid 'im, an' he blow'd it! Brer Dust got up
fum whar he wuz a-layin' at, an' come down de road des a-whirlin'. He
stricken ol' Brer B'ar fust, den Brer Wolf, an' den Brer Fox, an' atter
dat, all de yuther creeturs, an' it come mighty nigh smifflicatin' um!
Not never in all yo' born days is you y'ever heern sech coughin' an'
sneezin', sech snortin' an' wheezin'! An' dey all look like dey wuz
painted red. Brer B'ar sneeze so hard dat he hatter lay down in de road,
an' Brer Dust come mighty nigh buryin' 'im, an' 'twuz de same wid de
yuther creeturs--dey got der y'ears, der noses, an' der eyeses full.

[Illustration]

"An' den Cousin Rain come 'long, a-pursuin' Brer Dust, an' he come
mighty nigh drownin' um. He left um kivver'd wid mud, an' dey wuz wuss
off dan befo'. It wuz de longest 'fo' dey kin git de mud out 'n der eyes
an' y'ears, an' when dey git so dey kin see a leetle bit, dey tuck
notice dat Brer Rabbit, stidder bein' full er mud, wuz ez dry ez a chip,
ef not dryer.

[Illustration]

"It make um so mad, dat dey all put out atter 'im, an' try der level
best fer ter ketch, but ef dey wuz anything in de roun' worl' dat Brer
Rabbit's got, it's soople foots, an' 'twant no time 'fo' de yuther
creeturs can't see ha'r ner hide un 'im! All de same Brer Rabbit aint
bargain fer ter have two races de same day."

"But, Uncle Remus," said the little boy, "which beat, Brother Dust or
Cousin Rain?" The old man stirred uneasily in his chair, and rubbed his
chin with his hand. "Dey tells me," he responded cautiously, "dat when
Cousin Rain can't see nothin' er Brother Dust, he thunk he am beat, but
he holla out, 'Brer Dust, wharbouts is you?' an' Brer Dust he holla
back, 'You'll hatter scuzen me; I fell down in de mud an' can't run no
mo'!'"




BRER RABBIT'S FLYING TRIP


    [Illustration]

    Dar once wuz a time when most er de creeturs
      Got mighty tired er Brer Rabbit's capers,
    An' dey 'semble', dey did, grass an' meat eaters.
      Browsers an' grazers, an' likewiss de bone-scrapers,
            Fer ter see what dey kin do.

    Brer B'ar wuz dar, wid his bid fur suit on,
      An' ol' Brer Wolf fetched his big howl along,
    An' when eve'ything wuz ready, wid a long, loud hoot on,
      Here come ol' Simon Swamp Owl along,
            A-tootin' of his too-whoo.

    Dar wuz ol' Brer Fox, suh, wid his black socks, suh,
      An' a heap er creeturs dat I don't hatter mention;
    Some bow-legged an' some knock-kneed in de hocks, suh.
      An' dey all agree fer ter hol' a convention
            Fer ter stop Brer Rabbit's pranks.

    [Illustration]

    Brer Fox, he 'low he'll gi' a pot er gol', suh,
      Ter de man what kin tol Brer Rabbit off, suh;
    Brer Buzzard say, "I'm a-gittin' ol', suh,
      But I'll try my han," an' den he cough, suh.
            An' de rest un um bowed dere thanks.

    Now, ol' Brer B'ar wuz a-settin' in de cheer, suh,
      So he stand up an' move a motion;
    He up an' 'low, "Le's erso'v right here, suh,
      Fer ter thank Brer Buzzard whiles we're in de notion,
            An' not put it off ter some yuther day."

    An' den dey had it up an' down, suh,
      'Sputin' 'bout what dey oughter do,
    Some wanter gi' 'im a flower crown, suh,
      Ef he rid Brer Rabbit up dar in de blue,
            An' drap 'im when he got half-way.

    [Illustration]

    Dey sont a runner atter ol' Brer Rabbit
      Ter ax 'im ter call an' 'ten' de convention;
    But ol' frien' Wobble-nose had a quare habit
      Er knowin' a thing befo' it wuz mention',
            An he come 'fo' he got de word.

    He wiggle his nose, an' wunk his eye--
      "Here sho is de man I wants ter see, suh!
    Brer Buzzard I'm tryin' ter l'arn how ter fly!"
      An' c'ose Brer Buzzard gi' his agree, suh,
            An' all un um say he's a 'commydatin' bird!

    [Illustration]

    An' den Brer Buzzard half spread his wing, suh
      He try ter look young, but he wuz ol' suh--
    He try ter strut an' walk wid a swing, suh;
      He wuz dreamin' 'bout dat pot er gol', suh,
            An' what he wuz gwine fer ter buy.

    Brer Buzzard ain't skacely got thoo wid his pride, suh,
      'Fo' Brer Rabbit lit right 'tween his floppers,
    Wid, "Now, hump yo'se'f, an' gi' me a ride, suh,
      Ef you don't I'll hit--I'll hit you some whoppers
            When I git you up dar in de sky!"

    [Illustration]

    Well, de creeturs grinned when Brer Buzzard riz, suh.
      An' made a big fuss accordin' ter der natur';
    Ez fer ol' Brer Rabbit, de pleasure wuz all his, suh
      De ridin' wuz easy ez eatin' tater
            When it's b'iled an' made inter pie!

    Kaze under bofe wings he had a paw, suh,
      An', when Brer Buzzard try fer ter drap 'im.
    He'd scratch an' tickle 'im wid his claw, suh;
      An' when Brer Buzzard try fer ter flap 'im,
            He'd scratch an' wink his eye!

    [Illustration]

    An' wid his claws he tuck an' steered 'im
      Fum post ter pillar in de deep blue, suh;
    He'd holla an' laugh--all de creeturs heer'd 'im--
      You know how you'd feel ef it hab been you, suh,
            A-waitin' fer some un ter fall!

    When ol' Brer Rabbit got tired er ridin',
      He steered Brer Buzzard right straight ter de groun', suh,
    An' den an' dar went right inter hidin'.
      When de creeturs come up he couldn't be foun', suh,
            An' I speck an' I reckon dat's all!




BRER RABBIT AND THE GOLD MINE


[Illustration]

There had been silence in the cabin for a long ten minutes, and Uncle
Remus, looking up, saw a threat of sleep in the little boy's eyes.
Whereupon he plunged headlong into a story without a word of
explanation.

"Well, suh, one year it fell out dat de craps wuz burnt up. A dry drouth
had done de work, an' ef you'd 'a' struck a match anywhar in dat
settlement, de whole county would 'a' blazed up. Ol' man Hongriness des
natchally tuck of his cloze an' went paradin' 'bout eve'ywhar, an' de
creeturs got bony an' skinny. Ol' Brer B'ar done better dan any un um,
kaze all he hatter do wuz go ter sleep an' live off'n his own fat; an'
Brer Rabbit an' his ol' 'oman had put some calamus root by, an' saved up
some sugar-cane dat dey fin' lyin' 'roun' loose, an' _dey_ got 'long
purty well. But de balance er de creeturs wuz dat ga'nt dat dey ain't
got over it down ter dis day.

[Illustration]

"De creeturs had der meetin'-place, whar dey could all set 'roun' an'
talk de kind er politics dey had, des like folks does at de cross-roads
grocery. One day, whiles dey wuz all settin' an' squottin' 'roun',
jowerin' an' confabbin', Brer Rabbit, he up 'n' say, sezee, dat ol'
Mammy-Bammy-Big-Money tol' his great gran'daddy dat dar wuz a mighty big
an' fat gol' mine in deze parts, an' he say dat he wouldn't be 'tall
'stonished ef 'twant some'rs close ter Brer B'ar's house. Brer B'ar, he
growled, he did, an' say dat de gol' mine better not let him fin' it,
kaze atter he got done wid it, dey won't be no gol' mine dar.

[Illustration]

"Some laughed, some grinned an' some gapped, an', atter jowerin' some
mo', dey all put out ter whar der famblies wuz livin' at; but I boun'
you dey ain't fergit 'bout dat gol' mine, kaze, fum dat time on, go whar
you mought, you'd ketch some er de creeturs diggin' an' grabblin' in de
groun', some in de fields, some in de woods, an' some in de big road;
an' dey wuz so weak an' hongry dat dey kin skacely grabble fer fallin'
down.

[Illustration]

"Well, dis went on fer de longest, but bimeby, one day, dey all 'gree
dat sump'n bleeze ter be done, an' dey say dey'll all take one big hunt
fer de gol' mine, an' den quit. Dey hunted in gangs, wid de gangs not
fur fum one an'er, an' it so happen dat Brer Rabbit wuz in de gang wid
Brer Wolf, an' he know'd dat he hatter keep his eyes wide open. All de
creeturs hatter dig in diffunt places, an' whiles Brer Rabbit want much
uv a grabbler, he had a way er makin' de yuthers b'lieve dat he wuz de
best er de lot. So he made a heap er motion like he wuz t'arin' up de
yeth. Dey ain't been gwine on dis away long fo' Brer Wolf holler out,

[Illustration]

"'Run here, Brer Rabbit! I done foun' it!' Brer B'ar an' Brer Fox wuz
bofe diggin' close by, an' Brer Rabbit kinder wunk one eye at de
elements; he say, sezee, 'Glad I is fer yo' sake, Brer Wolf; git yo'
gol' an' 'joy yo'se'f!' Brer Wolf say, 'Come git some, Brer Rabbit! Come
git some!' Ol' Brer Rabbit 'spon', 'I'll take de leavin's, Brer Wolf;
you take what you want, an' den when you done got 'nough I'll get de
leetle bit I want.' Brer Wolf say, 'I wanter show you sump'n.' Brer
Rabbit 'low, 'My eyes ain't big fer nothin'.' Brer Wolf say, 'I got a
secret I wanter tell you.' Brer Rabbit 'low, 'My y'ears ain't long fer
nothin'. Des stan' dar an' do yo' whisperin', Brer Wolf, an' I'll hear
eve'y word you say.'

[Illustration]

"Brer Wolf ain't say nothin', but make out he's grabblin', an' den, all
of a sudden, he made a dash at Brer Rabbit, but when he git whar Brer
Rabbit wuz at, Brer Rabbit ain't dar no mo'; he done gone. Weak an'
hongry ez he is, Brer Wolf know dat he can't ketch Brer Rabbit, an' so
he holler out, 'What's yo' hurry, Brer Rabbit? Whar you gwine?' Brer
Rabbit holler back, 'I'm gwine home atter a bag fer ter tote de gol' you
gwine leave me! So long, Brer Wolf; I wish you mighty well!' an' wid dat
he put out fer home."




BRER RABBIT GETS BRER FOX A HOSS


    [Illustration]

    Not many er de creeturs wuz fon' er water,
    Onless it mought 'a' been Brer Coon's daughter;
    Brer B'ar, Brer Fox, an' ol' Brer Rabbit,
    Dey vow'd dey can't never git in de habit
    Er wadin' de creek, er swimmin' de river--
    When it come ter dat, dey'd run ter kivver!
    When folks come 'long fer ter git across,
    De creeturs tuck notice dat dey rid a hoss.

    [Illustration]

    Brer Fox, he say he wish he had one,
    An' 'mongst all de yuthers he'd be de glad un;
    He'd git a bridle an' a bran' new saddle,
    An' git on de hoss an' ride 'im straddle;
    He say, sezee, "He'd do some trottin',
    Kaze when I git started, I'm a mighty hot un!"
    Brer Rabbit, he smole a great big smile,
    Wid, "I can't ride myse'f, kaze I got a b'ile!

    [Illustration]

    "But it seem like ter me dat I knows whar a hoss is:
    He's away back yan' whar two roads crosses,
    An' I'll meet you dar termorrer mornin',
    Des 'bout de time when day's a-dawnin'."
    Brer Fox, he say, "I hear yo' sesso,
    An' ef I ain't sick I'll be dar desso!"
    Brer Rabbit tip his hat, wid, "So-long, frien';
    We'll git de hoss, you may depen'."

    [Illustration]

    Long 'fo' de time, Brer Rabbit wuz a-stirrin',
    An' he chuckle ter hisse'f like a cat a-purrin';
    De hoss wuz stretched out asleep in de pastur';
    Brer Rabbit went up des ez close ez he dast ter,
    Fer ter see ef he 'live: hoss switched his tail, suh!
    "Dis time we'll git you widout fail, suh!"
    So Brer Rabbit say; den he seed Brer Fox--
    "An' an'er fine gent fer ter git in a box!"

    [Illustration]

    Den he say out loud, "Good luck done sont 'im,
    An' laid 'im down right whar you want 'im!
    Ef youer tied ter his tail, you kin sholy hol' 'im,
    An' mo' dan dat, you kin trip 'im an' roll 'im!"
    So said, so done! an' dar Brer Fox wuz,
    Right close ter de place whar a heap er knocks wuz!
    Brer Rabbit, he holla, "Hol' 'im down! hol' 'im down!
    Des make 'im stay right spang on de groun'!"

    [Illustration]

    De hoss, he riz wid a snort an' a whicker,
    An' showed dat he wuz sump'n uv a kicker!
    An' den an' dar, Brer Rabbit 'gun ter snicker,
    Wid, "Hol' 'im, Brer Fox! 'twon't do ter flicker!
    Ef you make 'im stan' still, you kin ride 'im de quicker!"
    De hoss, he r'ar'd an' raise a mighty dust up,
    An' fust thing you know, Brer Rabbit hear a bust-up!
    "I hope, Brer Fox, dat you ain't much hurt--
    But yo' wife'll be mad, kaze you done tored yo' shirt!"




BRER RABBIT FINDS THE MOON IN THE MILL POND


    [Illustration]

    Oh, one bright day in de middle er May,
        Brer Rabbit wuz feelin' fine;
    He tuck ter de road, an' never know'd
        De place whar he wuz gwine!

    "Oh, fur an' free," sezee, "siree,
        No gal kin change my min'!"
    Brer Tarrypin, sly, he wunk one eye,
        Un'neat' his green-gourd vine!

    He holla an' say, "Whar you gwine dis day,
        Wid yo' pipe an' walkin'-cane?"
    Brer Rabbit wave his han' like a gal do her fan--
        "My heart's 'bout ter bust wid pain;

    [Illustration]

    "I'm a heap too nice, I ain't laugh'd but twice
        Sence de big Jinawary rain;
    My day'll be done ef I don't have some fun--
        Dey'll call me Sunday-Jane!

    "I'll git sollumcholic ef I don't have a frolic,
        My head'll git flabby an' swink;
    I chaw de pine-bud, kaze I'm 'bout ter lose my cud
        An' some nights I don't sleep a wink!

    "Ef I has ter set still, oh, I'll w'ar de green willow,
        An' go in mo'nin' wid de Mink!
    But I bet you a hat dat 'fo' I does dat,
        I'll show um all a new kink!"

    [Illustration]

    So, off he put, on his nimbles' foot,
        Wid a grin, a laugh, an' a cough;
    Ter Miss Motts an' Miss Meadows, an' all de udders,
        He tell what 'uz gwineter come off!

    'Twuz a mill-pon' fishin', an' he lef um a-wishin'
        Dat de win' don't blow fum de norf!
    An' de creeturs all, bofe long an' tall--
        An' dem no bigger dan a dwarf--

    Brer Wolf an' Brer B'ar,--all say dey'd be dar,
        An' dey promise fer ter fetch a seine;
    Dey 'gree ter de day, an' Brer Rabbit say
        Dat dey don't hatter come ef it rain;

    [Illustration]

    So said, so done, an' when de time come,
        De big road ez well ez de lane
    Wuz filled wid a crowd, all talkin' out loud,
        An' a-prankin' wid might an' main!

    Brer Rabbit wuz dar, wid Miss Molly Har',
        A-waitin' fer de fun ter begin;
    He shuck his shank, an' went ter de bank,
        An' make like he gwineter jump in!

    But de sight dat he saw made 'im drap his jaw,
        An' break up a great big grin!
    He sez ter Brer Coon, "Run here an' see de Moon!
        A-floatin' widout a fin!"

    [Illustration]

    He look ag'in--"She sho fell in,
        An' we got ter git her out;
    Ef she stays in de pon', it's 'good-bye, John!'
        An' uv dat dey ain't no doubt;

    "We got ter have light when we play at night,
        Fer ter see how ter git about;
    We'll drag wid de seine--ef we don't drag in vain,
        We'll have good reason ter shout!"

    But when it come ter seinin', dar wuz some complainin
        'Bout who wuz ter do it all,
    Dey all make out dat dey wanter wade out,
        But it fell on dem dat wuz tall:

    [Illustration]

    Brer B'ar, he laugh, ez he tuck a staff,
        Brer Wolf say he fear'd he'd fall,
    But he tuck his place wid a mighty wry face,
        An' when dey 'gun ter haul.

    "Oh, you better bet dis water's wet!
        I feel des like a sponge!"
    An' den dey all, wid a kick an' a squall,
        Wid a squeal an' den a lunge,

    Grabbed at de water--which dey hadn't oughter
        Went over der heads wid a splunge;
    Brer Rabbit bent double, "Oh, all er yo' trouble
        Fills me full er fun-unj-unj!"




HOW MR. LION LOST HIS WOOL


[Illustration]

"Twuz des sech a day ez dis dat Mr Lion lost his wool," remarked Uncle
Remus to the little boy, "Mr. Man tuck a notion dat de time done come
fer him fer ter have a hog-killin' an' he got 'im a big barrel, an' fill
it half full er water fum de big springs. Den he piled up 'bout a cord
er wood, an' ez he piled, he put rocks 'twix' de logs, an' den he sot de
wood after at bofe een's an' in de middle. 'Twan't long 'fo' dey had de
hogs killt, an' eve'ything ready fer ter scrape de ha'r off. Den he tuck
de red-hot rocks what he put in de fire, an' flung um in de barrel whar
de water wuz, an' 'twan't long, mon, 'fo' dat water wuz ready fer ter
bile. Den dey tuck de hogs, one at a time, an' soused um in de water,
an' time dey tuck um out, he ha'r wuz ready fer ter drap out by de
roots. Den dey'd scrape un wid sticks an' chips, an' dey aint leave a
ha'r on um.

[Illustration]

"Well, bimeby, dey had all de hogs killt an' cleaned, an' hauled off,
an' when eve'ything wuz still ez a settin' hen, ol' Brer Rabbit stuck
his head out fum behine a bush whar he been settin' at. He stuck his
head out, he did, an' look all 'roun', an' den he went whar de fier wuz
an' try fer ter warm hisse'f. He aint been dar long 'fo' here come Brer
Wolf an' Brer Fox, an den he got busy.

[Illustration]

"He say, 'Hello, frien's! howdy an' welcome! I 'm des fixin' fer ter
take a warm baff like Mr. Man gi' his hogs; wont you j'ine me?' Dey say
dey aint in no hurry, but dey holp Brer Rabbit put de hot rocks in de
barrel an' dey watch de water bubble, an' bimeby, when eve'ything wuz
ready, who should walk up but ol' Mr. Lion?

[Illustration]

"He had a mane fum his head plum ter de een' er his tail, an' in some
places it wuz so long it drug on de groun'--dat what make all de
creeturs 'fear'd un 'im. He growl an' ax um what dey doin', an' when
Brer Rabbit tell 'im, he say dat's what he long been needin'. 'How does
you git in?' 'Des back right in,' sez ol' Brer Rabbit, sezee, an' wid
dat,

[Illustration]

"Mr. Lion backed in, an' de water wuz so hot, he try fer ter git out,
an' he slipped in plum ter his shoulder-blades. You kin b'lieve me er
not, but dat creetur wuz scall'd so dat he holler'd an' skeer'd
eve'ybody fur miles aroun'.

[Illustration]

"An when he come out, all de wool drap't out, 'cep' de bunch you see on
his neck, an' de leetle bit you'll fin' on de een' er his tail--an'
dat'd 'a' come off ef de tail hadn't 'a' slipped thoo de bung-hole er de
barrel." With that, Uncle Remus closed his eyes, but not so tightly that
he couldn't watch the little boy. For a moment the child said nothing,
and then, "I must tell that tale to mother before I forget it!" So
saying, he ran out of the cabin as fast as his feet could carry him,
leaving Uncle Remus shaking with laughter.




HOW BRER RABBIT GOT A HOUSE


    [Illustration]

    Oh, once 'pon a time, all de creeturs, all de creeturs,
        Tuck a notion dat dey'd build a house,
    An' fix it so ez ter keep out de skeeters,
        An' fix it up nix cummy rous!
    Dey all wuz dar fum de B'ar ter de Possum,
        Brer Wolf, Brer Fox, Brer Coon,
    Wid ol' Brer Rabbit fer ter stan' 'roun' an' boss um,
        Kaze dey hatter have de' house right soon.

    [Illustration]

    Brer Rabbit, he wuz busy, oh, yes, mighty busy,
        Not doin' uv a blessed thing;
    Ef he clim' de scaffle, he say he'll git dizzy,
        So he medjur an' mark an' sing.
    Dey buil' de house, an' it sho wuz a fine un,
        Made er poplar, oak an' pine;
    De littlest room wuz a sev'm-by-nine un,
        Whar de sick could go an' whine!

    [Illustration]

    Brer Rabbit, he wait, an' when de time come
        He choosened a upsta's room,
    An' dar he sot (ef I kin make de rhyme come)
        A-singin' "Hark fum de Toom"!
    An' den he got what he aint had oughter,
        Ez all de creeturs said,
    A gun, a cannon, an' a tub er water,
        An' hid um under his bed!

    [Illustration]

    When de creeturs come home, Brer Rabbit wuz ready,
        An' he tell um he gwineter set down;
    "Well, set," sez dey, "an' we'll try ter be ste'dy,"
        An' wid dat, Brer Rabbit kinder frown;
    Bang-bang! went de gun--de barrels wuz double--
        An' de creeturs wuz still ez mice;
    Brer B'ar he say, "Dy must be some trouble,
      But I hope heedon't loosen de j'is!"

    [Illustration]

    Brer Rabbit, he say, "Wharbouts mus' I spit at?"
        An' Brer Wolf answer, wid a grin,
    "Des wharsomever you kin make it hit at!"
        Brer Fox, he rub his chin;
    Brer Rabbit, he tuck de tub er water,
        An' empty it all on de sta'rs,
    An' it come nigh drownin' Brer Coon's daughter.
        An' likewise one er Brer B'ar's!

    [Illustration]

    Brer Rabbit say, "When I sneeze I'll skeer you,
        An' I hate fer ter have it ter do!"
    Brer Fox say, "We'll lissen an' hear you
        Des go right ahead wid yo' sneeze-a-ma-roo!"
    Boom-a-lam! went de cannon, an' de creeturs, dey lit out
        Thoo window-sash an' do'
    Any way, any way dat dey kin git oot,
        An' dey aint come dar no mo'!




BRER RABBIT AND THE PARTRIDGE NEST


    [Illustration]

    Oh, what's de matter wid de Whipperwill,
    Dat she sets an' cries on de furder hill?
    An' what's de matter wid Miss Bob White,
    Dat she choke herse'f wid sayin' Good-night?
    You know mighty well dat sump'n is wrong
    When dey sets an' sings dat kinder song,
    'Twix' a call an' a cry, 'twix' a weep an' a wail--
    Dey must be tellin' a mighty sad tale.

    [Illustration]

    Miss Whipperwill's troubles, an' what she say
    Will do fer ter tell some yuther day;
    But Miss Bob White--my! aint she a sight?--
    I'll hatter tell why she hollers Good-night.
    Dey once wuz a time (needer mo' ner less)
    When she ain't try ter hide ner kivver her nes';
    She built it in de open, whar all kin see,
    An' wuz des ez perlite ez she kin be.

    [Illustration]

    She'd make her house facin' eas' an' wes',
    An' den wid eggs she'd fill her nes';
    Fer ter keep um warm she'd brood an' set,
    An' keep her house fum gittin' wet.
    Whiles dis gwine on, Brer Rabbit come by,
    A-wigglin' his mouf, an' a-blinkin' his eye:
    "De top er de mornin', Miss Bob," sezee;
    "De same ter you, Brer Rabbit," se' she.

    [Illustration]

    Sez ol' Brer Rabbit, "I been missin' you long,
    I wuz mighty fear'd dat sump'n wuz wrong,
    But here you set ez still ez a mouse,
    Not doin' nothin' but keepin' house!"
    "Oh, well," se' she, "I'm too ol' ter gad,
    I use' ter do it, but I wish I never had!
    De only thing I want is ter wash my dress,
    But I can't do dat whiles I'm on my nes'."

    [Illustration]

    Brer Rabbit, he say, "Can't I he'p you out?
    I ain't doin' nothin' but walkin' about,
    An' my ol' 'oman is willin' fer ter bet
    Dat ef settin 's de thing, I'm ol' man Set!"
    "I know mighty well," sez Miss Bob White,
    "Ef you set a-tall, it'll be done right."
    "Thanky-do, Miss Bob! Go wash yo' dress,
    An' I'll do what I kin fer ter kivver yo' nes'!"

    [Illustration]

    So off she put, wid a flutter an' a flirt,
    An' washed her dress in a pile er clean dirt;
    Brer Rabbit see de eggs, an' shuck his head;
    His mouf 'gun ter dribble, an' his eye turn red;
    Sezee, "It'd sholy be hard fer ter match um,
    So I'll des take um home an' try fer ter hatch um!"
    So said, so done! An' den when he come back,
    He come in a gait 'twix' a lope an' a rack.

    [Illustration]

    An' Miss Bob White, atter washin' her dress,
    Went a-runnin' back ter house an' nes';
    "Much erbleege, Brer Rabbit," an' den she bowed.
    "Say nothin', ma'am, fer ter make me proud,
    Kaze I been a-waitin' here, frettin' an' sweatin',
    Fer fear I ain't sech a good han' at settin';
    My ol' 'oman say I got a slow fever,
    An' I 'clar' ter goodness, I'm ready ter b'lieve her!

    [Illustration]

    "I felt sump'n move, I hear' sump'n run,
    An' de eggs done gone--dey ain't na'er one!
    I sho is seed sights, I done hear folks talk--
    But never befo' is I seed eggs walk!"
    "My goodness, me!" sez Miss Bob White,
    A-peepin' in de nes', "You sho is right!"
    An' y'ever sence den, when darkness falls,
    She gives de lost chillun her Good-night calls!
    An' y'ever sence den, when darkness falls,
    She gives de lost chillun her Good-night calls!





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Uncle Remus and Brer Rabbit, by 
Joel Chandler Harris

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNCLE REMUS AND BRER RABBIT ***

***** This file should be named 22282.txt or 22282.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/2/8/22282/

Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, LN Yaddanapudi and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file made using scans of public
domain works at the University of Georgia.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
