The Project Gutenberg eBook, Marjorie Dean High School Freshman, by
Pauline Lester


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Marjorie Dean High School Freshman


Author: Pauline Lester



Release Date: November 27, 2007  [eBook #23644]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARJORIE DEAN HIGH SCHOOL
FRESHMAN***


E-text prepared by Roger Frank and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (https://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 23644-h.htm or 23644-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/6/4/23644/23644-h/23644-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/6/4/23644/23644-h.zip)





MARJORIE DEAN
HIGH SCHOOL SERIES

By PAULINE LESTER

Cloth Bound, Cover Designs in Colors

MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL FRESHMAN.
MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL SOPHOMORE.
MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL JUNIOR.
MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

[Illustration: Poising herself on the bank, she cut the water in a
clean, sharp dive. Page 234. Marjorie Dean, High School Freshman]

      *      *      *      *      *      *

MARJORIE DEAN
HIGH SCHOOL FRESHMAN

by

PAULINE LESTER

Author of
"Marjorie Dean, High School Sophomore"
"Marjorie Dean, High School Junior"
"Marjorie Dean, High School Senior"







A. L. Burt Company Publishers New York

Copyright, 1917 by A. L. Burt Company




MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL FRESHMAN

CHAPTER I

THE PARTING OF THE WAYS


"What am I going to do without you, Marjorie?" Mary Raymond's blue eyes
looked suspiciously misty as she solemnly regarded her chum.

"What am I going to do without _you_, you mean," corrected Marjorie
Dean, with a wistful smile. "Please, please don't let's talk of it. I
simply can't bear it."

"One, two--only two more weeks now," sighed Mary. "You'll surely write
to me, Marjorie?"

"Of course, silly girl," returned Marjorie, patting her friend's arm
affectionately. "I'll write at least once a week."

Marjorie Dean's merry face looked unusually sober as she walked down the
corridor beside Mary and into the locker room of the Franklin High
School. The two friends put on their wraps almost in silence. The
majority of the girl students of the big city high school had passed out
some little time before. Marjorie had lingered for a last talk with Miss
Fielding, who taught English and was the idol of the school, while Mary
had hung about outside the classroom to wait for her chum. It seemed to
Mary that the greatest sorrow of her sixteen years had come. Marjorie,
her sworn ally and confidante, was going away for good and all.

When, six years before, a brown-eyed little girl of nine, with long
golden-brown curls, had moved into the house next door to the Raymonds,
Mary had lost no time in making her acquaintance. They had begun with
shy little nods and smiles, which soon developed into doorstep
confidences. Within two weeks Mary, whose eyes were very blue, and whose
short yellow curls reminded one of the golden petals of a daffodil, had
become Marjorie's adorer and slave. She it was who had escorted Marjorie
to the Lincoln Grammar School and seen her triumphantly through her
first week there. She had thrilled with unselfish pride to see how
quickly the other little girls of the school had succumbed to Marjorie's
charm. She had felt a most delightful sense of pardonable vanity when,
as the year progressed, Marjorie had preferred her above all the others.
She had clung to Mary, even though Alice Lawton, who rode to school
every day in a shining limousine, had tried her utmost to be best
friends with the brown-eyed little girl whose pretty face and lovable
personality had soon made her the pet of the school.

Year after year Mary and Marjorie had lived side by side and kept their
childish faith. But now, here they were, just beginning their freshman
year in Franklin High School, to which they had so long looked forward,
and about to be separated; for Marjorie's father had been made manager
of the northern branch of his employer's business and Marjorie was going
to live in the little city of Sanford. Instead of being a freshman in
dear old Franklin, she was to enter the freshman class in Sanford High
School, where she didn't know a solitary girl, and where she was sure
she would be too unhappy for words.

During the first days which had followed the dismaying news that
Marjorie Dean was going to leave Franklin High School and go hundreds of
miles away, the two friends had talked of little else. There was so much
to be said, yet now that their parting was but two weeks off they felt
the weight of the coming separation bearing heavily upon them. Both
young faces wore expressions of deepest gloom as they walked slowly down
the steps of the school building and traversed the short space of stone
walk that led to the street.

It was Marjorie who broke the silence.

"No other girl can ever be as dear to me as you are. You know that,
don't you, Mary?"

Mary nodded mutely. Her blue eyes had filled with a sudden rush of hot
tears.

"But it won't do any good," continued Marjorie, slowly, "for us to mourn
over being separated. We know how we feel about each other, and that's
going to be a whole lot of comfort to us after--I'm gone." Her girlish
treble faltered slightly. Then she threw her arm across Mary's shoulder
and said with forced steadiness of tone: "I'm not going to be a silly
and cry. This is one of those 'vicissitudes' of life that Professor
Taylor was talking about in chapel yesterday. We must be very brave.
We'll write lots of letters and visit each other during vacation, and
perhaps, some day I'll come back here to live."

"Of course you will. You must come back," nodded Mary, her face
brightening at the prospect of a future reunion, even though remote.

"Can't you come with me to dinner?" coaxed Marjorie, as they paused at
the corner where they were accustomed to wait for their respective
street cars. "You know, you are one of mother's exceptions. I never have
to give notice before bringing you home."

"Not to-night. I'm going out this evening," returned Mary, vaguely. "I
must hurry home."

"Where are you going?" asked Marjorie, curiously. "You never said a
word about it this morning."

"Oh, didn't I? Well, I'm going out with----Here comes your car,
Marjorie. You'd better hurry home, too."

"Why?" Marjorie's brown eyes looked their reproach. "Do you want to get
rid of me, Mary? I've oceans of time before dinner. You know we never
have it until half-past six. Never mind, I'll take this car. Good-bye."

With a proud little nod of her head, Marjorie climbed the steps of the
car which had now stopped at their corner, without giving her friend an
opportunity for reply. Mary looked after the moving car with a rueful
smile that changed to one of glee. Her eyes danced. "She hasn't the
least idea of what's going to happen," thought the little fluffy-haired
girl. "Won't she be surprised? Now that she's gone, Clark and Ethel and
Seldon ought to be here."

A shrill whistle farther up the street caused her to glance quickly in
the direction of the sound. Two young men were hurrying toward her,
their boyish faces alight with enthusiasm and good nature.

"It's all O.K., Mary," called the taller of the two, his black eyes
glowing. "Every last thing has been thought of. Ethel has the pin.
She'll be along in a minute."

"It's a peach!" shouted the smaller lad, waving his cap, then jamming
it down on his thick, fair hair. "We've been waiting up the street for
Marjorie to take her car. Thought she'd never start."

"I am afraid I hurt her feelings," deplored Mary. "I forgot myself and
told her she'd better hurry home. She looked at me in the most
reproachful way."

"Cheer up," laughed Clark Grayson, the black-eyed youth. "To-night'll
fix things. All the fellows are coming."

"So are all the girls," returned Mary, happily. "I do wish Ethel would
hurry. I'm so anxious to see the pin. I know Marjorie will love it. Oh,
here comes Ethel now."

Ethel Duval, a tall, slender girl of sixteen, with earnest, gray-blue
eyes and wavy, flaxen hair, joined the trio with: "I'm so glad we
waited. I wanted you to see the pin, Mary." She was fumbling busily in
her shopping bag as she spoke. "Here it is." She held up a small, square
package, which, when divested of its white paper wrapping, disclosed a
blue plush box. A second later Mary was exclaiming over the dainty
beauty of the bit of jewelry lying securely on its white satin bed. The
pin was fashioned in the form of a golden butterfly, the body of which
was set with tiny pearls.

"Oh-h-h!" breathed Mary. "Isn't it wonderful! But do you suppose her
mother will allow her to accept such an expensive gift? It must have
cost a lot of money."

"Fifteen dollars," announced Clark, cheerfully, "but it was a case of
only fifty cents apiece, and besides, it's for Marjorie. Fifteen times
fifteen dollars wouldn't be too much for her. Every fellow and girl that
was invited accepted the invitation and handed over the tax. To make
things sure, Ethel went round to see Marjorie's mother about it and won
her over to our side. So that's settled."

"It's perfectly lovely," sighed Mary in rapture, "and you boys have
worked so hard to make the whole affair a gorgeous success. I'm afraid
we had better be moving on, though. It won't be long now until half-past
seven. I do hope everyone will be on time."

"They've all been warned," declared Seldon Ames. "Good-bye, then, until
to-night." The two boys raised their caps and swung down the street,
while Mary and Ethel stopped for one more look at the precious pin that
in later days was to mean far more to their schoolmate, Marjorie Dean,
than they had ever dreamed.




CHAPTER II

GOOD-BYE, MARJORIE DEAN


"Whatever you do, don't laugh, or speak above a whisper, or fall up the
steps, or do anything else that will give us away before we're ready,"
lectured Clark Grayson to the little crowd of happy-faced boys and girls
who were gathered round him on the corner above Marjorie Dean's home.
"We'd better advance by fives. Seldon, you go with the first lot. When I
give the signal, this way," Clark puckered his lips and emitted a soft
whistle, "ring the bell."

"Right-o," softly retorted three or four boyish voices.

Clark rapidly divided his little squad of thirty into fives, and moved
toward the house with the first division. Two minutes later the next
five conspirators began to move, and in an incredibly short space of
time the surprise party was overflowing the Dean veranda and front
steps. The boy who had been appointed bell ringer pressed his finger
firmly against the electric bell. There came the sound of a quick
footstep, then Marjorie herself opened the door, to be greeted with a
merry shout of "Surprise! Surprise!"

"Why--what--who!" she gasped.

"Just exactly," agreed Clark Grayson. "'Why--what--who'--and enough
others to make thirty. Of course, if you don't want us----"

"Stop teasing me, Clark, until I get over my surprise, at least," begged
Marjorie. "No, I never suspected a single thing," she said, in answer to
Ethel Duval's question. "Here are mother and father. They know more
about all this than they'll say. They made me believe they were going to
a party."

"And so we are," declared her father, as he and Mrs. Dean came forward
to welcome their young guests, with the cordiality and graciousness for
which they were noted among Marjorie's friends.

"Come this way, girls," invited Marjorie's mother, who, in an evening
frock of white silk, looked almost as young as the bevy of pretty girls
that followed her. "Mr. Dean will look after you, boys."

Once she had helped her mother usher the girls into the upstairs
sleeping room set aside for their use, Marjorie lost no time in slipping
over to the dressing table where Mary stood, patting her fluffy hair and
lamenting because it would not stay smooth.

"You dear thing," whispered Marjorie, slipping her arm about her chum.
"I'll forgive you for not telling me where you were going. I was
terribly hurt for a minute, though. You know we've never had secrets
from each other."

"And we never will," declared Mary, firmly. "Promise me, Marjorie, that
you'll always tell me things; that is, when they're not someone else's
secrets."

"I will," promised Marjorie, solemnly. "We'll write our secrets to each
other instead of telling them. Now I must leave you for a minute and see
if everyone is having a good time. We'll have another comfy old talk
later."

To Mary Raymond fell the altogether agreeable task of keeping Marjorie
away from the dining-room, where Mrs. Dean, Ethel Duval and two of her
classmates busied themselves with the decorating of the two long tables.
By ten o'clock all was ready for the guests. In the middle of each
table, rising from a centerpiece of ferns, was a green silk pennant,
bearing the figures 19-- embroidered in scarlet. The staffs of the two
pennants were wound with green and scarlet ribazine which extended in
long streamers to each place, and was tied to dainty hand-painted
pennant-shaped cards, on which appeared the names of the guests. Laid
beside the place cards were funny little favors, which had been
gleefully chosen with a sly view toward exploiting every one's pet
hobby, while at either end of each table were tall vases of red roses,
which seemed to nod their fragrant approval of the merry-making.

"It's quite perfect, isn't it?" sighed Ethel, with deep satisfaction,
gently touching one of the red roses. "The very nicest part of it all is
that you've been just as enthusiastic as we over the party." She turned
affectionate eyes upon Mrs. Dean.

"It could hardly be otherwise, my dear," returned Mrs. Dean. "Remember,
it is for my little girl that you have planned all this happiness.
Nothing can please me more than the thought that Marjorie has so many
friends. I only hope she will be equally fortunate in her new home,
though, I am sure, she will never forget her Franklin High School
chums."

"We won't give her that chance," nodded Ethel, emphatically. "There, I
think we are ready. Clark wants to be your partner, Mrs. Dean, and
Seldon is to escort Marjorie to her place. We aren't going to give her
the pin until we are ready to drink the toasts. Robert Barrett is to be
toastmaster. Will you go first and announce supper?"

There was a buzz of delight and admiration from the guests, as headed by
Marjorie and Seldon, the little procession marched into the dining-room.
For a moment the very sight of the gayly decked table with its weight of
goodies and wonderful red roses caused Marjorie's brown eyes to blur.
Then, as Seldon bowed her to the head of one of the tables, she winked
back her tears, and nodding gayly to the eager faces turned toward her
and said with her prettiest smile: "It's the very nicest surprise that
ever happened to me, and I hope you will all have a perfectly splendid
time to-night."

"Three cheers for Marjorie Dean! May we give them, Mrs. Dean?" called
Robert Barrett.

Mrs. Dean's smiling assent was lost in the volume of sound that went up
from thirty lusty young throats.

"Now, Franklin High," proposed Mary Hammond, and the Franklin yell was
given by the girls. The boys, who were nearly all students at the La
Fayette High School, just around the corner from Franklin, responded
with their yell, and the merry little company began hunting their places
and seating themselves at the tables.

Marjorie was far too much excited to eat. Her glances strayed
continually down the long tables to the cheery faces of her schoolmates.
It seemed almost too wonderful that her friends should care so much
about her.

"Marjorie Dean, stop dreaming and eat your supper," commanded Mary, who
had been covertly watching her friend. "Clark, you are sitting next to
her. Make her eat her chicken salad. It's perfectly delicious."

"Will you eat your salad or must I exercise my stern authority?" began
Clark, drawing down his face until he exactly resembled a certain
roundly disliked teacher of mathematics in the boys' high school. There
was a laugh of recognition from the boys sitting nearest to Clark. He
continued to eye Marjorie severely.

"Of course, I'm going to eat my salad," declared Marjorie, stoutly. "You
must give me time, though. I'm still too surprised to be hungry."

But the greatest surprise was still in store for her. When everyone had
finished eating, Robert Barrett began his duties as toastmaster. Ethel
Duval came first with "What Friendships Mean to a Schoolgirl," and
Seldon Ames followed with a ridiculously funny little toast to "The High
School Fellows." Then Mr. and Mrs. Dean were toasted, and Lillian Hale,
a next-door neighbor and the only upper-class girl invited, gave solemn
counsel and advice to the "freshman babies."

As Marjorie's dearest friend, to Mary had been accorded the honor of
giving the farewell toast, "Aufwiedersehen," and the presentation of the
pin. Mary's clear voice trembled slightly as she began the little speech
which she had composed and learned for the occasion. Then her faltering
tones gathered strength, and before she realized that she was actually
making a speech, she had reached the most important part of it and was
saying, "We wish you to keep and wear this remembrance of our good will
throughout your school life in Sanford. We hope you will make new
friends, and we ask only that you won't forget the old."

"I can't begin to tell you how much I thank you all," Marjorie
responded, her tones not quite steady, her face lighted with a fond
pride that lay very near to tears. "I shall love my butterfly all my
life, and never forget that you gave it to me. I am going to call it my
talisman, and I am sure it will bring me good luck."

But neither the givers nor Marjorie Dean could possibly guess that, in
the days to come, the beautiful golden butterfly was to prove anything
but a talisman to the popular little freshman.




CHAPTER III

THE GIRL WHO LOOKED LIKE MARY


"It's rather nice to have so much room, but I know I shall never feel
quite at home here," murmured Marjorie Dean, under her breath, as she
came slowly down the steps of her new home and paused for a moment in
the middle of the stone walk which led to the street. Her wistful glance
strayed over the stretch of lawn, still green, then turned to rest on
the house, a comfortable three-story structure of wood, painted dark
green, with lighter green trimmings. Her mother's sudden appearance at
the window caused Marjorie to retrace her steps. Luncheon was ready.

"Everything is so different," she sighed, as she climbed the steps she
had so lately descended. "I've been here a week, and I haven't met a
single girl. I don't believe there are any girls in this neighborhood. I
should feel a good deal worse, too, if the Franklin girls hadn't been
such dears!" Marjorie's last comment, spoken half aloud, referred to the
numerous letters she had received since her arrival in the town of
Sanford from her Franklin High School friends, now so many miles away.
Mary Raymond had not only fulfilled her promise to write one long letter
every week, but had mailed Marjorie, almost daily, hurriedly-written
little notes full of the news of what went on among the boys and girls
she had left behind.

It had been a busy, yet a very long week for Marjorie. The unpacking of
the Deans' furniture, which had been shipped to Sanford a week before
their arrival there, and the setting to rights of her new home had so
occupied the attention of Mrs. Dean and Nora, her faithful
maid-of-all-work, that Marjorie, aside from certain tasks allotted to
her to perform, was left for the most part to her own devices. As they
had arrived in Sanford on Monday, Marjorie's mother had decided to give
her daughter an opportunity to accustom herself to her new home and
surroundings before allowing her to enter the high school. So the day
for Marjorie's initial appearance in "The Sanford High School for Girls"
had been set for the following Monday.

It was now Friday afternoon. Marjorie had spent the morning in writing a
fifteen-page letter to Mary, the minor refrain of which was: "I can't
tell you how much I miss you, Mary," and which contained views regarding
her future high school career that were far from being optimistic. She
had not finished her letter. She decided to leave it open until after
luncheon and, laying it aside for the time, she had tripped down stairs
and out doors.

"What are you going to do this afternoon, dear?" asked her mother as
Marjorie slipped into place at the luncheon table.

"I don't know, Mother," was the almost doleful reply. "I thought I might
take a walk up Orchard street as far as Sargent's, that cunning little
confectioner's shop on the corner. Perhaps, if I go, I may see something
interesting to tell Mary. I haven't finished my letter."

Marjorie did not add that her walk would include a last stroll past the
towering gray walls of a certain stone building on Lincoln avenue, which
bore over its massive oak doors the inscription, "The Sanford High
School for Girls." Almost every day since her arrival, she had visited
it, viewing it speculatively and with a curious kind of apprehension.
She was not afraid to plunge into her new school life, but deep down in
her heart she felt some little misgiving. What if the new girls proved
to be neither likable nor companionable? What if she liked them but they
did not like her? She had just begun the same apprehensive train of
thought that had been disturbing her peace of mind for the last four
days when her mother's voice broke the spell.

"If you are going that far I wish you would go on to Parke & Whitfield's
for me. I should like you to match this embroidery silk. I have not
enough of it to finish this collar and cuff set I am making for you."

"I'll be your faithful servant and execute all your commissions, mum,"
declared Marjorie with a little obeisance, her spirits rising a little
at the prospect of actual errands to perform. She was already tired of
aimlessly wandering along the wide, well-kept streets of Sanford,
feeling herself to be quite out of things. Even errands were actual
blessings sometimes, she decided, as a little later, she ran upstairs to
dress.

"May I wear my best suit and hat, Mother?" she called anxiously down
from the head of the stairs. "It's such a lovely day, I'm sure it won't
rain, snow, hail or do anything else to spoil them."

"Very well," answered Mrs. Dean, placidly.

With a gurgle of delight Marjorie hurried into her room to put on her
new brown suit, which had the mark of a well-known tailor in the coat,
and her best hat, on which all the Franklin High girls had set their
seal of approval. She had shoes and gloves to match her suit, too, and
her dancing brown eyes and fluffy brown hair were the last touches
needed to complete the dainty little study in brown.

"Don't I look nice in this suit?" she asked her mother saucily, turning
slowly around before the living-room mirror. "Aren't you and father
perfect dears to let me have it, though?" She whirled and descended upon
her mother with outstretched arms, enveloping her in an ecstatic hug
that sadly disturbed the proper angle of her brown velvet hat.

"Don't be gone too long," reminded her mother. "You know father has
promised us tickets for the theatre to-night. We shall have an early
dinner."

"All right, I'll remember, Captain." With a brisk touching of her hand
to her hat brim in salute Marjorie vanished through the door, to
reappear a moment later at the living-room window, flash a merry smile
at her mother, about face and march down the walk in true military
style.

Long before when Marjorie was a tiny girl she had shown an unusual
preference for soldiers. She had owned enough wooden soldiers to make a
regiment and was never at a loss to invent war games in which they
figured. Sometimes, when she tired of her stiff, silent armies, which
could only move as she willed, she inveigled her father or mother into
being the hero, the enemy, the traitor or whatever her active
imagination chose to suggest. Her parents, amused at her boyish love of
military things, encouraged her in her play and entered into it with as
much spirit as the child herself. Her father, who had once been an
officer in the National Guard, taught her the manual of arms and she had
learned it with a will.

Marjorie's military enthusiasm had been at its height when she met Mary
Raymond, who soon became equally fascinated with the stirring play. In
time other interests crowded their lives. The hard-worked armies were
laid peacefully on their wooden backs to enjoy a long, undisturbed rest,
while Marjorie and Mary became soldiers instead, addressing Mr. Dean as
"General," Mrs. Dean as "Captain," and bestowing upon themselves the
rank of ordinary enlisted soldiers who must earn their promotion by
loyal and faithful service.

Mr. Dean had been rather chary of promotions, frequently reminding his
little detachment that it is a far cry from the ranks of a private to
that of a commissioned officer. So when their parting came, Mary and
Marjorie had just received their commissions as second lieutenants,
their awards of faithful service in the grammar school.

Lieutenant Marjorie smiled, then sighed, as she started on her walk. The
salute she had just given brought a flood of memories of Mary. She felt
she would not mind exploring this strange, new, high school territory if
Mary were with her. She was sure no girl in Sanford could understand her
as Mary had. On two different afternoons she had stood across the street
from the school at the time of dismissal. She had eagerly watched the
great oak doors open wide and the long lines of girls file out, waking
the still October air with their merry voices. She had been particularly
attracted toward one tall, lithe, graceful girl whose golden hair and
brown eyes made her unusually lovely. At first sight of her, lonely,
imaginative Marjorie had named her "The Picture Girl," and had decided
that she was a darling. She had noticed that the pretty girl was always
the center of a group and she had also noted that one small,
black-haired girl with an elfish face, who wore the most exquisite
clothes invariably walked at the tall girl's side. There was a
pink-cheeked girl, too, with laughing blue eyes and dimples, and a
fair-haired, serious-faced girl, who reminded Marjorie of Alice Duval.
They usually formed part of the group about the tall girl and her dark
companion, and there was also a very short, stout girl who puffed along
anxiously in the rear of the group as though never quite able to catch
up.

Marjorie had already imagined much concerning this particular knot of
girls, and her desire to see them again before entering school was
responsible for her walk down Lincoln avenue that sunny fall afternoon.
She would do her errands first, she decided, then, returning by the way
of the school, pass there just at the time that the afternoon session
was dismissed. She went about her far-from-arduous commissions in
leisurely fashion, now and then glancing at her châtelaine watch to make
sure of the time. Three o'clock saw the daily procession of girls down
the high school steps, and released from classes for the day. She did
not intend to miss them.

It was twenty minutes to three when Marjorie finished a remarkable
concoction of nuts, chocolate syrup and ice cream, a kind of glorified
nut sundae, rejoicing in the name of "Sargent Nectar," and left the
smart little confectioner's shop. As she neared the school building her
eyes suddenly became riveted upon a slim, blue-clad figure that
hesitated for on instant at the top of the high steps then ran lightly
down and came hurrying toward where she stood.

"The advance guard," declared Marjorie half aloud. Then, as her eyes
sought the approaching girl: "Why, she looks like Mary! And she's been
crying! I'm going to speak to her." She took an impulsive step forward
as the stranger came abreast of her and began:

"Won't you----"

Marjorie's speech ended abruptly. The weeping girl cast one startled
glance toward her from a pair of wet blue eyes, lunged by her without
speaking and, breaking into a run, turned the corner and disappeared
from view. Marjorie surveyed the back of the rapidly vanishing yellow
head with rueful surprise. Then she gave a short laugh.

"I should have known better," she reflected. "Of course, she'd hardly
care to tell her personal affairs to the first one who asks her. But she
made me think of Mary. Oh, dear, I'm so homesick. Not even my new suit
and hat can make me forget that. I wouldn't have mother know it for the
world. I believe she is a wee bit homesick, too."

Marjorie paused for an instant at her accustomed place on the opposite
side of the street, undecided whether to loiter there and once more
watch her future companions pass out of school or to go on about her
business. Suddenly the school doors swung wide and the pupils began
flocking out. The little stranger yielded to the temptation to linger
long enough to watch the five girls pass in whom she had become
interested. They were among the last to emerge and, the moment they
reached the steps, their voices rose in a confused babble, each one
determined to make herself heard above the others.

"I knew she wouldn't do it," shrilled the stout girl, as they neared
Marjorie. "She's too stingy for words. That's the third time she's
refused to go into things with the rest of us."

"Be still," reminded the Picture Girl; "she might have very good
reasons----"

"Good reasons," scornfully mimicked the little dark girl, her black eyes
glittering angrily. "It was only because the plan was mine. She hates
me, and you all know why. I don't think you ought to stand up for her,
Muriel. You know how deceitful she is and what unkind things she said
about me."

"I'm not standing up for her," contradicted Muriel, but her tones
lacked force. "I only felt a little bit sorry for her. She looked ready
to cry all the afternoon. I think she went home early to avoid meeting
us."

"That proves she is a coward," was the triumphant retort. "Remember----"
With a sudden swift movement she rose on tiptoe and, drawing the Picture
Girl's head to the level of her mouth, whispered something to her. The
fair-haired girl looked annoyed, the fat girl openly sulky and the
dimpled girl disapproving. Exchanging significant glances, they walked
on ahead of the other two.

Without the slightest intention of being an eavesdropper, Marjorie had
heard every word of the loud-spoken conversation. Her eyes were fixed in
fascination upon the dark, sharp-featured face so close to the fair,
beautiful one. She suddenly recalled a picture she had once seen called
"The Evil Genius," in which a dark, mocking face peered over the
shoulder of a young man who sat at a table as though in deep thought.
This girl's vivid face bore a slight resemblance to that of the Evil
Genius, and it was not until the end of Marjorie's junior year in
Sanford that this sinister impression faded and disappeared forever.

When the little company had passed on down the street, Marjorie turned
and followed them from a distance. For several blocks her way lay in the
same direction, but as she turned into her own street she swept a last
glance toward the five girls. She wondered whom they had been discussing
so freely. She was vaguely disappointed in the Picture Girl, who seemed
to her independent mind too easily influenced by the Evil Genius.
Marjorie had already begun to think of the small, dark girl as that. She
was glad not to be the girl they had discussed. Then, her thought
changing, a vision of two wet blue eyes and a tear-stained face set in
fluffy yellow curls came to her, and Marjorie knew that she had seen the
object of their discussion. A wave of sympathy for the offender swept
over her. "I don't believe she could do anything deceitful or horrid,"
she reflected stoutly. "Her eyes are as true and as blue as Mary's. I'm
going to like her and be her friend, if she'll let me, for she certainly
seems to need one. I did so want to be friends with the Picture Girl,
but I can't help wishing she had been just a little bit braver."

While Marjorie strolled thoughtfully home, deep in her own cogitations,
the five girls, having joined forces again, were discussing her.

"Did you see that pretty girl standing across from the school as we came
out?" asked Susan Atwell, the girl with the dimples.

"Yes," returned Irma Linton. "I noticed her there the other day, too. I
wonder who she can be."

"I don't know," said Muriel Harding. "She is awfully sweet though, and
dresses beautifully. She----"

"I know all about her," interrupted Geraldine Macy. "Her father is the
new manager for Preston & Haines. They only moved here from the city
last week. Her name is Dean. That is, her last name. I don't know her
other name."

"I am surprised that you don't know that," was the sarcastic comment of
Mignon La Salle, the little dark girl.

"You needn't be," flung back the stout girl. "There are lots of things I
don't know that I'd like to know. For instance----"

"Don't be cross, Jerry," interrupted Mignon, hastily. "I was only
teasing you." She cast a peculiar glance at the ruffled Jerry from under
her heavy lashes which the young woman failed to catch. "Tell us some
more about this new girl. I really didn't pay hardly any attention to
her to-day."

"There isn't anything more to tell that I know of," muttered Jerry,
sulkily, her desire to distribute news quite gone. "Wait until Monday
and see. I know she's going to enter Sanford High and that she's a
freshman."

"Then as freshmen it's our solemn duty to be nice to her and make her
feel at home," stated Muriel, seriously.

Mignon La Salle shrugged her thin shoulders. "Perhaps," she said,
without enthusiasm. "I shall wait until I see her before I decide that."

Meanwhile, Marjorie had reached home, and, seated before the library
table, was writing for dear life on the letter she had begun to Mary. So
far she had had nothing to tell her chum regarding the young women who
were to be her classmates. To be sure, what she had seen and heard that
afternoon had amounted to nothing, but the girl who looked like Mary had
set her to longing all over again to be able, just for one afternoon, to
sit side by side on the front steps with her childhood's friend and talk
things over.

"You can't imagine, Mary," she wrote, "how sorry I felt when I saw that
poor girl crying with your eyes. They were just like yours. I forgot
everything except that she looked like you, and asked her what the
trouble was. Of course, she didn't answer me, but actually ran down the
street. I should have known better, but I felt so terribly sympathetic.
'Terribly' is the only word that expresses it. Right after she had gone
the others began to come out of school, and at last the five girls I
told you about came out. They were all talking at once, but I heard the
horrid, sharp-faced, dark girl say that someone was stingy and deceitful
and a lot of other unpleasant things. I thought the Picture Girl was
going to stand up for the person, but that mean little Evil Genius
wouldn't let her. Then all at once it came to me that it was this Mary
girl they were talking about. It was really this one dark girl who said
most of the mean things. The others just listened to her. At any rate,
I'm going to find out who the Mary girl is and try to be a friend to her
just because she looks like you. Don't imagine I could ever like her
better than you, because you know I couldn't. But it's a true soldier's
duty to stand by his comrades on the firing line, you know, and I am
going to be this girl's freshman comrade, and, if she's one-half as nice
as you, I'll be ready to help her fight her battles.

"Monday is the great day. I dread it, and yet I am looking forward to
it. I like the outside of the school, but will I like the inside? Mother
is going to the principal's office with me. I hope I sha'n't have to try
a lot of tiresome examinations. I have forgotten everything I ever knew,
and the weather has been too pleasant to study. This is such a pretty
town, with plenty of nice walks. If only you were here it would be quite
perfect. I do hope you can come and visit me at Easter. Must stop now,
as I hear mother calling me. We are going to walk down to meet father.
With my dearest love. Write soon.

                                          "Yours always,

                                                   "Marjorie."

Marjorie folded, addressed and stamped her letter, then catching her
hat from the hallrack ran out the front door to overtake her mother who
had walked on ahead.

"I finished my letter to Mary," she held it up for inspection, "and I've
something to report, Captain."

"I am ready to hear you," smiled her mother, as they walked on arm in
arm.

For the second time Marjorie related her little adventure, ending with
her resolve to learn to know and befriend, if necessary, the girl who
looked like Mary. Nor did she have the slightest premonition of how much
this readily-avowed championing of a stranger was to cost her.




CHAPTER IV

SANFORD'S LATEST FRESHMAN


"Will you tell me the way to the principal's office, please?"

A clear voice broke in upon the conversation of two girls who had paused
before the broad stairway leading to the second floor of the Sanford
High School for a last word before separating for their morning
recitations.

At the sound of the soft, interrupting voice, which contained a touch of
perplexity in its tones, both girls turned quickly to regard the owner.
They saw an attractive little figure, wearing a dainty blue cloth gown,
which was set off by hand-embroidered cuffs and an open rolling collar
of sheerest white. From under a smart blue hat escaped a wealth of soft,
brown curls, while two brown eyes looked into theirs with an expression
of appeal that brought forth instant reply.

"Miss Archer's office is the last room on the east side of the
second-floor corridor. I am going there now and shall be glad to show
you the way," was the quick response of the taller of the two girls,
accompanied by a cheery smile that warmed Marjorie Dean's heart and made
her feel the least bit less of a stranger in this strange land which she
was about to explore.

"Thank you," she returned gratefully, trying to smile in an equally
friendly manner.

Marjorie's first day of school had begun far from propitiously. She had
not reckoned on making her initial appearance in Sanford High School
alone. It had been planned that her mother should accompany her, but
when Monday morning came, her beloved captain had awakened with a
racking headache, which meant nothing less than lying in bed for a long,
pain-filled day in a darkened room.

Torn between sympathy for her mother and her own disappointment,
Marjorie had experienced a desire to go to her captain's room and cry
her eyes out, but being fashioned of sturdier stuff, she made a
desperate effort to brace up and be a good soldier. This was just
another of those miserable "vicissitudes" that no one could foresee. She
must face it without grumbling. Her father had already telephoned for a
physician when she entered her mother's room, and Marjorie put on her
sweetest smile as she kissed her mother and assured her that she didn't
in the least mind going to school alone.

As she followed the young woman up the stairs and down the long corridor
Marjorie felt her heart beat a little faster. Her low spirits of the
early morning began to rise. How good it seemed actually to be in school
again! And what a beautiful school it was! Even Franklin would appear
dingy beside it. She gazed appreciatively at the high ceiling and the
shining oak wainscotings of the wide corridor through which she was
passing. When her guide, who was tall, thin and plain of face, opened
the last door on the right and ushered her into a beautiful sunshiny
office which seemed more like a living-room than a place wherein
business was transacted, Marjorie uttered an involuntary, "Oh, how
lovely!"

"Yes, isn't it though," returned the tall girl. "This is Miss Archer's
own idea, and, so far, it's proving a brilliant success. That is, we all
think so. Is Miss Archer in her private office?" she asked the young
woman who had risen from her desk near the door and came forward to
receive them.

Marjorie would have liked to ask her new acquaintance what she meant,
but at that moment a door at the farther end of the room opened and a
stately, black-haired woman, with just a suspicion of gray at her
temples, emerged. She turned a pair of grave, deep-set eyes upon the
tall girl and said, pleasantly: "Well, Ellen, what can I do for you this
morning?"

"Oh, Miss Archer!" exclaimed the tall girl, eagerly, with an impulsive
step forward, "you haven't forbidden basketball this year, have you?
Stella and I couldn't believe our ears when we heard it this morning!"
It was evident that the impetuous Ellen was on the best possible terms
with her principal.

"I don't remember having issued an order to that effect," smiled Miss
Archer. "Where did you hear that bit of news?"

Ellen Seymour's plain face flushed, then paled. "It was just a rumor,"
she replied with reluctance. "I'd rather not mention names. Still, when
I heard it, I could not rest until I had asked you. The sophomores hope
to do something wonderful this year. We couldn't bear to believe for a
minute that there would be no basketball. We had planned to have a
tryout some day this week, after school. I'm so glad," she added
fervently. "Thank you, Miss Archer. Oh, pardon me," she turned to
Marjorie, "this is Miss Archer, our principal. Miss Archer, this young
lady wishes to see you. I met her in the corridor downstairs and
volunteered my services as guide."

With a courteous nod to Marjorie, the tall girl left the room and the
principal turned her attention toward the prospective freshman.

At the calm, kindly inquiry of the gray eyes Marjorie's feeling of
shyness vanished, and she said in her most soldierly manner, as though
speaking to her mother: "Miss Archer, my name is Marjorie Dean, and I
wish to enter the freshman class of Sanford High School. We moved to
Sanford from the city of B----. We have been here just a week. I was a
freshman in Franklin High School at B----."

Miss Archer took the young girl's hand in hers. Her rather stern face
was lighted with a welcoming smile. Marjorie's direct speech and frank,
honest eyes had pleased the older woman.

"I am glad to know that we are to have a new pupil," she said cordially.
"The freshman class is smaller than usual this year. So many girls leave
school when their grammar school course is finished. I wish we could
persuade these mothers and fathers to let their daughters have at least
a year of high school. It would help them so much in whatever kind of
work they elected to do later."

"That is what mother says," returned Marjorie, quickly. "My mother
intended to come with me to-day, but was unable to do so." She did not
go into details. Young as she was, Marjorie had a horror of discussing
her personal affairs with a stranger. "She will call upon you later."

"I shall be pleased to meet your mother," Miss Archer made courteous
answer. "The first and most important matter to be considered this
morning is your class standing. Let me see. B---- is in the same state as
the town of Sanford. I believe the system of credits is the same in all
the high schools throughout this state, as the examinations come from
the state board at the capital. What studies had you begun at B----?"

"English composition, algebra, physiology, American history and French,"
recited Marjorie, dutifully.

Miss Archer raised her eyebrows. "You are ambitious. We usually allow
our pupils to carry only four subjects."

"But these are quite easy subjects," pleaded Marjorie; "that is, all
except algebra. I am not especially clever in mathematics. I am obliged
to study very hard to make good recitations. Still, I should like to
continue with the subjects I have begun. Won't you try me until the end
of the first term?" she added, a coaxing note in her voice.

"I will at least try you for a week or two. Then if I find that you are
not overtaxing your strength you may go on with them."

"Thank you." Marjorie's relieved tone caused the principal to smile
again. It was not usual for a pupil to show concern over the prospect of
losing a subject. Many of the students rebelled at having to carry four
subjects.

"Have you your grammar school certificate with you?" asked Miss Archer,
the smile giving way to a businesslike expression.

Marjorie handed the principal the large envelope she had been carrying.
Miss Archer drew forth a square of thick white paper, ornamented with
the red seal by which the state board of school commissioners had
signified their approval of Marjorie Dean and her work in the grammar
school.

The older woman read it carefully. "Yes, this is, as I thought the same
form of certificate. From this moment on you are a freshman in Sanford
High School, Miss Dean. I trust that you will be happy here. Sanford has
the reputation of being one of the finest schools in the state. I am
going to assign you to a seat in the study hall at once. Miss Merton is
in charge there. She will give you a printed form of our curriculum of
study. School opens at nine o'clock in the morning. The morning session
lasts until twelve o'clock. We have an hour and a quarter for luncheon,
and our last recitation for the day is over at half past three o'clock.
We have devotional exercises in the chapel on Monday and Friday
mornings, and the course in gymnastics is optional. There are, of
course, many other things regarding the regulations of the school which
you will gradually come to know."

"Miss Arnold," the thin-faced, sharp-eyed young woman, who had been
covertly appraising Marjorie during her talk with Miss Archer, came
languidly forward. "This is Miss Dean." The two girls bowed rather
distantly. Marjorie had conceived an instant and violent dislike for
this lynx-eyed stranger. "Take Miss Dean to the locker room, then to
Miss Merton. Say to Miss Merton that Miss Dean is a freshman, and that I
wish her assigned to a desk in the freshman section."

With a last glance of pleasant approval, which Marjorie's pretty face,
dainty attire and frank, yet modest bearing had evoked, the principal
retired to her inner office, and Marjorie obediently followed her guide,
who, without speaking, set off down the corridor at almost unnecessary
speed. "This way," she directed curtly as they reached the main
corridor. They passed down the corridor, descended a second stairway and
brought up directly in front of long rows of lockers. Within five
minutes Marjorie's hat had been put away, and she had received a locker
key. This done, her companion hurried her upstairs and down the wide
corridor through which they had first come.

Then she suddenly opened a door, and Marjorie found herself in an
enormous square room, which contained row upon row of shining oak desks,
occupied by what seemed to her hundreds of pupils. In reality there were
not more than two hundred and forty persons in the room, but in the eyes
of the little stranger everything was quadrupled. How different it was
from Franklin! So this was the study hall, one of the things on which
the school prided itself. In front of the rows of desks was one large
desk on a small raised platform, reminding Marjorie of an island in the
midst of a sea. At the desk sat a small, gray-haired woman, who peered
suspiciously over her glasses at Marjorie as she was lifelessly
introduced by Miss Arnold.

"I don't like _her_ at all," was the young girl's inward comment as she
walked behind the stiff, uncompromising, black-clothed back to a desk
almost in the middle of the last row of seats on the east side. But
Marjorie experienced a little shiver of delight as she seated herself,
for directly in front of her, and gazing at her with reassuring, smiling
eyes, was the Picture Girl.




CHAPTER V

GETTING ACQUAINTED WITH THE PICTURE GIRL


"Welcome to Sanford," whispered the girl, "and to the freshman class. I
was sure when I saw you the other day you couldn't be anything other
than a freshman."

Marjorie flushed, then smiled faintly. "I didn't think any of the girls
would remember me," she confessed.

"Oh, I remember you perfectly. You were across the street from school on
three different days, weren't you?"

Marjorie nodded. "I just had to come down and get acquainted with the
outside of the school. I was awfully curious about it."

"Miss Harding," a cold voice at their elbows caused both girls to start.
So intent had they been on their conversation that they had not noticed
Miss Merton's approach, "you may answer any questions Miss Dean wishes
to ask regarding our course of study here as set forth in our
curriculum." She laid a closely printed sheet of paper before Marjorie.
"This does not mean, however, the personal conversation in which, I am
sorry to say, you appeared to be engrossed when I approached. Remember,
Miss Dean, that personal conversation will neither be excused nor
tolerated in the study hall. I trust I shall not have to remind you of
this again."

Marjorie watched with unseeing eyes the angular form of the teacher as
she retreated to her platform. If Miss Merton had dealt her a blow on
her upturned face, it could have hurt no more severely than had this
unlooked-for reprimand. She was filled with a choking sense of shame
that threatened to end in a burst of angry sobs. The deep blush that had
risen to her face receded, leaving her very white. Those students
sitting in her immediate vicinity had, of course, heard Miss Merton. She
glanced quickly about to encounter two pairs of eyes. One pair was blue
and, it seemed to the embarrassed newcomer, sympathetic. Their owner was
the "Mary" girl, who sat two seats behind her in the next aisle. The
other pair was cruelly mocking, and they belonged to the girl that
Marjorie had mentally styled the Evil Genius. Something in their
taunting depths stirred an hitherto unawakened chord in gentle Marjorie
Dean. She returned the insolent gaze with one so full of steady strength
and defiance that the girl's eyes dropped before it and she devoted
herself assiduously to the open book which she held in her hand.

"Don't mind Miss Merton," whispered Muriel, comfortingly. "She is the
worst crank I ever saw. No one likes her. I don't believe even Miss
Archer does. She's been here for ages, so the Board of Education thinks
that Sanford High can't run without her, I guess."

"I'm so mortified and ashamed," murmured Marjorie. "On my first day,
too."

"Don't think about it," soothed Muriel. "What studies are you going to
take? I hope you will recite in some of my classes. Wait a moment. I'll
come back there and sit with you; then we'll make less noise. Miss
Merton told me to help you, you know," she reminded, with a soft
chuckle.

The fair head and the dark one bent earnestly over the printed sheet.
Marjorie whispered her list of subjects to her new friend, who jotted
them down on the margin of the program.

"How about 9.15 English Comp?" she asked. "That's my section."

Marjorie nodded her approval.

"Then you can recite algebra with me at 10.05, and there's a first-year
French class at 11.10. That brings three subjects in the morning. Now,
let me see about your history. If you can make your history and
physiology come the first two periods in the afternoon, you will be
through by three o'clock and can have that last half hour for study or
gym, or whatever you like. I am carrying only four subjects, so I have
nothing but physical geography in the afternoon. I am through reciting
every day by 2 o'clock, so I learn most of my lessons in school and
hardly ever take my books home. If I were you, I'd drop one
subject--American History, for instance. You can study it later. The
freshman class is planning a lot of good times for this winter, and, of
course, you want to be in them, too, don't you?"

"I should say so," beamed Marjorie. "Still," her face sobering, "I think
I won't drop history. It's easy, and I love it."

"Well, I don't," emphasized Muriel. "By the way, do you play
basketball?"

"I played left guard on our team last year, and I had just been chosen
for center on the freshman team, at Franklin High, when I left there,"
was the whispered reply.

"That's encouraging," declared Muriel. "We haven't chosen our team yet.
We are to have a tryout at four o'clock on Friday afternoon in the
gymnasium. You can go to the meeting with me, although you will have met
most of the freshman class before Friday. Oh, yes, did Miss Archer tell
you that we report in the study hall at half-past eight o'clock on
Monday and Friday mornings? We have chapel exercises, and woe be unto
you if you are late. It's an unforgivable offense in Miss Merton's eyes
to walk into chapel after the service has begun. If you are late, you
take particular pains to linger around the corridor until the line
comes out of chapel, then you slide into your section and march into the
study hall as boldly as though you'd never been late in your life,"
ended Muriel with a giggle, which she promptly smothered.

"But what if Miss Merton sees one?"

Muriel made a little resigned gesture. "Try it some day and see. There's
the 9.15 bell. Come along. If we hurry we'll have a minute with the
girls before class begins. All of my chums recite English this first
hour. You needn't stop at Miss Merton's desk. It'll be all right."

Marjorie walked down the aisle behind Muriel, looking rather worried.
Then she touched Muriel's arm. "I think I'd rather stop and speak to
Miss Merton," she said with soft decision.

"All right," the response came indifferently as Muriel, a bored look on
her youthful face, walked on ahead.

Marjorie walked bravely up to the teacher. "Miss Merton, I have arranged
my studies and recitation hours. Miss Harding is going to show me the
way to the English composition class."

Miss Merton stared coldly at the girl's vivid, colorless face, framed in
its soft brown curls. Her own youth had been prim and narrow, and she
felt that she almost hated this girl whose expressive features gave
promise of remarkable personality and abundant joy of living.

"Very well." The disagreeable note of dismissal in the teacher's voice
angered Marjorie.

"I'll never again speak to her unless it's positively necessary," she
resolved resentfully. "I wish I'd taken Miss Harding's advice."

"Well, did she snap your head off?" inquired Muriel as Marjorie joined
her.

"No," was the brief answer.

"It's a wonder. There goes the third bell. It's on to English comp for
us. I won't have time to introduce you to the girls. We'll have to wait
until noon. Miss Flint teaches English. She's a dear, and everyone likes
her."

Muriel's voice dropped on her last speech, for they were now entering
the classroom. At the first flat-topped desk in one corner of the room
sat a small, fair woman with a sweet, sunshiny face that quite won
Marjorie to her.

"Miss Flint, this is Miss Dean," began Muriel, as they stopped before
the desk. "She is a freshman and has just been registered in the study
hall by Miss Merton."

A long, earnest glance passed between teacher and pupil, then Marjorie
felt her hand taken between two small, warm palms. "I am sure Miss Dean
and I are going to be friends," said a sweet, reassuring voice that
amply made up for Miss Merton's stiffness. "Are you a stranger in
Sanford, my dear? I am sure I have never seen you before."

"We have lived here a week," smiled Marjorie. "We moved here from
B----."

"How interesting. Were you a student of Franklin High School? I have a
dear friend who teaches English there."

"Oh!" exclaimed Marjorie, her eyes sparkling, "do you mean Miss
Fielding?"

"Yes," returned Miss Flint. "We were best friends during our college
days, too. Hampton College is our alma mater."

"That is where I hope to go when I finish high school. Miss Fielding has
told me so many nice things about Hampton," was Marjorie's eager reply.
Then she added impetuously, "I'm going to like Sanford, too. I'm quite
sure of it."

"That is the right spirit in which to begin your work here," was the
instant response. "I will assign you to that last seat in the third row.
We do not change seats. Each girl is given her own place for the year."

Marjorie thanked Miss Flint, and made her way to the seat indicated. The
sound of footsteps in the corridor had ceased. A tall girl in the front
row of desks slipped from her seat and closed the door. Miss Flint rose,
faced her class, and the recitation began.

After the class was dismissed Miss Flint detained Marjorie for a moment
to ask a few questions regarding her text and note books. Muriel waited
in the corridor. Her face wore an expression of extreme satisfaction.
It looked as though the new freshman might be a distinct addition to the
critical little company of girls who had set themselves as rulers and
arbiters of the freshman class. She was pretty, wore lovely clothes,
lived in a big house in a select neighborhood, had played center on a
city basketball team, and was the friend of Miss Flint's friend. To be
sure, Mignon La Salle might raise some objection to the newcomer. Mignon
was so unreasonably jealous. But for all her money, Mignon must not be
allowed always to have her own way. Muriel was sure the rest of the
girls would be quite in favor of adding Marjorie Dean to their number.
They needed one more girl to complete their sextette. To Marjorie should
fall the honor.

"I'll introduce her to the girls this noon, and let them look her over.
Then I'll have a talk with them to-night and see what they think,"
planned Muriel as she went back to the study hall at Marjorie's side.

There was a hurried exchange of books, then Marjorie was rushed off to
her algebra recitation. Here she found herself at least two weeks ahead
of the others, and was able to solve a problem at the blackboard that
had puzzled several members of the class, thereby winning a reputation
for herself as a mathematician to which it afterward proved anything but
easy to live up to.

While in both her English and algebra classes Marjorie had searched the
room with alert eyes for the girl who looked like Mary. She felt vaguely
disappointed. She had hoped to come into closer contact with her. She
liked Muriel, she decided, but she did not altogether understand her
half-cordial, half-joking manner. She was rather glad that she was to go
to her French class alone. She had told Muriel not to bother. She could
find the classroom by herself.

As she clicked down the short, left-hand, third floor corridor, she saw
just ahead of her a little blue-clad figure passing through the very
doorway for which she was making. An instant and she too had entered the
room. She stared about her, then walked to a seat directly opposite to
the one now occupied by the girl that looked like Mary. For a brief
moment the girl eyed Marjorie indifferently, then something in the
scrutiny of the other girl evidently annoyed her. She drew her straight
dark brows together in a displeased frown, and deliberately turned her
face away.

By this time perhaps a dozen girls had entered, and, as the clang of the
third bell echoed through the school, an alert little man with a thin,
sensitive face and timid brown eyes, bustled into the room and carefully
closed the door. Hardly had he taken his hand from the knob when the
door was flung open, this time to admit a sharp-featured girl with
bright, dark eyes and a cruel, thin-lipped mouth. Smiling maliciously,
she swung the door shut with an echoing bang. The meek little professor
looked reproachfully at the offender, who did not even appear to see
him.

"The Evil Genius," recognized Marjorie. Her eyes strayed furtively
toward the Mary girl, who had not paid the slightest attention to this
late arrival. "What a hateful person that black-eyed girl is," ran on
Marjorie's thoughts. "I know it was she who made that nice girl cry the
other day. I wish she wasn't quite so distant. The nice girl, I mean.
Oh, dear. I forgot to go up to the professor's desk and register. That's
his fault. He came in late. He'll see me in a minute and ask who I am."

To her extreme surprise, the little man paid no particular attention to
her, but, opening his grammar, began the giving out of the next day's
lesson. This he explained volubly and with many gestures. Marjorie's
lips curved into a half smile as she compared this rather noisy
instructor with Professor Rousseau, of Franklin. Later, when he called
upon his pupils to recite, however, he was a different being. His
politely sarcastic arraignment of those who floundered through the
lessons, accompanied by certain ominous marks he placed after their
names in a fat black book that lay on his desk, plainly showed that,
despite his mild appearance, he was a force yet to be reckoned with.

"I hope he doesn't notice me until class is over," fidgeted Marjorie.
"It surely must be time for that bell to ring." She began nervously to
count those who were due to recite before her turn came. It would be so
embarrassing to do her explaining before this group of strange girls,
particularly before the Evil Genius. Ah, she had begun to read! And how
beautifully she read French! The critical professor was listening to the
smooth flow of words that tripped from her tongue with approbation
written on every feature. "She must have studied French before,"
speculated Marjorie, as the professor directed the next girl to go on
with the exercise; "or else she is French. I believe she is. Oh, dear,
only two more girls."

Clang! sounded the bell.

"Thank goodness," breathed the relieved freshman.

There was a general closing of books. "To-morrow I shall geev you a
wreetten test," warned Professor Fontaine. Then the second bell rang,
and the class filed out of the room.

"Eet ees not strange that I haf overlooked you, Mademoiselle," explained
Professor Fontaine five minutes later, after listening to Marjorie's
apology for not presenting herself to him before class. "The freshmen
like to make so many alterations in their programs. They haf soch good
excuses for changeeng classes, but, sometimes, too, they do not tell
me. Eet maks exasperation." He waved his hands comprehensively. "I am
pleased," he added, with true French courtesy, "to haf another pupil.
Ees eet that you like the French, Mademoiselle Dean?"

"It is a beautiful language, Professor Fontaine," Marjorie assured him.
"I have only begun learning it, but I like it so much."

"C'est vrai," murmured the delighted professor. "La Francais est une
belle langue. If, then, you like it, you weel study your lessons, n'est
pas?"

"I'll try very hard to make good recitations. I will bring my books
to-morrow. We used the same grammar at Franklin High School."

Marjorie hastened back to the study hall to find it empty. The clock on
the north wall pointed significant hands to ten minutes past twelve. The
Picture Girl had said that she wished Marjorie to meet her friends, but
she was not waiting. It was disappointing, but her own fault, thought
the lonely freshman as she left the study hall and went slowly
downstairs to the locker room. She gave an impatient sigh as she pinned
on her hat. Exploring new territory wasn't half so interesting as she
could wish. Then a light footstep sounded at her side. A dignified
little voice said, stiffly, "Will you please allow me to get my hat?"

Marjorie whirled about in amazement. Could she believe her eyes? The
voice belonged to the Mary girl; they were to share the same locker.




CHAPTER VI

THE PLEDGE


"Oh, I am so glad we are to have a locker together!" exclaimed Marjorie,
impulsively. "I've been very anxious to know you. I really owe you an
apology. I spoke to you in the street the other day. I don't know what
you thought of me, but you look so much like my dearest chum in
B---- that I called to you before I realized what I was doing."

The other girl regarded Marjorie with the suspicious, uneasy eyes of a
cornered animal. Then, without answering, she reached for her hat and
was about to go silently on her way, when something in Marjorie's
gracious words seemed to touch her and she said, grudgingly, "I remember
you."

"That's nice," beamed Marjorie. "I was afraid you wouldn't. Let me tell
you about my chum." She launched forth in an enthusiastic description of
Mary Raymond and of their long friendship. "I wrote Mary about having
seen a girl that looked like her. She will be very curious to see you.
She's coming to visit me some time during the year. So I hope you and I
will be friends. But I haven't even told you who I am. My name is
Marjorie Dean. Won't you please tell me yours?" She offered her hand
winningly, but the strange, self-contained young girl ignored it.

"My name is Constance Stevens." Her voice was coldly reluctant, carrying
with it an unmistakable rebuff.

Marjorie drew back, puzzled and hurt. She was not used to having her
friendly overtures rejected. The blue-eyed girl saw the shrinking
movement, and, stirred by some hitherto unknown impulse, stretched forth
her hand. "Please forgive me for being so rude," she said contritely.
"It is awfully sweet in you to tell me about your chum and to say that
you wish to be my friend. You are the first girl, who has been so nice
with me since I came to Sanford. How I hate them!" Her expressive face
darkened and her blue eyes became filled with brooding, sullen anger.

"Are you going home to luncheon now?" asked Marjorie, with a view toward
keeping away from disagreeable subjects.

The other girl nodded, then, pinning on her hat, the two left the
building. Marjorie wished to ask questions, but she did not know how to
begin with this strange, moody girl. There were so many things to say.
"Do you play basketball?" she asked, almost timidly, when they had
traversed three blocks in silence.

Constance shook her head. "I don't even know the game, let alone trying
to play it. Do you play?"

"Yes. I have played every position on the team. I was chosen for center
of the freshman team at Franklin High just before I came here. One of
the freshmen has asked me to go to the tryout on Friday."

The Mary girl looked wistfully at Marjorie. "I'm going to tell you
something," she announced with finality. "Truly, it's for your own good.
You mustn't try to be friends with me. If you do, you'll be sorry. We,
my father and I, are nobodies in this town. Father's a broken-down
musician who teaches the violin for a living. I've a little lame
brother, and we take care of a poor old musician, who, people say, is
crazy. He isn't, though. He's merely childish.

"People call us Bohemians and gypsies and even vagabonds. They don't
understand that our greatest crime is just being poor. The girls in the
freshman class make fun of me and call me a tramp and a beggar behind my
back. One girl did try to be the least bit pleasant with me, but she
soon stopped. We've been in Sanford only two months, but it seems like a
hundred years. At first I was glad to think I was going to high school.
How I hate it now! But they sha'n't drive me away. I'll get my
education in spite of everything." Her lips drew together with resolute
purpose.

"So, you see," her voice grew gentle, "you mustn't waste your time upon
me. The girls won't like you if you do, and you don't know how dreadful
it is to be left out of everything. Of course, you can speak to me,
but----" She paused and looked eloquent meaning at Marjorie. Her late
aloofness had quite vanished. Her small face was now soft and friendly,
making the resemblance to happy-go-lucky Mary Raymond more apparent.

Marjorie laughed. Those who knew her best would have understood that her
laughter meant defiance. "I don't choose my friends because they are
rich or because others like them. I choose them because I want them
myself," she declared with a proud lift of her head. "I knew that
someone had been horrid to you the first day I ever saw you. I heard
several girls talking of you afterward. At least, I think they were
talking of you. I said to myself then that they had misjudged you. So I
went home and wrote my letter to Mary. I told mother all about you, too,
and that I was going to be your friend, if you would let me. I want you
to come and see me and meet mother and father. As for the girls in the
freshman class, I'd like to be friends with them, too, but I couldn't do
anything so contemptible and unfair as to dislike a girl just because
they thought they did. Now, you know what I think about it. Are we
going to share our locker and our troubles and our pleasures?"

The tears flashed across Constance Stevens' eyes. Her hand slid into
Marjorie's, and thus began a friendship between the two freshmen that
was to defy time and change.

They separated on the next corner and, throwing dignity to the winds,
Marjorie raced up the long walk and into the house to see if her captain
was better.

"I came to report, Captain," she said gently as she tiptoed up to her
mother's bed. "How are you, dear?"

"Better, Lieutenant," returned her mother, kissing the pretty, flushed
face. "Now for the report."

"You are sure I won't make your head ache with my chatter?"

"No, dear; it is ever so much better now."

Marjorie went faithfully through with the events of the morning. "I had
to stand by my colors, Captain. I wouldn't be fit to be a soldier if I
didn't know how to stand fast. Just as though it makes any difference
whether a girl is rich or poor if she's a dear and one likes her. How
can some girls be so silly? They wouldn't be if they had Mary's and my
military training. When in doubt ask your captain."

She laughed gaily, then her merry glance changed to one of dismay. "Good
gracious! It's fifteen minutes to one. I'll have to eat my luncheon in
a hurry." With a hasty kiss Marjorie flitted from the room and down the
stairs to the dining-room.

After luncheon she lingered for a brief moment with her mother, then set
off for the afternoon session of school. But she could not help
wondering as she walked just how it would seem to be in the freshman
class but not of it.




CHAPTER VII

THE WARNING


The afternoon session of school passed uneventfully for Marjorie. She
had returned too late from luncheon to hold more than a few words of
conversation with the Picture Girl. In spite of the watchful espionage
of Miss Merton, whose eyes seemed riveted to her side of the room,
Muriel managed to convey to Marjorie the news that the girls were dying
to meet her and were so sorry they had missed her at noon.

"We waited for you more than ten minutes," Muriel whispered guardedly.
"Mignon saw you stop at Professor Fontaine's desk. We knew what that
meant. It always takes him forever to explain anything. Do you remember
a black-haired, black-eyed girl in the French class this morning? She
wore the sweetest brown crêpe-de-chine dress. Well, that's Mignon La
Salle. Her father is the richest man in Sanford. Mignon could go away to
school if she liked, but she doesn't care about it. Tell you more
later."

Muriel faced front with a sudden jerk that could mean but one thing.
Marjorie cast a fleeting glance at Miss Merton. The teacher was frowning
angrily, as though about to deliver a rebuke. Luckily for the two girls,
the first recitation bell rang and they stood not upon the order of
their going, but went with alacrity. Once outside the study-hall door
they were safe.

"I don't know what ails Miss Merton," complained Muriel. "She has never
said a word to me before. That's twice to-day she has shown her claws."

"She doesn't like me," said Marjorie, calmly, "and I don't like her. I
think she is the rudest teacher I ever knew. It was I, not you that she
meant that scolding for this morning."

"Nonsense!" scoffed Muriel. "She likes you as well as she likes the rest
of us. I don't believe she is awfully, terribly, fearfully fond of
girls. When she was young she must have been one of those stiff, prim
goody-goodies; the distressingly snippy sort that made all her friends
so tired." Muriel laughed softly.

Marjorie smiled at Muriel's unflattering description of Miss Merton's
youth, then her face sobered. In her heart she knew that Miss Merton
disliked her, and the knowledge was not pleasant. She made an earnest
resolve to overcome the teacher's prejudice. She would make Miss Merton
like her.

Muriel went with her as far as the door of the history room, which was
in charge of Miss Atkins, a stout, middle-aged woman, who beamed amiably
upon Marjorie, entered her name in the class register, motioned her to a
front seat and promptly appeared to forget her existence. But though
Miss Atkins exhibited small personal interest in her new pupil, such was
not the case with regard to the subject which she taught. The lesson
dealt with the coming of the Virginia colonists, their settlement in
Jamestown and the final burning of the town. Miss Atkins' vivid
description of the colonists' determined struggles to gain a foothold in
the New World was well worth listening to. The reading of extracts from
special reference books pertaining to that gallant expedition into the
treacherous forests of an unknown, untried country made the lesson seem
doubly interesting. When the recitation was over Marjorie went back to
the study hall congratulating herself on the fact that she had not
dropped history, and reflecting that no one would ever have suspected
Miss Atkins of being so fascinating.

As she groped in her desk for her textbook on physiology, she looked
about her for some sign of Constance Stevens. She recollected that she
had not seen her in her seat when the afternoon session began. The
moment her recitation in physiology was over she hastened to the locker
room. No, her new friend's hat was not there. She had not returned to
school after luncheon. Marjorie reached for her own hat, vaguely
wondering what had happened to keep Constance away from school.

She stood meditatively poking her hatpins in and out of her hat, when
the sound of footsteps on the stairs came to her ears. School was over
for the day. She put on her hat in a hurry, took a swift peep at herself
as she passed the one large mirror that hung at the end of the
freshmen's lockers, and ran up the stairs. She would not disappoint
Muriel's friends again.

This time she was first on the scene, standing on the identical spot
where she had stood the day Constance rushed weeping past her. Why
didn't her class come out? Surely she had heard their footsteps on the
stairs. But it was fully five minutes before the stream of girls began
to issue from the big doors. Then Muriel appeared, surrounded by her
friends, and in another instant the girl with the dimples, the
fair-haired girl, the stout girl and the Evil Genius were, with varying
degrees of friendliness, telling Marjorie Dean that they were glad to
meet her.

Susan Atwell said so frankly with a delightful show of dimples. Irma
Linton looked the acme of gentle friendliness. Geraldine Macy's face
wore an expression of open admiration. Mignon La Salle's greeting,
however, was distinctly reserved. To be sure, she smiled; but Muriel,
who had been furtively watching her, knew that the French girl was not
pleased with the idea of admitting another girl to their fellowship.

"The rest of the girls like her," thought Muriel. "Mignon will find
she'll have to give in this time." Purposely, to make sure she was
right, she said boldly: "Miss Dean, will you go to the basketball tryout
with us on Friday afternoon?"

"Yes, do," urged Geraldine Macy, eagerly.

"We'd love to have you," came from Susan Atwell. "We understand that you
are a star player."

"Of course you must," smiled Irma Linton.

The French girl alone hesitated. Her eyes roved speculatively from one
face to another, then she said suavely, "Come by all means, Miss Dean.
It will be quite interesting."

"Thank you. I shall be pleased to go with you." Marjorie ignored
Mignon's slight hesitation, although she had noted it. "I wonder if you
are all as fond of basketball as I," she went on quickly. "It's a
splendid game, isn't it?"

Her new acquaintances answered with emphasis that it was certainly a
great game, and, the ice now broken, they began to ply their new
acquaintance with questions. How did she like Sanford? Did it seem
strange to her after a big city high school? What subjects had she
selected? Had she met any other girls besides themselves?

Marjorie answered them readily enough. She was glad to be one of a
crowd of girls again.

"Have you met any other girls?" asked Geraldine Macy, abruptly.

"I met a Miss Seymour before I had even gone as far as Miss Archer's
office. She is a delightful girl, isn't she?"

No one of the five girls made answer. The little freshman regarded them
perplexedly.

"Mm!" ejaculated Muriel Harding. "You wouldn't think her quite so nice
if you knew as much about her as we do. Wait until you see her play
basketball. She plays center on the sophomore team, and she makes some
very peculiar plays. She's always creating trouble, too. She and some of
her sophomore friends seem to have a particular grudge against Mignon.
They are forever criticising her playing. They have even gone so far as
to say that we don't play fairly; that we are tricky. The idea!" Muriel
looked highly offended at the mere idea of any such thing.

Marjorie listened without comment. Muriel's ready tirade against the
pleasant-faced sophomore who had willingly offered her services that
morning made her feel decidedly uncomfortable. Then Miss Seymour's
straightforward speech to Miss Archer came back to her. The sophomore
had been generous to her enemies, if they were enemies, in that she had
refused to mention any names. Marjorie wondered if Muriel or Mignon
would be equally generous in the same circumstances. She resolved to say
nothing of what she had been privileged to hear. It was not hers to
tell.

Suddenly she divined, rather than saw, Mignon's elfish eyes fixed upon
her. "You met another girl, at noon, did you not, Miss Dean?" asked the
French girl, with an almost sarcastic inflection.

"Yes; Miss Stevens," was the composed answer. "We share the same locker.
She is a nice girl, too, and I like her very much, so, please, don't say
anything against her," she ended, in half-smiling warning.

Mignon La Salle's face grew dark. She recognized the challenging note in
the new girl's tone. Muriel, too, frowned. Susan Atwell sidled up to
Mignon, Irma Linton looked distressed and Geraldine Macy calmly curious
as to what would come next. It came in the way of a small tempest, for
the French girl lost her temper over Marjorie's retort.

She stamped her foot in childish rage, saying vehemently: "She is a
nobody, that Stevens person, and her family are vagabonds. You will make
a great mistake if you choose her for your friend." Then, her rage
receding as suddenly as it had come, she shrugged her shoulders
deprecatingly. "Pardonnez moi." She bowed to Marjorie. "I spoke too
strongly. It is not for me to choose Miss Dean's friends." Slipping her
arm through Muriel's, she drew her ahead of the others. Susan Atwell
took a hurried step forward and caught her other arm, leaving Marjorie
to walk between Irma and Geraldine.

"Don't mind her," said Jerry, in a low voice. "She has it in for that
Miss Stevens. She, the Stevens girl, did something, no one knows what,
to make Mignon angry with her. Mignon says Miss Stevens talked about her
and Muriel and Susan believed it, but Irma and I are not so silly."

Two blocks further on Marjorie bade good-bye to the five girls. She said
it without enthusiasm. Their carping, quarrelsome attitude had taken all
the pleasure from knowing them. She made mental exception in favor of
Irma and Jerry. The gentleness of the one and the sturdy, outspoken
manner of the other had impressed her favorably. But she was sorely
disappointed in Muriel.

Should she tell her mother of the disagreeable ending of her first day?
She decided not to do so. She would carry nothing save pleasant tales to
her captain to-day. And so that night, when she entered the living-room
and found her mother, in a becoming negligee, occupying the wide leather
couch by the window, she saluted, like a dutiful soldier, and included
in her report only the pleasant happenings of her first,
never-to-be-forgotten day in Sanford High School.




CHAPTER VIII

STANDING BY HER COLORS


When Marjorie took her seat in the study hall the next morning, Muriel's
greeting was as affable as it had been before the disagreement of the
previous afternoon. She even went so far as to whisper, "Don't take
Mignon too seriously. She is really dreadfully hurt over the unkind
things Miss Stevens has said of her."

Marjorie listened in polite silence to the Picture Girl's rather lame
apology in behalf of her friend. She could think of nothing to say.
Muriel had turned about in her seat, her eyes fixed expectantly upon the
other girl. But just then came an unexpected interruption.

"Miss Dean," shrilled Miss Merton's high, querulous voice, "who gave you
permission to leave school before the regular hour of dismissal
yesterday afternoon?"

"I did not----" began the astonished girl.

"Young woman, do you mean to contradict me?" thundered Miss Merton.

Marjorie had now risen to her feet. Her pretty face had turned very
white, her brown eyes gleamed like two angry flames. "I had no intention
of contradicting you, Miss Merton." Her low, steady tones were full of
repressed indignation. "What I had begun to say was that I did not know
I was expected to return to the study hall after my last class. In the
high school which I attended in B---- we went from our last class to our
locker rooms. It is, of course, my fault. I should have inquired about
it beforehand." The freshman quietly resumed her seat.

Every pair of eyes in the room was turned upon Marjorie.

Miss Merton, however, had no intention of letting her off so easily.
"The rules and regulations of another high school do not, in the least,
interest me, Miss Dean," she said, with biting sarcasm. "It is my
business to see that the rules of _Sanford_ High School are enforced,
and I propose to do it. You have been a pupil in this school for only
one day, yet I have been obliged to reprimand you on two different
occasions. If you annoy me further I shall consider myself fully
justified in sending you to Miss Archer."

The ringing of the first recitation bell put an end to the little scene.
Marjorie rose from her seat and marched from the study hall, her head
held high. If Miss Merton expected her to break down and cry she would
find herself sadly mistaken. Muriel overtook her in the corridor. "My,
but Miss Merton hates you!" she commented cheerfully, as though enjoying
her classmate's discomfiture.

Marjorie made no reply. Her proud spirit was too deeply crushed for
words. She went through her recitation in English that morning like one
in a dream. Several times during her French hour she gazed appealingly
at Constance, but the Mary girl kept her fair head turned resolutely
away. She did not appear at her locker either at noon or after school
was over, although Marjorie lingered, in the hope that she would come.

So successfully did she manage to steer clear of Marjorie, who was too
proud to make advances in the face of Constance's marked avoidance,
that, when Friday came and the afternoon session was over, Marjorie was
escorted to the gymnasium by the Picture Girl and her friends, who, even
to Mignon, believed that the newcomer had been wise and taken their
brusque advice.

At least half of the freshman class had elected to try for a place on
the team. Miss Randall, the instructor in gymnastics, and several
seniors had been chosen to pick the team, and when the six girls arrived
on the scene the testing had begun. Mignon La Salle was the first of
their group to play. Her almost marvelous agility, her quick, catlike
springs and her fleetness of foot called forth unstinted praise from
Marjorie. Muriel, too, played a skilful game; so did Susan Atwell. When
Marjorie was called upon to play left guard on a team composed of the
last lot of aspirants for basketball honors, she advanced to her
position rather nervously. Muriel, Mignon, Susan Atwell and two
freshmen, whom she did not know, were to oppose her. She wondered if she
could play fast enough to keep up with her clever opponents. Then, as
she caught the French girl's elfish eyes fixed upon her, mocking
incredulity in their depths, she rallied her doubting spirit and
resolved to outplay even Mignon.

Fifteen minutes later Marjorie Dean had been chosen to play left guard
on a team of which Mignon was center, Muriel, right guard, Susan Atwell,
right forward, and a freshman named Harriet Delaney, left forward.
Muriel had also been made captain, and several girls were chosen as
substitutes.

"Hurrah for the new team!" cried Muriel Harding. "Let's call ourselves
the Invincibles. You certainly can play basketball, Miss Dean. How lucky
in you to come to Sanford just when we need you. By the way, 'Miss Dean'
is too formal. Please let us call you Marjorie. You can call us by our
first names. What's the use of so much formality among team-mates?"

Being merely a very human young girl, Marjorie could not help feeling a
little bit pleased with herself. She was glad she had played so well.
She felt that she had really begun to like her new associates very much.
Even Mignon must have her good points; and how wonderfully well she
played basketball! Perhaps Constance Stevens had been just a little bit
at fault. Certainly she had acted very queerly after that first day when
they had pledged their friendship. Had she, Marjorie, been wise to avow
unswerving loyalty to a stranger, and all because she looked like Mary
Raymond? Marjorie's disquieting reflections were interrupted by
something the French girl was saying.

"It was too funny for anything, wasn't it, Muriel?" Mignon laughed with
gleeful malice.

"Yes," nodded Muriel. "We gave the sophomores a bad scare."

"What did you do?" asked Irma Linton, curiously.

Seeing that she had the attention of her audience, the French girl
began.

"You remember the practice game we played against the sophomores last
week? According to my way of thinking, the sophomores played a very
rough game. I complained to Miss Seymour, their captain. She laughed at
me," Mignon scowled at the remembrance, "so I decided to teach her a
lesson."

"I told Muriel about it, and between us we made up a dialogue. It was
all about the sophomores' unfair playing, and how surprised they would
be when they found themselves forbidden to play basketball. Then we
managed to walk out of school behind two girls that always tell
everything they know, and recited our dialogue. The next morning Muriel
saw one of the girls talking to Miss Seymour for all she was worth, so
we know that she faithfully repeated everything she heard. Miss Seymour
wouldn't dare go to Miss Archer with it for fear Miss Archer would ask
too many questions. You know Miss Archer said last year when Inez
Chester made such a fuss about her sprained wrist that if ever again one
team reported another for rough playing she would disband the accused
team and have Miss Randall select a new one. So I imagine we gave our
friends the sophs something to think about."

"But who told you the sophomores would be forbidden to play?" demanded
candid Jerry.

"No one told us, silly," retorted Muriel, her color rising. "We simply
said they would be surprised when they found themselves forbidden to
play. 'When' may mean next week or next month, or next year or century,
or any other time. We were only talking for their general edification."

"Then nobody actually said a word about it?" persisted Jerry. "You just
made up all that stuff?"

"It didn't do any hurt," began Muriel. "We thought----"

"Don't be such a prig, Jerry," put in Mignon, impatiently. "It isn't
half so wicked to play a joke on those stupid sophomores as it is to ask
one's mother for money for a fountain pen, and then use the money for
candy and ice cream."

There was a chorus of giggles from the girls, in which Jerry did not
join. She was eyeing Mignon steadily. "See here, Mignon," she said with
offended dignity. "I just want you to know that I told my mother about
that money that very same night. I may have my faults, but I certainly
don't tell things that aren't true." Jerry punctuated this pertinent
speech with emphatic nods of her head, and, having said her say, walked
on a little ahead of her friends, the picture of belligerence.

"Now, you've made Jerry angry, Mignon," laughed Susan Atwell.

Mignon merely lifted her thin shoulders. "I can't please every one. If I
did, I should never please myself."

"I don't know what ails Jerry all of a sudden," commented Muriel to
Marjorie. "She isn't usually so--so funny."

Again Marjorie kept her own counsel. She, alone, knew that the object of
the rumor which Muriel and Mignon had started had failed. Ellen Seymour
had gone frankly to headquarters with it, and Miss Archer had asked no
questions. Marjorie wondered what these girls would say if they knew
the truth. She did not like to criticize them, but were they truly
honorable? For a moment she wished she had refused to play on the team
with them. Muriel and Mignon, in particular, seemed so careless of other
people's feelings.

Her sympathies were with Jerry, and quickening her pace she slipped her
arm through that of the fat girl, saying, "Don't you think to-morrow's
algebra lesson is hard?"

Jerry viewed her companion's smiling face rather sulkily. Then
succumbing to the other's charm, she said in a mollified tone: "Of
course it's hard. They're all hard. I know I shall never pass in
algebra."

"Oh, yes, you will," was Marjorie's cheerful assurance. "It's my hardest
study, too; but I'm going to pass my final examination in it. I've
simply made up my mind that I must do it."

"Then I'll make up my mind to pass, too," announced Jerry, inspired by
Marjorie's determined tones. "And, say, it would be splendid if we could
do our lessons together sometimes. My mother likes me to bring my school
friends home."

"So does mine," returned Marjorie, cordially. "She says home is the
place for me to entertain my schoolmates. I hope you will come to see me
soon. It's your turn first, you know. Oh, please pardon me a moment, I
must speak to this girl!" The cause of this sudden exclamation was a
young woman in a well-worn blue suit who was coming across the street
directly ahead of them.

"Oh, Constance!" hailed Marjorie, "I have been looking for you. Stop a
minute!" Marjorie stood waiting for her friend with eager face and
outstretched hand. By this time the four other girls had come abreast of
the trio and had passed them, Irma Linton being the only one of them who
bowed to Constance. Jerry stood beside Marjorie for an instant, then
walked on and overtook her chums.

"Please don't stop," begged Constance, her face expressing the liveliest
worry. "Really, you mustn't try to be friends with me. I wish to take
back my part of our compact. You've been chosen to play on the team, and
those girls seem to like you. I can't stand in your way, and my
friendship won't be worth anything to you, so just let's forget all we
said the other day."

Marjorie stared hard at the other girl, the pathetic droop of whose lips
looked for all the world like Mary's when things went wrong. "You don't
mean that, and I won't give you up," she said with fine stubbornness. "I
haven't time to talk about it now. I must catch up with those girls.
Wait for me at our locker to-morrow noon, please, _please_."

With a hasty squeeze of Constance's hand, Marjorie raced on up the
street to overtake her companions. They were so busily engaged in
discussing her, however, that they did not hear her approach, and
consequently did not lower their voices.

"I will not speak to her; I will not play with her on the team!" she
heard Mignon La Salle sputter angrily.

"We certainly don't care to bother with her if she's going to take up
with all sorts of low people." This loftily from Muriel, who was afraid
to cross the French girl.

"My mother told me never to speak to any of those crazy Stevens
persons," added Susan Atwell, with a toss of her curly head. "I don't
care so very much for this Dean girl, either."

"Oh, you make me tired, the whole lot of you," cried Jerry, with angry
contempt. "Marjorie Dean is nicer than all of you put together, and if
she likes that little white-faced Stevens girl, then the girl is all
right, even if her family were ragpickers. I'm ashamed of myself for
being so silly as to listen to any of Mignon's complaints against her.
You can do as you like, but if it's a case of being your friend or
Marjorie's, then I guess I'd rather be hers."

"Thank you, Geraldine." Marjorie's quiet voice caused the party to turn,
then exchange sheepish glances. "I don't wish you to quarrel over me,"
she went on. "I should like to be friends with all of you, but none of
you can choose my friends for me any more than I can choose yours for
you."

"You can't chum with us and be the friend of that Miss Stevens,"
muttered Mignon. "She is my enemy. Do you understand?"

"I am sorry to hear that," returned Marjorie, keeping her temper with
difficulty, "but she is not mine. I like her. I shall stand up for her
and be her friend as long as we go to Sanford High School. I am sorry to
seem disagreeable, but I shouldn't feel the least bit true to myself if
I were afraid to say what I think. This is my street. Good-bye."

Marjorie walked proudly away from the group. An instant and she heard
the patter of running feet behind her.

"You can't get rid of us so easily," panted Geraldine Macy.

"I think you are right, Marjorie," said Irma Linton, quietly, putting
out her hand. "I should like to be your friend."

And the dividing of the sextette of girls was the dividing of the
freshman class of Sanford High School.




CHAPTER IX

A BITTER MOMENT


Marjorie went soberly up the steps of her home that afternoon. Her
pleasure in making the team had been short-lived. She wondered if it
would not be better to write her resignation. How could she bear to play
on a team when three of the members had decided to drop her
acquaintance? Still, they had not chosen her to play on the team; why,
then, should she resign? She decided to consult her captain on the
subject; then changed her mind. She would not trouble her mother with
such petty grievances. This prejudice against Constance Stevens had
originated wholly with Mignon La Salle. Perhaps the French girl would
soon forget it, and it would die a natural death. Marjorie was not
mortally hurt over the turn of the afternoon's affairs. She had not been
so deeply impressed with the importance of Mignon and her friends that
she failed to see their snobbish tendencies. She made mental exception
of Jerry and Irma. She was secretly glad that they had declared for her.
She liked Jerry's blunt independence and Irma's gentle, lovable
personality. With the optimism of sixteen, she declined to worry over
what had happened, and her report to her captain at the end of that
troubled afternoon included only the pleasant events of the day.

When she went to school the next Monday morning she discovered that it
did hurt, just a trifle, to be deliberately cut by the Picture Girl,
and, instead of being greeted with Susan Atwell's dimpled smile, to
receive an icy stare from that young woman, as, later in the morning,
they passed each other in the corridor.

In some mysterious manner the story of the disagreement had been noised
about the freshman class, with the result that Marjorie's acquaintance
was eagerly sought by a number of freshmen whom she knew merely by
sight, and that several girls, who had made it a point to smile and nod
to her, now passed her, frigid and unsmiling.

As for the members of the little group Marjorie had watched so earnestly
before she had been enrolled as a freshman at Sanford, they were now
divided indeed. As the week progressed the "Terrible Trio," as Jerry had
satirically named Mignon, Muriel and Susan, endeavored to make plain to
whoever would listen to them that there was but one side to the story,
namely, their side. Emulating Marjorie's example, Jerry and Irma had
taken particular pains to be friendly with Constance Stevens. After an
eloquent dissertation on friendship, delivered by Marjorie at their
locker on the Monday morning following her disagreement with the other
girls, Constance had shed a few happy tears and admitted that she had
rather be "best friends" with Marjorie than anyone else in the world.

The hardest part of it all for Marjorie was her basketball practice. It
was dreadful to be on speaking terms with only one girl on the team,
Harriet Delaney, and she was not overly cordial. Marjorie tried to
remember that Miss Randall had appointed her to her position, that the
right to play was hers; but the unfriendly players made her nervous, and
she lost her usual snap and daring. The second week's practice came, and
she resolved to play up to her usual form, but, try as she might, she
fell far short of the promise she had shown at the tryout. She also
noted uneasily that, no matter how early she reported for practice, the
team seemed always to be in the gymnasium before her and that one of the
substitutes invariably held her position.

The freshmen had challenged the sophomores to play against them on the
first Saturday afternoon in November. It was now the latter part of
October and both teams were utilizing as much of their spare time as
possible in preparing for the fray.

"Are you going to practice this afternoon?" whispered Geraldine Macy to
Marjorie as they left the algebra class on Monday morning.

Marjorie nodded.

"Oh, dear," grumbled Jerry under her breath. "I wanted to talk to you
about the Hallowe'en party."

"What Hallowe'en party?" asked Marjorie, opening her eyes.

"Haven't you your invitation?" It was Jerry's turn to look surprised.

"I don't even know what you're talking about."

Their entrance into the study hall put an end to the conversation. It
was renewed at noon, however, when Jerry, Irma, Marjorie and Constance
trooped out of the school building together, a seemingly contented
quartet.

"Just imagine, girls," announced Jerry, excitedly. "Marjorie doesn't
know a thing about the Hallowe'en party. She hasn't her invitation
either. I think that's awfully queer."

"I haven't mine, but I know all about it," put in Constance Stevens,
quietly.

"Who has charge of the invitations?" asked Marjorie.

"Miss Arnold. You'd better see her about yours to-day. Of course you
both want to go."

"But what is it and where is it held?" questioned Marjorie.

"It's a big dance. Weston High School, that's the boys' school, gives a
party to Sanford High on every Hallowe'en night. It's a town
institution and as unchangeable as any law the Medes and Persians ever
thought of making," informed Jerry.

"Oh, how splendid!" exclaimed Marjorie. "I should like to know some nice
Sanford boys, and I love to dance!"

"Then you ought to meet my brother Hal," declared Jerry, solemnly, "for
he's the nicest, handsomest, best boy I know."

"Wait until you see the Crane," laughed Irma Linton. "He's the tallest
boy in high school. He's six feet two inches now. They say he hasn't
stopped growing, either, and he is awfully thin. That's why the boys
call him the 'Crane.' He doesn't mind it a bit. His real name is Sherman
Norwood, but no one ever calls him that except the teachers."

During the rest of the walk home the coming dance was the sole subject
under discussion. Yes, the girls wore evening gowns, if they had them.
Lots of girls wore their best summer dresses. The leading caterer of
Sanford always had charge of the refreshments and the boys paid the
bills. There was a real orchestra, too. Of course all the teachers were
there, but the pokey ones went home early and the jolly ones, like Miss
Flint and Miss Atkins, stayed until the last dance.

There were countless other questions to ask, but the luncheon hour was
too short to admit of any lingering on the corner.

"I wish we had more time to talk," sighed Marjorie, reluctantly, as she
came to her street. "I'd love to hear more about the dance."

"We'll tell you all there is to tell after school," promised Jerry. "Oh,
no, we can't either. You'll have to go to that old basketball practice.
What a nuisance it is. And to think you have to play on the team with
Mignon, Muriel and Susan, after the way they've treated you. Why don't
you resign?"

"I don't believe I'll play next term," said Marjorie, slowly, "but I
feel as though I ought to stay on the team for the rest of this term.
Our game with the sophomores is set for two weeks from to-morrow; then,
I believe we are to play against two teams from nearby towns. It
wouldn't be fair to leave the team now, after having practiced with it."

"I don't believe I'd bother my head much about that part of it," sniffed
Jerry, "I'd just quit."

"No, you wouldn't, Geraldine Macy," laughed Irma. "You might grumble,
but you wouldn't be so hateful."

"You don't know how hateful I can be," warned Jerry. "Some other girls
are likely to find out, though."

"Good-bye. I must not stop here another second," declared Marjorie.

"Good-bye!" floated after her as she walked rapidly toward home.

"How goes it, Lieutenant?" asked her father, who, with her mother, was
already seated at the table as she entered the dining-room.

"Pretty well, thank you, General," she replied, touching her hand to her
curly head.

"I haven't heard you say a word about school for at least a week, my
dear," commented her mother. "Has the novelty of Sanford High worn off
so soon?"

"No, indeed, Captain," returned Marjorie, earnestly. "I'm finding out
new things every day." She did not add that some of the "new things" had
not been agreeable, nor did she volunteer any further information
concerning her school. This touch of reticence on the part of her
usually talkative daughter caused her mother to look at her searchingly
and wonder if Marjorie had something on her mind which in due season
would be brought to light. The subject of the dance returning to the
young girl's thoughts, she began at once to talk of it, and her
enthusiastic description of the coming affair served to allay her
mother's vague impression that Marjorie was not quite happy, and she
entered into the important discussion of what her daughter should wear
with that unselfish interest belonging only to a mother.

When Marjorie returned to school that afternoon she felt happier than
she had been since her advent into Sanford High School. The thought of
the coming dance brought with it a delightful thrill of anticipation.
She had always had such good times at the school dances given by her boy
and her girl chums of B----. She hoped she would enjoy this Hallowe'en
frolic. She wondered if the "Terrible Trio" would be there. She smiled
over Jerry's appropriate appellation, then frowned at herself for
countenancing it. Good soldiers didn't indulge in personalities.

That afternoon she found it hard, however, to concentrate her
thoughts on her studies, and when Miss Atkins asked her on what day the
Pilgrim Fathers landed in America, she absent-mindedly replied
"Hallowe'en," to the great joy of her class. During her physiology hour
she managed to keep strictly to the subject; but she was impatient for
the afternoon to pass so that she could go to Miss Arnold for her
invitation.

Her eyes sparkled, however, when, on returning to the study hall, she
saw lying on her desk a square white envelope addressed to her.

"Oh, here it is," she thought delightedly. "I'm so glad. I wonder if
Constance has hers."

She tore open the end of the envelope with eager fingers and drew out a
folded sheet of note paper. But the light died out of her face as she
read:

"My dear Miss Dean:

"For some time the members of the freshman team have been dissatisfied
with your playing, and have repeatedly urged me to allow Miss Thornton
to play in your position on the team. Not wishing to seem unfair, Miss
Randall and I watched your work at practice Wednesday afternoon and
agreed that the requested change would be best. As manager of the
freshmen team, their welfare must ever be my first consideration. I
therefore feel no hesitation in asking you for your resignation from the
team.

                                    "Yours sincerely,

                                            "MARCIA ARNOLD."

A sigh of humiliation that was half a sob rose to Marjorie's lips. Her
chin quivered ominously. Suddenly a dreadful thought flashed across her
brain. Suppose Mignon and the others were watching her to see how she
received the bad news. Marjorie's desire to cry left her. She leaned
back in her seat and assumed an air of indifference far removed from her
real state of mind. Then she calmly refolded the letter and placed it in
its envelope with the impassivity of a young sphinx.

Later that afternoon, as Mignon La Salle strolled out of school between
her two satellites, Susan and Muriel, she was heard to declare with
disappointed peevishness that that priggish Miss Dean was either too
stupid to resent or too thick-skinned to feel a plain out-and-out snub.




CHAPTER X

A BLUE GOWN AND A SOLEMN RESOLVE


The next day in school was a particularly trying one for poor Marjorie.
It was decidedly hard for the sore-hearted little freshman to believe
that Miss Arnold's motive in asking her to resign from the team had been
purely disinterested. She was reasonably sure that she had Mignon to
blame for the humiliation. Jerry Macy had told her of Miss Arnold's
respect for Mignon's father's money, and that Miss Archer's thin-lipped,
austere-looking secretary was one of the French girl's most devoted
followers.

The wave of dislike which had swept over Marjorie upon first beholding
Marcia Arnold had, as the days passed, intensified rather than lessened.
Jerry, too, could not endure the secretary. "I never could bear her,"
she had confided to Marjorie. "I'm glad she's a junior. I'll have two
years of comfort after she's gone. I suppose she deserves a lot of
credit for keeping up in her studies and earning money as a secretary at
the same time, but I'd rather have a nice wriggly snake, or a cheerful
crocodile for a friend if it comes to a choice."

Marjorie was equally certain that Miss Arnold did not like her. She had
had occasion to ask the secretary several questions and the latter's
manner of answering had been curt, almost to rudeness. The desired
resignation was yet to be written. Marjorie had purposely delayed
writing it until the last hour of the afternoon session. She wished to
think before writing. It took her the greater part of the hour to
compose it, although, when it was finally copied on a sheet of note
paper she had brought to school for that purpose, it covered little more
than one side of the sheet.

While she was addressing it for mailing, she suddenly remembered that
she had not yet asked Miss Arnold for her Hallowe'en invitation. Should
she hand the secretary her resignation instead of mailing it? She
decided that the more dignified course would be to mail it. As to the
invitation for the dance, she was entitled to it; therefore she was not
afraid to demand it. She wondered if Constance had received hers, and,
when her new friend returned from class, Marjorie managed to catch her
eye and question her by means of a sign language known only to
schoolgirls. A vigorous shake of Constance's fair head brought forth
more signs, which, when school was dismissed, resulted in a determined
march upon Miss Archer's office by the two friends, reinforced by Jerry
and Irma, who had managed to join Marjorie and Constance in the
corridor.

"That's just why we waited," announced Jerry, wagging her head
emphatically when Marjorie explained her mission. "We wondered if she'd
given them to you. You let me do the talking. She won't have a word to
say when I'm through."

"Hush, Jerry!" cautioned Irma. "She'll hear you."

They were now entering Miss Archer's living-room office. Marcia Arnold,
who was seated before her desk, intent on the book she held in her hand,
raised her eyes and regarded the quartette with a displeased frown. Then
she addressed them in peremptory tones.

"Please make less noise, girls. Your voices can be plainly heard in Miss
Archer's office and she is too busy now to be disturbed." This last with
a view to discouraging any attempt on their part to see the principal.

"We didn't come to see Miss Archer," was Geraldine Macy's calm retort.
"We came to see you about Miss Dean's and Miss Stevens' invitations for
the dance. They haven't received them."

"I know nothing whatever about them," snapped Miss Arnold, picking up
her book as a sign of dismissal.

"You ought to know. The invitations were given to you by the boys'
committee," was Jerry's pertinent reminder. "You sent them the list of
names, didn't you? Perhaps you accidentally left out these two names."

This was a malicious afterthought on Jerry's part, but it had a potent
effect on Marcia Arnold. A tide of red rose to her sallow face. For a
second her eyes wavered from the four pairs searchingly upon her. Then
she answered with elaborate carelessness: "It is just possible that
these two names have been omitted. I will go over my list and see."

"Yes, do," advised Jerry, laconically. Then she slyly added: "It seems
funny, doesn't it, that when 'D' and 'S' are so far apart on the
alphabetical list, they should both happen to be overlooked? If the
girls don't receive their invitations by to-morrow night I'll speak to
my brother about it. He's the president of the junior class, you know,
and he'll take it up with the committee. Come on, girls."

The three young women obediently following her, Jerry marched from the
room with the air of a conqueror. True to her prediction, Marcia Arnold
had found nothing to say to the stout girl's parting shot.

"There really wasn't much use in our going. I'm afraid we weren't very
brave. We shouldn't have stood like wooden images and let you fight our
battles, Jerry. It was awfully dear in you, but I do hope Miss Arnold
won't think Constance and I are babies," demurred Marjorie.

"What do you care what she thinks as long as she hunts up your
invitations?" asked Jerry, with superb contempt. "What she thinks will
never hurt either of you."

The belated invitations were delivered to the two freshmen by Miss
Arnold herself the next day, greatly to Jerry's satisfaction.

"I saw her give them to you, girls," she whispered to Marjorie on the
way to the English class. "She looked mad as a hatter, too. She thought
she'd hold back your invitations until the last minute; then maybe you
would get mad and not go to the dance."

"But why should she wish to keep us from going?" asked Marjorie,
wonderingly.

"Ask Mignon," was Jerry's enigmatical answer. "Very likely she knows
more about it than anyone else."

Marjorie found no chance for conversation with Constance until they met
in French class. Even then she had only time to say, "Be sure to wait
for me this noon," before Professor Fontaine called his class to order
and attacked the advance lesson with his usual Latin ardor.

Constance was first at their locker. She had already put on her own hat
and coat and was holding Marjorie's for her, when her friend arrived.

"What are you going to wear, Constance?" asked Marjorie, as she put on
her coat and hat.

"I'm not going," was the brief answer.

"Not going!" Marjorie stared hard at her friend. Was Constance hurt
because she had not received her invitation? Then she went on, eagerly
apologetic: "It wasn't the Weston boys' fault that we didn't get our
invitations when the others received theirs. They didn't intend to leave
us out, even though they only knew our names."

"It's not that." Constance's voice trembled a little. "I--I--well, I
haven't a dress fit to wear!" Her pale cheeks grew pink with shame as
she burst forth with this confession of poverty. "This blue suit and
three house dresses are all the clothes I have in the world. Don't say
you feel sorry for me. I shall hate you if you do. I sha'n't always be
poor. Some day," her eyes grew dreamy, "I'll have all sorts of lovely
clothes. When I am a----" She stopped abruptly, then said in her usual
half-sullen tones, "I can't go, so don't ask me."

Marjorie looked curiously at this strange girl. The longer she knew
Constance the better she liked her, but she did not in the least
understand her. Suddenly a bright idea popped into her head. "I'm so
sorry you can't go to the dance," she commented, then promptly dropped
the subject. When she left Constance, however, she remarked innocently:
"Don't forget, you are coming home with me to-night. Don't say you can't.
You promised, you know."

"I will come," promised Constance, brightening. "Good-bye."

The moment Marjorie reached home she made a dash for her room and going
to her closet, emerged a moment afterward with an immense white
pasteboard box in her arms. Stopping only long enough to drop her wraps
on her bed she ran downstairs and burst into the dining-room with: "I
have found her, Mother. I've found the girl this was made for."

"What is all this commotion about, Lieutenant?" asked her father,
teasingly. "Are we about to be attacked by the enemy? Salute your
superior officers and then state your case. Discipline must be preserved
at all costs in the army. Is it a requisition for new uniforms? You
soldiers are dreadfully hard on your clothes. Or is the post about to
move and is that a packing case?"

Marjorie made a most unsoldierlike rush for him and, throwing her arms
about his neck, kissed his cheek. "You are a great big tease, and I
choose to salute you this way." Then she kissed her mother, saying:
"I've the loveliest plan, Captain. I'm sure that this dress will fit
Constance. She says she won't go to the school dance because she has no
pretty gown to wear. May I give her this darling blue one?" She opened
the box and drew forth a dainty frock of pale blue chiffon over silk.
The chiffon was caught up here and there with tiny clusters of
pinky-white rosebuds. The round neck was just low enough to show to
advantage a white girlish throat, while the soft, fluffy sleeves reached
barely to the elbows. It was a particularly beautiful and appropriate
frock for a young girl.

"You see, General," explained Marjorie, "Aunt Mary sent this to me when
I graduated from grammar school. She hadn't seen me for two years and
didn't know I had grown so fast. She bought it ready made in one of the
New York stores. It was too short and too tight for me and to make it
over meant simply to spoil it. It was so sweet in her to send it that
when I wrote my thank you to her I couldn't bear to tell her that it
didn't fit, so I kept it just to look at. I didn't really need it, for,
thanks to you and mother, I have plenty of others. Don't you think I
ought to make someone else happy when I have the chance? It is right to
share one's spoils with a comrade, isn't it?"

Her father looked lovingly at the pretty, earnest face of his daughter
as she stood holding up the filmy gown, her eyes bright with unselfish
purpose. "I am very glad my little girl is so thoughtful of others," he
said. "Whatever your captain says is law. How about it, Captain?" His
wife and he exchanged glances.

"You may give your friend the dress if you like, dear," consented Mrs.
Dean, "if you think she will accept it."

"That's just the point, Captain," returned Marjorie. "You know you said
I could bring Constance home for dinner to-night, and she is coming.
Perhaps we can think of some nice way to give it to her while she is
here."

Marjorie carefully replaced the gown in its box and ran upstairs with
it. She returned with her hat and coat on her arm, and hanging them on
the hall rack hastened to eat her luncheon.

All afternoon she puzzled as to how she might best offer Constance the
gown. When the four girls strolled homeward together after school she
had still not thought of a way. Jerry and Irma held forth, at length,
with true schoolgirl eloquence, upon the subject of their gowns.
Constance listened gravely without comment. Her small, impassive face
showed no sign of her hopeless longing for the pretty things she had
never possessed.

Once inside the Dean's pleasant home, a flash of appreciation routed her
impassivity as Marjorie conducted her into the comfortable living-room
where Mrs. Dean sat reading, and her face softened under the spell of
the older woman's gentle greeting.

"I am pleased to know you, Constance," said Mrs. Dean, offering her
hand. "I have been expecting you for some time. Now that I have seen you
I will say that you do look very much like Marjorie's friend Mary." She
did not add that this girl's face lacked the good-natured, happy
expression that so perfectly matched Mary Raymond's sunny curls. Yet she
noted that the blue eyes met hers openly and frankly, and that there was
an undeniable air of sincerity and truth about Constance which caused
one instinctively to trust her.

To the formerly friendless girl who had never before been invited to the
home of a Sanford girl, the evening passed like a dream. Under the
genial atmosphere of the Dean household, her reserve melted and before
dinner was over she had forgotten all about herself and was laughing
merrily with Marjorie over Mr. Dean's nonsense. After dinner Mrs. Dean
played on the piano and Constance, who knew how to dance was initiated
into the mysteries of several new steps which were favorites of the
Franklin girls, and later the two girls spent a happy hour in Marjorie's
room with her books, of which she had a large collection.

"Oh, dear," sighed Constance, as she glanced at the clock on the
chiffonier. "It is ten o'clock. I must go."

"Wait a few minutes," requested Marjorie. "I have something to show you,
but I must see mother for a minute first. Please excuse me. I'll be back
directly."

"Mother," Marjorie hurried into the living-room. "Have you thought of a
way? Constance is going home, and it's now or never."

"Suppose you give it to her by yourself," suggested her mother. "I am
afraid my presence will embarrass her and then she will surely refuse."

Marjorie stood eyeing her mother uncertainly. Then she laughed. "I know
the easiest way in the world," she declared, and was gone.

When she entered the room Constance was kneeling interestedly before the
book-shelves. "You have the 'Jungle Books,' haven't you? Don't you love
them?"

"Yes," laughed Marjorie. "Mary and I read them together. I always called
myself 'Bagheera' the black panther, and she always called herself
'Mogli, the man-cub.' We used to write notes to each other sometimes in
the language of the jungle."

"How funny," smiled Constance. Her gaze intent upon the books, she did
not notice that Marjorie had stepped to her closet, returning to her bed
with a cloud of pink over her arm. Next she opened a big box and laid a
cloud of blue beside the one of pink. "Constance, come here a minute,"
she said.

Constance sprang up obediently. Her glance fell upon the bed and she
gave a little startled, admiring "Oh!"

Marjorie linked her arm in that of her friend and drew her up to the
bed. "This gown," she pointed to the pink one, "is mine, and this one,"
she withdrew her arm, and lifting the blue cloud held it out to
Constance, "is yours."

The Mary girl drew back sharply. "I don't know what you mean," she
muttered. "Please don't make fun of me."

"I'm not making fun of you. It's your very own, and after I tell you all
about it you'll see just why it happens to be yours."

Seated on the edge of the bed beside Marjorie, the wonderful blue gown
on her lap, the girl who had never owned a party dress before heard the
story of how it happened to be hers. At first she steadily refused its
acceptance, but in the end wily Marjorie persuaded her to "just try it
on," and when she saw herself, for the first time in her
poverty-stricken young life, wearing a real evening gown that glimpsed
her unusually white neck and arms she wavered. So intent was she upon
examining her reflection that she did not notice Marjorie had slipped
from the room, returning with a pair of blue silk stockings and satin
slippers to match. "These go with it," she announced.

"Oh--I--can't," faltered Constance, making a move toward unhooking the
frock.

"Of course you can." Marjorie deposited the stockings and slippers on
the foot of her bed and going over to Constance put both arms around
her. "You are going to have this dress because mother and I want you to.
I can't possibly wear it myself, and it's a shame to lay it away in the
closet until it is all out of style. Please, please take it. You simply
must, for I won't go to the dance unless you do, and you know how
dreadfully I should hate to miss it. I mean what I say, too."

"I'll take it," said Constance, slowly.

Suddenly she slipped from Marjorie's encircling arm and leaned against
the chiffonier, covering her face with her hands.

"Constance!" Marjorie cried out in surprise. "You mustn't cry."

"I--can't--help--it." The words came brokenly. "Ever since I was little
I've dreamed about a blue dress like this. You--are--too--good--to--me.
Nobody--was--ever--good to me before."

It was a quarter to eleven o'clock before Constance, her tears dried,
her face beaming with a new expression of happiness, left the Deans'
house, accompanied by Mr. Dean, who had come in shortly before ten
o'clock and insisted on seeing her safely home.

Later, as she prepared for bed in her bare little room she could not
help wondering why Marjorie had desired her for a best friend, and had
clung to her in spite of the displeasure of certain other girls. She
wondered, too, if there were any way in which she might show Marjorie
her affection and gratitude, and she made a solemn resolve that if that
time came she would prove herself worthy of Marjorie Dean's friendship.




CHAPTER XI

THE HALLOWE'EN DANCE


Saturday dawned as inauspiciously as any other day in the week, but to
the high school boys and girls of the little city of Sanford it was a
day set apart. Aside from commencement, the great event of their high
school year was about to take place.

As early as eight o'clock that morning the decorating committee of
Weston High School was up and laboring manfully at the task of turning
Weston's big gymnasium into a veritable bower of beauty, which should,
in due season, draw forth plenty of admiring "Ohs!" and "Ahs!" from
their gentle guests. For three days the committee had been borrowing,
with lavish promises of safe return, as many cushions, draperies,
chairs, divans and various other articles calculated to fitly adorn the
ballroom, as their families and friends confidingly allowed them to
carry off.

Their progress along this line had been painstakingly watched by
numerous pairs of sharp, young eyes, and the report had gone forth among
the girls that this particular Hallowe'en party was going to be "the
nicest dance the boys had ever given."

To Marjorie Dean, however, the event promised more than the usual
interest. It was to be her first opportunity of entering into the social
life of the boys and girls of Sanford. In B---- she had numbered many
stanch friends among the young men of Lafayette High School, but she had
lived in Sanford for, what seemed to her, a very long time and had not
met a single Weston boy. Jerry had promised to introduce Marjorie to her
brother and to the tall, fair-haired youth known as the Crane, but so
far the young people had not been thrown together. Marjorie had no
silly, sentimental ideas in her curly brown head about boys. From early
childhood she had been allowed to play with them. She was fond of their
games and had always evinced far more interest in marbles, tops and even
baseball than she had in dolls. Still, at sixteen, she was not a hoyden
nor a tomboy, but a merry, light-hearted girl with a strong, healthy
body and a feeling of comradeship toward boys in general which was to
carry her far in her later life.

At the time she had given Constance the blue gown she had also gained
her friend's rather reluctant consent to come to dinner at the Deans' on
the great night and dress with her for the dance. Marjorie attributed
Constance's hesitation to shyness. Always reticent regarding her home
life, Constance, aside from her one outburst relating to her family
on the day when she had advised Marjorie against her friendship, had
said little or nothing further of her home. So Marjorie did not know
that it was not a matter of shyness, but rather a question of who would
keep house and get the supper while she was out enjoying herself, that
caused Constance to demur before accepting the invitation. Then she
remembered that Hallowe'en came on Saturday and decided that she could
manage after all.

The momentous Saturday dawned clear and cold, with just the suspicion of
a fall tang to the air. It was a busy day for the Weston boys, and when
at four o'clock the last garland of green had been twined about the
gymnasium posts and the gallery railing, while the last flag had been
painstakingly hung at the proper angle, the dozen or more of young men
who formed the decorating committee viewed their work with boyish pride.

"It looks bully," shouted an enthusiastic freshman, with a sweep of his
arm which was intended to include the whole room. "If the girls aren't
suited with this, they won't be invited over here again in a hurry."

"Hear him rave!" sadly commented a sophomore. "It takes a freshman to
fall all over himself."

"That's because we are young and have more enthusiasm," retorted the
freshman, his freckled face alive with an impish grin.

    "Desist from your squabbles
    And join in the waltz,"

caroled an extremely tall, thin youth, pirouetting on his toes, and
waving a long trail of ground pine about his head in true première
danseuse fashion.

There was a shout of laughter from the boys at this burst of
terpsichorean art. The tall youth pranced and whirled the length of the
gymnasium and back, ending his performance with a swift, high kick and a
bow that bade fair to dislocate his spine.

"Did I hear someone laugh?" he asked severely, drawing down his face
with such an indescribably funny expression that the laughter broke
forth afresh. "It is evident that you don't appreciate my rare ability
as a dancer."

"You mean as a grasshopper," jeered the freckle-faced youth.

"Exactly. No, I don't either. How dare you insult me?" He made a lengthy
lunge toward the freshman, who promptly dodged behind a tall,
good-looking young man who had at that moment joined the group.

The lunging youth brought up short with, "Hello, Hal, I thought you had
gone."

"So I had. Got halfway home and found I'd left my pocketknife here.
Maybe I didn't hotfoot it back though. Hope the girls will like the
looks of things." He cast approving eyes about the transformed
gymnasium. "Jerry's been raving to me ever since school began about her
new friend, Marjorie Dean. Have you met her? I understand she is coming
to-night."

"Not I, I can't tell one of those girls from another," grumbled the
Crane. "You know just how much I like girls. I don't mind helping get
ready for this business, but I'd rather take a licking than come back
here to-night. You'll see me vanishing around the corner and out of here
at the very first chance. Girls are an awful nuisance anyway."

"Nothing like true chivalry," murmured the freckle-faced freshman. An
instant later he was sprinting down the gymnasium as fast as his short
legs could carry him, the Crane in hot pursuit.

"Cut it out, fellows," laughed Harold Macy. "You'll upset something or
other, and then, look out."

"If we do it will be the Crane's fault," came plaintively from the
freckle-faced freshman, as he dodged his pursuer with an agility born of
long practice. "I don't see why he wants to chase me. I merely made a
simple remark."

"Now that you've owned up to its being simple I'll let you off this
time," declared the Crane, magnanimously, "but see that it doesn't
happen again."

"I will," was the glib promise. "I'm sorry I said you were a
grasshopper. You look more like a giraffe."

Then he made a hurried exit through a nearby side door, leaving the
Crane to vow dire vengeance the next time he ventured within reach.

A little further loitering and the group of boys broke up, and, leaving
the gymnasium, went home to get ready for the evening's fun and be back
in good season to help receive their guests.

There were two guests, however, who dressed for the party with entirely
different emotions. To Constance it was the most wonderful night of her
life. She stole frequent, half-startled glances at her blue satin-shod
feet and even pinched a fold of her chiffon gown between her fingers to
feel if it were real. Mrs. Dean had arranged the girl's fair curling
hair in precisely the same fashion that Mary Raymond wore hers, and when
she had been hooked into the precious gown, with its exquisite little
sprays of rosebuds, she thought she knew just how poor, lowly Cinderella
felt when the fairy godmother touched her with her wand. While she was
being dressed she said little, yet Marjorie and her mother knew by the
happy light that crowded the wistful look quite out of her expressive
eyes that their guest was too deeply appreciative for words.

Marjorie, who looked radiantly pretty in her frock of pink silk with its
overdress of delicate pink net, welcomed the dance with all the
enthusiasm of one who was heartily glad to get in touch with the social
side of her school life. She had forgotten for the moment that certain
girls in the freshman class had turned against her; that she was no
longer a member of the freshman basketball team. She remembered only
that it seemed ages since she had attended a party and she hoped
fervently that someone would ask her to dance.

Jerry and Irma had arranged to call for Marjorie and Constance, as the
quartette were to use the Macys' limousine. When the automobile stopped
before the house, Jerry insisted on getting out and running into the
house to see her friends' gowns. Irma followed her, a smile of
good-natured tolerance on her placid face.

"Jerry couldn't wait to see your dresses," she said, then exclaimed in
wonder: "How lovely you look, Constance, and what a perfectly sweet
gown!"

Constance colored to the tips of her small ears. Jerry, too, began
voicing loud approval, and when, after having stood in line and been
inspected by Mrs. Dean, the four girls piled into the limousine,
Constance was overcome with the peculiar sensation of experiencing too
much happiness. She felt that it could not possibly last.

The gymnasium was fairly well filled when they entered and by half past
eight o'clock the majority of the guests had arrived. Hardly had they
deposited their scarfs in the dressing-room and administered last
judicious pats to straying fluffy locks of hair when Jerry, who had
disappeared the moment they reached the dressing-room, came hurrying
back with the information that Hal was waiting outside to do the honors.
"You'd better hurry out and console the Crane, Irma," she added slyly.
"He looks about ten feet tall in his evening clothes and perfectly
miserable."

Following in Jerry's wake Marjorie stepped into the gaily decorated room
and the next instant was shaking hands with handsome Hal Macy, the most
popular fellow in Weston High. As the brown eyes met the frank manly
gaze of the gray, there passed between the two young people a vivid
flash of liking and comradeship that was later to develop into a stanch
and beautiful friendship.

"I am so glad to know you," said Marjorie, earnestly. "I am very fond of
your sister."

"I am sure we shall be friends," declared Hal Macy. Involuntarily he put
out his hand. Marjorie's hand met it, and thus began the friendship
between Marjorie Dean and Hal Macy.




CHAPTER XII

ON THE FIRING LINE


Introductions followed thick and fast. More than one pair of boyish eyes
had been centered approvingly on the girls that "Macy" was "rushing,"
and he was soon besieged with gentle reminders not to be stingy, but to
give someone else a chance.

When the enlivening strains of a popular dance began, Hal Macy pointed
significantly to his name on Marjorie's card. She nodded happily then
glanced quickly about to see if Constance had a partner. Surely enough,
she was just about to dance off with a rather tall, slender lad, whose
dark, sensitive face, heavy-browed, black-lashed eyes of intense blue
and straight-lipped, sensitive mouth caused her to say impulsively, "Oh,
who is that nice-looking boy dancing with Constance?"

Hal glanced after the two graceful, gliding figures. "That's Lawrence
Armitage. He's one of the best fellows in school and my chum. You ought
to hear him play on the violin. He's going to Europe to study when he
finishes high school."

"How interesting," commented Marjorie as they joined the dancers. Then,
as Mignon La Salle, wearing an elaborate apricot satin frock, flashed by
them on the arm of a rather stout boy, with a disagreeable face,
Marjorie suddenly remembered the existence of Mignon, Muriel and Susan.
Her eyes began an eager search for the Picture Girl. Muriel was sure to
look pretty in evening dress. Mignon's frock made her look older, she
decided. She soon spied Muriel, whose gown of white lace was vastly
becoming. So was Susan Atwell's dress of old rose and silver. She
wondered a trifle wickedly if they had not been surprised to see
Constance blossom out in such brave attire. Then she put the thought
aside as unworthy and determined to remember only the good time she was
having.

After each dance the four friends managed to meet and compare notes
before they were off again with their next partners, and as the party
progressed it became noticeable that there were no wallflowers in that
particular group.

"What do you think of that Stevens girl to-night, Mignon?" inquired
Susan Atwell as she and the French girl stood together for a moment
between dances.

Mignon's elfish eyes gleamed angrily. "I think such beggars as she ought
never to be allowed to come to our parties. Goodness knows where she
borrowed that dress. Perhaps she didn't borrow it." She raised her
shoulders significantly. "If Laurie Armitage knew what a low,
disreputable family she has, I don't think he'd waste his time with
her."

"Did Laurie ask you to dance to-night?" asked Susan inquisitively.

But with a muttered, "I want to speak to Marcia," Mignon flounced off
without answering Susan's question, and the latter confided to Muriel
afterward that Mignon was mad as anything because Laurie hadn't noticed
her, but was trailing about after Miss Nobody Stevens.

Completely unaware that she was adding to the French girl's list of
grievances, Constance had danced to her heart's content, quite positive
in her own mind that she had never met a more delightful boy than
Lawrence Armitage, and that never before had she so greatly enjoyed
herself. And now the wonderful party was almost over. She examined her
card to see with whom she had the next dance. Then her glance straying
down, she noticed that a bit of the tiny plaiting at the bottom of her
chiffon skirt had become loose and was hanging. Fearful of a fall, she
hurried toward the dressing-room. She would have the maid take a stitch
or two in it.

But the maid was not in the room.

A solitary figure in an apricot gown stood before the mirror, lingered
for a moment after Constance entered, then glided noiselessly out.
Evincing no sign of having seen Mignon, Constance began a diligent
hunt for a needle and thread. Failing to find them, she fastened the
loose bit of plaiting with a pin and hurried out into the gymnasium. Her
next dance was with Lawrence Armitage. She must not miss it.

To her surprise Mignon re-entered the dressing-room as she left it.
Constance quickly made her way toward the corner which her friends had
selected as their headquarters.

"I tore the plaiting of my dress," she said ruefully to Marjorie. "I
couldn't find the maid or a needle, so I had to pin it. I'm awfully
sorry. I don't know how it happened."

"That's nothing," returned Marjorie, cheerfully. "I have a great long
tear in my sleeve. Someone caught hold of it in Paul Jones, and away it
went. Don't look so guilty over a little thing like that."

"You don't----" began Constance, but she never finished.

A tense little figure clad in apricot satin confronted her, crying out
in tones too plainly audible to those standing near, "Where is my
bracelet? What have you done with it?"

Constance stared at her accuser in stupefied amazement. Her friends,
too, were for the moment speechless.

"Answer me!" commanded Mignon. "I left it on the table in the
dressing-room. You were the only one in there at the time. When I
remembered and came back for it you were just leaving, but the bracelet
was gone. No one else except you could have taken it."

Still Constance continued to stare in horror at the French girl. She
tried to speak, but the words would not come. Attracted by Mignon's
shrill tones, the dancers began to gather about the two girls. It was
Marjorie who came to her friend's defense.

Even as a wee girl Marjorie Dean had possessed a temper. It was not an
ordinary temper. It was not easily aroused, but when once awakened it
shook her small body with intense fury and the object of her rage was
likely to remember her outburst forever after. Knowing it to be her
greatest fault, she had striven diligently to conquer it and it burst
forth only at rare intervals. To-night, however, the French girl's
heartless denunciation of Constance during a moment of happiness was too
monstrous to be borne. In a voice shaking with indignation she turned to
those surrounding her and said, "Will you please go on dancing? I have
something to say to Miss La Salle."

They scattered as if by magic, leaving Marjorie facing Mignon, her arm
about Constance, her face a white mask, her eyes flaming with scorn.
Then she began in low, even tones:

"I forbid you to say another word either to or about my friend Constance
Stevens. She has not taken your bracelet. She knows nothing about it. I
will answer for her as I would for myself. You have accused her of this
because you wish to disgrace her in the eyes of her friends and
schoolmates. I am not at all sure that you have lost it, but I am very
sure that Miss Stevens hasn't seen it. And now I hope I shall never be
called upon to speak to you again, for you are the cruelest, most
contemptible girl I have ever known; but, if I hear anything further of
this, I will take you to Miss Archer, to the Board of Education, if
necessary, and make you retract every word. Come on, Constance."

With her arm still encircling the now weeping girl, Marjorie made her
way to the dressing-room. Jerry followed her within the next five
minutes.

"The car's here," she announced briefly. "Hal and Laurie and the Crane
are going home with us."

"Don't you cry, Constance," she soothed, patting the curly, golden head.
"Mignon made a goose of herself to-night. The boys are all disgusted,
and everyone knows she was making a fuss over nothing. You did exactly
right, too, Marjorie, when you sent us all about our business. I'm sorry
it happened, but you remember what I tell you, Mignon has hurt herself a
great deal more than she has hurt you."




CHAPTER XIII

A PITCHED BATTLE


After the echoes of the dance had died away, basketball received a new
impetus that brought it to the fore with a bound. With the renewed
interest in the coming game was also noised about the report that "Miss
Dean wasn't on the team any longer," and in some unknown fashion the
news that she had been "asked" to resign had also gone the round of the
study hall. The upper class girls were not particularly interested
either in Marjorie or her affairs. She had not lived in Sanford long
enough to become well-known to them, and as a rule the juniors and
seniors left the bringing up of the freshmen to their sophomore sisters.
The sophomores were too much absorbed in the progress of their own team
to trouble themselves greatly over what was happening in the freshman
organization. If Muriel or Mignon had resigned, then there would have
been good cause for predicting an easy victory, for both girls were
considered formidable opponents; but Marjorie was new material, untried
and unproven.

It was in the freshman class, however, that comment ran rife. Since the
night of the Weston dance the class had been almost equally divided. A
little less than half the girls had either openly or by friendly smiles
and nods declared in favor of Marjorie and her friends. The remaining
members of the class, with a few neutral exceptions, were apparently
devoted to the French girl and Muriel. Among their adherents they also
counted Miss Merton, who took no pains to conceal her open dislike for
Marjorie, and Marcia Arnold, who even went so far as to try to explain
the situation to Miss Archer and was sternly reminded that the principal
would take no part in the private differences of her girls unless they
had something to do with breaking the rules of the school.

The days immediately preceding the game were not cheerful ones for
Marjorie. She was still unhappy over her unjust dismissal from the team,
and she wondered if it had been much talked of among her classmates. At
home she had announced offhandedly her resignation from the team and
her mother had asked no questions.

Mignon was greatly disturbed and displeased with the advent of Marjorie
Dean into Sanford High School. Young as she was, she was very shrewd,
and she at once foresaw in Marjorie's pretty face and attractive
personality a rival power. To be sure, Marjorie's father was not so rich
as her own, but it could not be denied that the Deans lived in a big
house on Maple avenue, that Marjorie wore "perfectly lovely" clothes and
had plenty of pocket money. In the beginning she had decided that it
would be better to make friends with her, but Marjorie's sturdy defense
of Constance and utter disregard for Mignon's significant warning had
shown her plainly that she could not influence the other girl to do what
she considered an unworthy act. Therefore, she had secretly determined
to make matters as disagreeable as lay within her power for the two
girls during her freshman year. Still she was obliged to admit to
herself that her next move would have to be planned and carried out with
more discretion.

And now it was the Friday before the much-heralded basketball game which
was to be played between the sophomores and the freshmen, and the merits
and shortcomings of the respective organizations were being eagerly
discussed throughout the school. The game was to be called at half-past
two o'clock on Saturday afternoon, and from all accounts there was to be
no lack of spectators.

"I wouldn't for anything miss that game to-morrow!" exclaimed Jerry
Macy, as she and Constance and Marjorie came down the steps of the
school together. "I hope the freshmen get the worst whitewashing that
any team in this school has ever had, too," she added, with a deliberate
air of spite.

"You mustn't say that, Jerry," returned Marjorie, a faint color rising
to her cheeks. "You must not let my grievances affect your loyalty to
your class."

"Do you mean to say that you want that horrid Mignon La Salle and her
crowd to win the game, and then go around crowing that it was all
because they put you out of the team? You needn't look so as though you
didn't believe me. You mark my word, if they win you'll find out that
they'll do just as I say. Freshman or no freshman, I'd rather see that
nice Ellen Seymour's team win any day."

"So would I," echoed Constance, her face darkening with the remembrance
of her own wrongs at Mignon's hands.

Marjorie was silent for a moment. She knew that Jerry's outburst rose
from pure devotion to her friends, and she could not blame Constance for
her hostile spirit. Still, was it right to allow personal grudges to
warp one's loyalty to one's class? If the record of their class read
badly at the end of their freshman year, whose fault would it be? She
had fought it all out with herself on the day she wrote her resignation,
and had wisely determined, then, not to allow it to spoil her year.

"I know how you girls feel about this," she said slowly. "I felt the
same way until after I had written my resignation. While I was writing I
kept hoping that the team would lose and be sorry they had put someone
else in my place. Then it just came to me all of a sudden that a good
soldier wouldn't be a traitor to his country even if he were reduced in
rank or had something happen unpleasant to him in his camp."

She stopped and looked embarrassed. She had forgotten that the girls
could not possibly know what she meant. She had never told any one in
Sanford High School about the pretty soldier play which she and Mary had
carried on for so long. It was one of the little intimate details of her
life which she preferred to keep to herself. Should she explain? Jerry's
impatient retort made it unnecessary.

"The only traitor I know anything about is Mignon," she flung back,
failing to grasp the significance of Marjorie's comparison.

Constance, however, had flashed a curious glance at her friend, saying
nothing. When Geraldine had nodded good-bye at her street, and the two
were alone, she asked: "What did you mean by comparing yourself to a
soldier, Marjorie?"

Marjorie smiled.

"I think I'd better tell you all about it. I've never told anyone else."

"What a splendid game," mused Constance, half to herself, when Marjorie
had finished. "Do you--would you--could I be a soldier, too, Marjorie?
It would help me. You don't know. There are so many things."

The wistful appeal touched Marjorie.

"Of course you can," she assured. "You'd better come to my house to
luncheon to-morrow. You can join the army then and go to the game with
me."

"I'm not going to the game." The look of expectancy died out of
Constance's face.

"You can't be a soldier if you balk at the first disagreeable thing that
comes along," reminded Marjorie, slipping her arm through that of her
friend. Constance walked a few steps in stolid silence. She could not
make up her mind to watch the playing of the girls whom she felt she
hated, even to please Marjorie. It was not until they were about to
separate that Marjorie said quietly. "Shall I tell mother you are
coming?" and Constance forced herself to reply shortly, "I'll come."

By half past one Saturday afternoon every seat in the large gallery
surrounding the gymnasium was filled, and by a quarter to two every
square foot of standing room was occupied by an enthusiastic audience
largely composed of boys and girls of the two high schools. Marjorie's
mother had after some little coaxing consented to come to the game with
her daughter as her guest. She sat with Constance and Marjorie in the
first row of the gallery, while beside her sat none other than Miss
Archer, whom they had encountered on their way to the high school and
who had invited them to take seats in the front row with her. She had
already met Mrs. Dean at the church which both women attended and had
conceived an instant liking for the pretty, gracious woman who looked
little older than her daughter.

"Wasn't it nice of Miss Archer to ask us to sit here?" whispered
Marjorie in her friend's ear. "We have mother to thank for it. She is so
dear that no one can help liking her." Marjorie looked adoring
admiration at her mother's clear-cut profile. "Do you suppose anyone
will mistake us for faculty?"

Both girls giggled softly at such an improbability.

"I never went to a basketball game before," confessed Constance after a
time. "What are those girls over there in the red paper hats and big red
bows going to do?"

"Oh, that's the sophomore class. They lead their class in the songs. The
green and purple girls are the freshman chorus."

"I didn't even know our class colors were green and purple."

"You didn't! Why, that's the reason you and I wore violets to the dance.
Almost every freshman had them."

"Oh, look!" Constance's eyes were fixed upon a tiny purple figure that
had just emerged from a side door in the gymnasium and was walking
slowly across the big floor. Immediately afterward a door opened on the
opposite side and a diminutive scarlet-clad boy flashed forth.

"They are the mascots," explained Marjorie, her gaze on the two children
who advanced to the center of the room and gravely shook hands. Then the
boy in red announced in a high, clear treble: "Ladies and gentlemen, the
noble sophomores!"

The door swung wide and a band of lithe blue figures, bearing a huge
letter "S" done in scarlet on the fronts of their blouses, pattered into
the gymnasium, amid loud applause.

"The valiant freshmen!" piped the purple-clad youngster.

There was a rush of black-clad girls, with resplendent violet "F's"
ornamenting their breasts, another volley of cheers from the audience,
then a shrill blast from the referee's whistle rent the air, the teams
dropped into their places, the umpire, time-keeper and scorer took
their stations, and a tense silence settled over the audience.

The referee balanced the ball. Ellen Seymour and Mignon La Salle
gathered themselves for the toss. Up it went. The two players leaped for
it. The referee's whistle sounded again. The struggle for basketball
honors began.

A jubilant shout swelled from the throats of the watching freshmen and
their fans. Mignon had caught the ball. She sent it speeding toward
Helen Thornton, who fumbled it, and losing her head, threw it away
from, instead of to the basket. An audible sigh of disapproval came from
the freshman contingent as they beheld the ball pass into the hands of
the sophomores, who scored shortly afterward.

Now that the ball was in their hands the sophomores proceeded to show
their friends and opponents a few things about playing. They had the
advantage and they kept it. Try as the freshmen might, they could not
score. The first unlucky error on the part of Helen Thornton had seemed
to turn the tide against them. Toward the close of the first half they
managed to score, but all too soon the whistle blew, with the score 8 to
2 in favor of the sophomores.

Their fans went wild with delight and their chorus sang or rather
shouted gleefully their pet song, beginning,

    "Hail the sophomores, gallant band!
    See how bold they take their stand!"

to the tune of "Hail Columbia," coming out noisily on the concluding
lines,

    "Firm and steadfast shall they be,
    Marching on to victory;
    As a band of players, they
    Shall be conquerors to-day."

The freshmen answered with their song, "The Freshmen's Brave Banner,"
but they did not sing as spiritedly as they had before the beginning of
the game.

"I wonder what Jerry and Irma think," commented Marjorie. Their two
chums had been detailed to sing in the freshman chorus, which accounted
for their absence from the Dean party.

"Jerry looks awfully cross," returned Constance, scanning the opposite
side of the gallery where Jerry was singing lustily, her straight, heavy
brows drawn together in a savage scowl.

"There goes the whistle!" Marjorie leaned eagerly forward to see the
freshman team come in from the side room which they were using. Her
alert eyes noted that Muriel looked sulky, Mignon stormy, Susan Atwell
belligerent, Harriet Delaney offended, and that Helen Thornton, the
substitute who had replaced her, had been crying.

Marjorie felt a thrill of pity for the unfortunate substitute. It looked
as though she had spent an unhappy quarter of an hour in the little side
room.

The teams changed sides and hastened to their places. Again Mignon and
Ellen faced each other. Then the whistle shrilled and the second half of
the game was on.

From the beginning of the second half it looked as though the freshmen
might retrieve their early losses. They worked with might and main and
made no false moves. Slowly their score climbed to six. So far the
sophomores had gained nothing. Then Ellen Seymour made a spectacular
throw to the basket and brought her team up two points. With the
realization that they were facing defeat the freshmen rallied and made a
desperate effort to hold their own, bringing their count up to eight.

Two more points were gained and the score was tied, but the time was
growing short. Helen Thornton had the ball and was plainly trying to
elude the tantalizing sophomore who barred her way. She made a clumsy
feint of throwing the ball. It slipped from her fingers and rolled along
the floor. There was a mad scramble for it. Mignon and Ellen Seymour
leaped forward simultaneously.

The crowd in the gallery was aroused to the height of excitement.
Marjorie, breathless, leaned far over the gallery rail. She knew every
detail of the dear old game. She saw Mignon's and Ellen's heads close
together as they sprang; then she saw Mignon give a sly, vicious side
lunge which threw Ellen almost off her feet. In the instant it took
Ellen to recover herself the French girl had seized the ball and was off
with it. Eluding her pursuers, she balanced herself on her toes, and
threw her prize toward the freshman basket. But it never reached there.
A long blue figure shot straight up into the air. Elizabeth Corey, a
girl whose sensational plays had made her a lion during her freshman
year, had intercepted the flying ball. She sent it spinning through the
air toward the sophomore nearest their basket, whose willing hands
received it and threw it home.

Mignon's trickery had availed her little. The sophomores had won.




CHAPTER XIV

WHAT HAPPENED ON BLUE MONDAY


For the next ten minutes the air was rent with the lusty voices of the
sophomore chorus and the joyous cheers of their fans. No echoing song
arose from freshman lips. The vanquished team had already betaken
themselves to their quarters, but the sophomore players were holding an
impromptu reception on the ground they had so hotly contested.

Marjorie and Constance watched them eagerly.

"Go downstairs, girls, and join the hero worshipers," smiled Miss
Archer. "We will excuse you, won't we, Mrs. Dean?"

"Yes; after the fervent manner in which they hung over the railing it
would be cruel to keep them with us," smiled Mrs. Dean.

"Let's find Jerry and Irma," said Marjorie, as they paused in the open
doorway of the gymnasium.

Hardly had she spoken, when Jerry's unmistakable tones rose behind her.
The stout girl was talking excitedly, a rising note of indignation in
her voice.

"I tell you I saw her push against Ellen Seymour," she declared. "You
must have seen her, too, Irma."

"I thought so," admitted Irma, "but I wasn't sure."

"Well, I was. Oh, girls, we were just going upstairs to find you! Now
that you're here, let's go into the gym, and join the celebration. I
don't know how you feel about it, but I'm glad the sophomores won,"
Jerry ended, with an emphatic wag of her head.

"Listen, Jerry," said Marjorie, earnestly, "you were talking so loudly
when you were behind us that I couldn't help hearing you. Did it seem to
you as though Mignon deliberately pushed against Ellen Seymour?"

"I know she did," reiterated Jerry. "I watched her, for she is always
unfair and tricky. Anyone who has ever played on a team could tell. I'm
surprised that you----" She stopped abruptly. "I believe you saw her,
too. Confess, you did see her; now, didn't you?"

Marjorie nodded.

"Now's your chance to get even with her. Let's go to Miss Archer and
tell her," proposed the stout girl. "She'll send for Ellen Seymour and
then, good-bye freshman basketball for a while. But what do you care?
You aren't on the team any more. It would serve them right at that."

"Oh, no," Marjorie looked her horror at the bare idea of tale-bearing.

"Just as you say," shrugged Jerry. They were still standing just inside
the door watching the sophomore team receiving congratulations, when
they beheld a familiar figure in a black gymnasium suit pause squarely
in front of Ellen Seymour. They saw Ellen start angrily, then a confused
murmur of voices arose and the circle of fans and players closed in
about the two girls.

"What's happened?" demanded Jerry. "Come on, girls." She hurried toward
the crowd, the three girls at her heels. Even as they joined the throng
they heard Mignon declare in a tone freighted with malice! "You
purposely pushed against me when we ran for the ball in our last play
and nearly threw me off my feet. You know that deliberate pushing,
striking or any kind of roughness is forbidden, and you could be
disqualified as a player. I do not know where the referee's eyes were, I
am sure, but I do know that you are not fit to be on a team, and I can
prove it by the other players of my team. I shall certainly complain to
Miss Archer about it the first thing Monday morning."

"All right, I'll meet you in Miss Archer's office the first thing after
chapel," answered Ellen, coolly, ignoring everything save the French
girl's final threat. "Come along, girls." She beckoned to the other
members of her team, who had listened in blank amazement to the bold
accusation. With her head held high, a careless smile on her fine face,
Ellen marched through the crowd, which made way for her, and across the
gymnasium to the sophomores' room, accompanied by her team.

"Isn't that a shame?" burst out Jerry. "Ellen will have an awful time to
prove herself innocent. She never touched Mignon. It was Mignon who
pushed her away. I saw her with my own eyes, and so did you, Marjorie.
Say," she looked blankly at Marjorie, "do you suppose it's our duty to
go to Miss Archer and tell her what we saw?"

"I--don't--know." The words came doubtfully. "Perhaps it will all blow
over. I hate to carry tales. Suppose we wait until Monday and see?
Mignon may change her mind. Even if she doesn't, Miss Archer may not
listen to her. But, if she should, then we'll have to do it, Jerry. It
wouldn't be fair to Ellen to keep still about it; I heard Miss Archer
tell mother Monday that she would not tolerate the least bit of
roughness in the girls' games. She knew of several schools where girls
had been tripped or knocked down and seriously hurt. She said that if
any reports of rough playing were brought to her she would 'deal
severely with the offender.' Those were her very words."

"All right; we'll wait," agreed Jerry. "I'm not crazy about reporting
even Mignon. Ellen can take care of herself, I guess."

So the matter was apparently settled for the time, and the four girls
strolled home discussing the various features of the game.

"How did you like the game, Captain?" she asked, saluting, as an hour
later she entered the living-room, where her mother sat reading.

"Very well, indeed," replied her mother, laying down her magazine.
"Neither Miss Archer nor I understand all the fine points of the game,
but we managed to keep track of most of the plays. By the way, Marjorie,
when you go to school on Monday morning, I wish you to take this
magazine to Miss Archer. It contains an article which I have marked for
her. It is quite in line with a discussion we had this afternoon."

"I'll remember," promised Marjorie, and when Monday morning came she
kept her word, starting for school with the magazine under her arm.

"I'll run up to Miss Archer's office with it after chapel," she decided.

When the morning service was over, Marjorie returned to the study hall,
and obtained Miss Merton's grudging permission to execute her
commission.

"I wish to see Miss Archer," she said shortly, as Marcia Arnold looked
up from her writing just long enough to cast a half insolent glance of
inquiry in her direction.

"You can't see her. She's busy."

The color flew to Marjorie's cheeks at the bold refusal. Her first
impulse was to turn and walk away. She could see Miss Archer later. Then
her natural independence asserted itself, and she determined to stand
her ground at least long enough to discover whether or not Miss Archer
were really too busy to be seen.

"Then I'll wait here until she is at liberty."

Marcia frowned and seemed on the verge of further unpleasantness when
the sound of a buzzer from the inner office sent her hurrying toward it.
As she opened the door, Marjorie caught a fleeting glimpse of two
persons; one was Miss Archer, her face set and stern, the other Mignon
La Salle, her black eyes blazing with satisfaction.

"Oh!" gasped Marjorie, remembering Mignon's threat, "she is reporting
poor Ellen."

The door swung open again and the secretary glided past her and out into
the corridor with the peculiar sliding gait that had caused Jerry to
liken her to a "nice, wriggly snake."

"She is going to bring Ellen here," guessed Marjorie.

Sure enough, within five minutes Marcia returned, followed by Ellen
Seymour, whose pale, defiant face meant battle. Again the door of the
inner office closed with a portending click. Marcia Arnold did not
return to the outer office.

Marjorie waited apprehensively, wondering if Ellen were holding her
own. Then to her utter amazement, the secretary appeared with a sulky,
"Miss Archer wants you," and returned to her desk.

"Good morning, Miss Dean," was the principal's grave salutation. "I did
not know until I asked Miss Arnold to go for you that you were in the
outer office."

"I have been waiting to give you the magazine that mother promised you.
She asked me to say to you that she had marked the article she wished
you to read."

"Please thank your mother for me," returned Miss Archer, her face
relaxing, "and thank you for bringing it. To return to why I sent for
you, you understand the game of basketball, do you not?"

"Yes," answered Marjorie, simply.

"You have played on a team?" inquired the principal.

"Yes."

"Did I not see you at practice with the freshmen shortly before the
game?"

Marjorie colored hotly. "I made the team, but afterward was asked to
resign because I did not play well enough."

"Who asked you to resign?"

"The note was signed by the manager of the team."

"And is that the reason you stopped playing?" broke in Ellen Seymour,
with impulsive disregard for her surroundings. "I might have known it."

Then she whirled upon Mignon in a burst of indignation as scathing as it
was unexpected.

"How contemptible you are! I haven't the least doubt that you are to
blame for Miss Dean's leaving the team. You knew her to be a skilful
player and you were afraid she would outplay you. You know, too, that
when we jumped for the ball Saturday you purposely pushed me away from
it, almost throwing me down. It didn't do you the least bit of good, and
because you are spiteful you have set out to disgrace me and put a stain
on the sophomores' victory."

"How dare you? You are not telling the truth! Prove your charge against
me, if you can," challenged Mignon, with blazing eyes.

"It will be easier to prove than yours against me," flung back Ellen.

"Girls, this is disgraceful! Not another word." Miss Archer's tone of
stern command had an immediate effect on the belligerents.

"Please pardon me, Miss Archer." There was real contrition in Ellen's
voice. "I didn't mean to be so rude. I lost control of my temper."

Mignon, however, made no apology. Her elfish eyes turned from Marjorie
to Ellen with an expression of concentrated hate.

"Now, girls," began Miss Archer, firmly, "we are going to settle this
difficulty here in my office before anyone of you goes back to her
classes. That is the reason I have sent for Miss Dean. When Miss La
Salle entered her complaint against you, Miss Seymour, I decided that
you should have a chance to speak in your own behalf. No sooner were you
brought face to face than one accused the other of treachery. From the
front row of the gallery, where I sat on the afternoon of the game, I
could see every move of the players, but my eyes were not sufficiently
trained to detect the roughness of which you accuse each other. Then I
remembered that Miss Dean sat next to me and that she was a seasoned
player. So I sent for her to ask her in your presence if she saw the
alleged roughness on the part of either of you."

There was a half-smothered exclamation of dismay from Marjorie. Ellen
was regarding her in mute appeal. Mignon's lips curled back in a sneer.
It was dreadful to remain under a cloud.

"I am waiting for you to speak, Miss Dean."

Marjorie drew a long breath. "Miss Seymour spoke the truth. I saw Miss
La Salle purposely push Miss Seymour away from the ball. Someone else
saw her, too--someone who sat on the other side of the gallery." Her
tones carried unmistakable truth with them.

"It isn't true! It isn't true!" Mignon's voice rose to an enraged
shriek. "She only says so because she wants to pay me for making her
resign from the team."

"What did I tell you?" asked Ellen Seymour, triumphantly. "She admits
that she was responsible for that resignation."

"That will do," commanded Miss Archer, raising her hand.

Ellen subsided meekly.

Realizing that she had said too much, Mignon quieted as suddenly as she
had burst forth.

"Miss Dean, are you perfectly sure of what you say?" questioned Miss
Archer.

"I am quite sure," was the steady answer.

A seemingly endless silence followed Marjorie's reply. The principal
surveyed the trio searchingly.

"What girls comprise the freshman team?" At last she put the question
coldly to Mignon.

The French girl sulkily named them. Miss Archer made note of their
names. The principal then pressed the buzzer that summoned her
secretary.

"Send these young women to me at once," she directed, handing Marcia the
slip of paper.

Turning to the three girls before her she said, "Miss Seymour, you may
go back to the study hall. Unless you hear from me further you are
exonerated from blame. I shall not need you either, Miss Dean. I am
sorry that I was obliged to involve you in this affair, but I am glad
that you were not afraid to tell the truth."

Marjorie turned to follow Ellen Seymour from the room, when the door
opened and the freshman basketball team filed in. For a brief instant
the principal's attention was fixed upon the entering girls, and in that
instant Mignon found time to mutter in Marjorie's ear, "I'll never
forgive you for this and you'll be sorry. Just wait and see if you're
not."




CHAPTER XV

MARJORIE'S WONDERFUL DISCOVERY


What transpired in Miss Archer's private office on that memorable
morning when the freshman team visited her in a body was a subject that
agitated high school circles for at least a week afterward. Other than
the team no one could furnish any authentic information as to what had
actually been said and done, but the amazing report that "Miss Archer
had disbanded the freshman basketball team" was on every one's tongue.
Whether or not another team would be selected no one knew. That would
depend wholly upon Miss Archer's decision. That the members of the team
had offended seriously there could be no doubt. As for the ex-members
themselves, they were absolutely mute on the subject. Among themselves,
however, they had a great deal to say, and, one and all, held Marjorie
Dean responsible for their downfall.

When Miss Archer had commanded their presence in her office that
eventful morning it was not in connection with the conflicting
statements of Ellen Seymour and Mignon La Salle. Satisfied that Mignon
was the real offender, she had read that young woman a lesson on
untruthfulness and treachery in the presence of the team that left her
white with mortification, her stormy black eyes alone betraying her
rage.

Then Miss Archer proceeded to the other business at hand, which was an
inquiry into their reason for requesting Marjorie Dean's resignation
from the team. One by one, the four girls, with the exception of Helen
Thornton, were questioned separately and acknowledged, in shamefaced
fashion, that Marjorie was a really good player.

"Then why," Miss Archer had asked sharply, "did you ask her to resign?"
There had been no answer to this pertinent question, and then had
followed their principal's rebuke, sharp and stinging.

"It is not often that I feel impelled to interfere in your games," she
had said. "Not long since I refused to listen to something Miss Arnold
tried to tell me; but, when several heartless girls deliberately combine
to humiliate and discomfit a companion under the flimsy pretext of 'the
good of the team' it is time to call a halt. Four girls were prime
movers in this contemptible plan. One girl was an accessory, and
therefore equally guilty. In justice to the traditions of Sanford High
School the girl who has suffered at your hands, and in defense of my own
self-respect, these offenders must be punished. So I am going to
disband your team and forbid any one of you to play basketball again
until I am satisfied that you know something of the first principles of
honor and fair play. However, I shall not forbid basketball to the
freshmen. The innocent shall not suffer with the guilty. A new team will
be chosen which I trust will be a credit rather than a detriment to our
high school. You are dismissed."

Five girls, whose faces were an open indication of their chagrin, had
left the principal's office in a far more chastened frame of mind than
when they had entered it. Miss Archer's arraignment had been a most
unpleasant surprise, and in discussing it among themselves afterward,
Helen Thornton had caused Mignon to pour forth a torrent of biting words
by saying sulkily, that if Mignon had let Ellen Seymour alone everything
would have been all right.

"Do you mean to say that you believe those miserable girls?" Mignon had
cried out.

And Helen had answered with marked sarcasm, "No; I believe what I saw
with my own eyes, and I wish I'd never heard of your old team. I'm
ashamed to think I ever listened to you," and had walked away from the
group with a sore and penitent heart, never to return to their circle
again.

All this was, of course, kept strictly secret by the other four
ex-members, who joined hands and vowed solemnly that they would weather
the gale together. The disbanding of the team by Miss Archer and Ellen
Seymour's vindication, could not be hushed up, however, and, despite
their protests that Miss Archer was unfair, and that the statements of
certain other girls were wholly unreliable, they lost ground with their
classmates.

Marjorie, too, had been made to feel the weight of their displeasure,
for they took pains to circulate the report that it was she who had told
tales to the principal, and thus brought them to grief. Several of the
sophomores, including Ellen Seymour, heatedly denied the rumor, and a
number of freshmen also took up the cudgels in her behalf. Jerry, Irma
and Constance stood firmly by her, and, although the poor little
lieutenant was far more hurt over the allegation than she would show,
she kept a brave face to the front and tried to ignore the ill-natured
thrusts launched chiefly by Muriel and Mignon.

But in the midst of this uncomfortable season Marjorie made a wonderful
discovery. It was quite by chance that she made it, and it concerned
Constance Stevens. Although the Mary girl had apparently grown very fond
of Marjorie and had almost entirely dropped her strange cloak of
reserve, she had never invited the girl who had so graciously befriended
her to her home.

From the words of vehement protest which Constance had spoken on that
day when Marjorie had followed her and protested that they become
friends, she had partly understood the other girl's position in regard
to her family, and had tactfully avoided the subject ever afterward. She
had talked the matter over with her captain, and they had decided to
respect Constance's reticence and keep religiously away from anything
bordering on the discussion of her family.

It was on a crisp November afternoon, several days before Thanksgiving,
that Marjorie made her discovery. As she walked into the living-room,
her books on her arm, her cheeks pink from the sharp, frosty air, her
mother hung up the telephone with: "Marjorie, do you think Constance
would like to go with us to the theatre to-night? Your father has just
telephoned me that he has four tickets."

"She'd love it. I know she would. I'll hurry straight down to her house
and ask her." Marjorie dropped her books on the table with a joyful
thump.

"Very well; but I wish you would wait until I finish my letter, then you
can post it on your way there."

"Did Nora bake chocolate cake to-day?" asked Marjorie irrelevantly.

"Yes."

There was a rush of light feet from the room. Three minutes later
Marjorie returned, a huge piece of chocolate layer cake in her hand.

"It's the best ever," she declared between bites.

By the time the cake was eaten the letter was ready.

"Hurry, dear," her mother called after her; "we shall have an early
dinner."

It did not recur to Marjorie until within sight of the house where
Constance lived that she was an uninvited guest. What a queer-looking
little house it was! Long ago it had been painted a pale gray with white
trimmings, but now it was a dingy, hopeless color that defied
description. A child's dilapidated tricycle stood on the rickety porch,
which was approached by a flight of three unstable-looking steps.

Her mind centered upon her errand, Marjorie paid small attention to her
surroundings. She bounded up the steps, searching with alert eyes for a
bell. Finding none she doubled her fist to knock, but paused suddenly
with upraised arm. From within the house came the vibrant notes of a
violin mingled with the soft accompaniment of a piano.

"Schubert's 'Serenade,'" breathed Marjorie, delightedly, lowering her
arm. "I simply must listen."

Suddenly a voice took up the plaintive strain. It was so high and sweet
and clear that the listener caught her breath in sheer amazement.

She stood spellbound, while the wonderful voice sang on and on to the
last note of the exquisite "Serenade" that seemed to end in a long-drawn
sigh.

Marjorie knocked lightly, but no one responded.

The singer had begun again. This time it was Nevin's "Oh That We Two
Were Maying."

She listened again; then, to her surprise, the door was gently opened.
Before her stood the tiny figure of a boy whose great black eyes looked
curiously into hers. Laying his finger upon his lips, he gravely
motioned with his other hand for her to enter. Then as he limped away
from the door Marjorie saw he was a cripple.

Marjorie stepped noiselessly into the room, her eyes on the piano. A man
was seated before it. She could not see his face, but she noted that he
had an enormous shock of snow-white hair. At one side of him stood
another old man, his thin cheek resting lovingly against his violin, his
whole soul intent upon the flood of melody he was bringing forth, while
on the other side of the pianist, her quiet face fairly transfigured
stood Constance, pouring out her very heart in song.




CHAPTER XVI

THE PEOPLE OF THE LITTLE GRAY HOUSE


Intent upon their music, neither the singer nor the two men were
immediately aware of the presence of another person in the room.

    "Oh, that we two were lying
    Under the churchyard sod,"

sang Constance, voicing the pent-up longing of Kingsley's tenderly
regretful words and Nevin's wistful setting, while the violin sang a
subdued, pensive obligato.

Marjorie stood very still, her gaze fastened upon Constance. The quaint
little boy stared at Marjorie with an equally intent interest. Thus, as
Constance began the last line the earnest, compelling regard of the
brown eyes caused her own to be turned toward Marjorie.

"Oh!" she ejaculated in faltering surprise. "Where--where did you come
from? What made you come here?"

There was mingled amazement, consternation and embarrassment in the
question. The white-haired pianist swung round on his stool, and the old
man with the violin raised his head and regarded the unexpected visitor
out of two mildly inquiring blue eyes.

"I'm sorry," began Marjorie, her cheeks hot with the shame of being
unwelcome. "I suppose I ought not to have come, but----"

Constance sprang to her side and catching her hands said contritely,
"Forgive me, dear, and please don't feel hurt. I--you see--I never
invite anyone here--because--well, just because we are so poor. I
thought you wouldn't care to come and so----"

"I've always wanted to come," interrupted Marjorie, eagerly. "I don't
think you are poor. I think you are rich to have this wonderful music. I
never dreamed you could sing, Constance. What made you keep it a
secret?"

"No one ever liked me well enough to care to know it until you came,"
returned Constance simply. "I meant to tell you, but I kept on putting
it off."

While the conversation went on between the two girls the one old man was
going over a pile of ragged-edged music on the piano, while the other
was industriously engaged with a troublesome E string.

"Father, Uncle John!" called Constance, gently, "come here. I want you
to meet my friend Marjorie Dean."

Both musicians left their self-appointed tasks and came forward.

Marjorie gave her soft little hand to each in turn, and they bowed over
it with almost old-style courtesy. She looked curiously at Constance's
father. His daughter did not in any way resemble him. His was the face
of a dreamer, rather thin, with clean-cut features and dark eyes that
seemed to see past one and into another world of his own creation. In
spite of his white hair he was not old. Not more than forty-five, or,
perhaps fifty, Marjorie decided. The other man was much older, sixty at
least. He was very thin, and his gentle face wore a pathetically vacant
expression that brought back to Marjorie the rush of bitter words
Constance had poured forth on the day when she had declined to be
friends. "We take care of an old man who people say is crazy, and folks
call us Bohemians and gypsies and even vagabonds."

"I came here to see if Constance could go to the theatre with us
to-night," explained Marjorie, rather shyly. "No, thank you, I won't sit
down. I promised mother I'd hurry home."

"It is very kind in you to ask my daughter to share your pleasure," said
Constance's father, his somber face lighting with a smile that reminded
Marjorie of the sun suddenly bursting from behind a cloud. "I should
like to have her go."

"Have her go," repeated the thin old man, bowing and beaming.

"Is there a band at the theatre?" piped a small, solemn voice.

Marjorie smiled down into the earnest, upraised face of the little boy.

"Oh, yes, there is a big, big band at the theatre."

"Then take me, too," returned the child calmly.

"No, no," reproved Constance gently, "Charlie can't go to-night."

A grieved look crept into the big black eyes. Without further words the
quaint little boy limped over to the old man, whom Constance had
addressed as Uncle John, and hid behind him.

Forgetting formality, tender-hearted Marjorie sprang after him. She
knelt beside him and gathered him into her arms. He made no resistance,
merely regarded her with wistful curiosity.

"Listen, dear little man," she said, "you and Constance and I will go to
the place where the big band plays some Saturday afternoon, and we'll
sit on the front seat where you can see every single thing they do.
Won't that be nice?"

The boy nodded and slipped his tiny hand in hers. "I'm going to play in
the band when I grow up," he confided. "Connie can go to-night if she
promises to tell me all about it afterward."

"You dear little soul," bubbled Marjorie, stroking his thick hair that
fell carelessly over his forehead and almost into his bright eyes.

"I'll tell you all about everything, Charlie," promised Constance.

"That means you will go," cried Marjorie, joyfully, rising from the
floor, the child's hand still in hers.

"Yes, I will," returned Constance hesitatingly, "only--I--haven't
anything pretty to wear."

"Pretty to wear," repeated Uncle John faithfully.

"Never mind that," reassured Marjorie. "Just wear a fresh white blouse
with your blue suit. I'm sure that will look nice."

"Will look nice," agreed Uncle John so promptly, that Marjorie started
slightly, then, noting that Constance seemed embarrassed, she nodded
genially at the old man, who smiled back like a pleased child.

Remembering her mother's injunction, Marjorie took hasty leave of the
Stevens family and set off for home at a brisk pace. Her thoughts were
as active as her feet. She had seen enough in the last fifteen minutes
to furnish ample food for reflection, and she now believed she
understood her friend's strange reserve, which at times rose like a wall
between them. What strange and yet what utterly delightful people the
Stevens were! They really did remind one a little of gypsies. And what a
queer room she had been ushered into by the odd little boy named
Charlie! She smiled to herself as she contrasted her mother's homelike,
yet orderly living-room with the room she had just left, which evidently
did duty as a hall, living-room, music-room and also a playroom for
little Charlie. There were hats and coats and musical instruments, pile
upon pile of well-thumbed music, and numerous dilapidated playthings
that bore the marks of too ardent treasuring, all scattered about in
reckless confusion. No wonder Constance had fought shy of
acquaintanceships which were sure to ripen into schoolgirl visits. Poor
Constance! How dreadful it must be to have to keep house, cook the meals
and try to go to school! The Stevenses seemed to be very poor in
everything except music. She wondered how they lived. Perhaps the two
men played in orchestras. Still she had never heard anything about them
in school, where news circulated so quickly.

"I'm going to ask Constance to tell me all about it," she decided, as
she skipped up the front steps. "Perhaps I can help her in some way."

Constance rang the Deans' bell at exactly half past seven o'clock. Her
blue eyes were sparkling with joyous light, and her usually grave mouth
broke into little curves of happiness. It was to be a red-letter night
for her.

The play was a clean, wholesome drama of American home life in which the
leading part was taken by a young girl, who appeared to be scarcely
older than Marjorie and Constance. The latter sat like one entranced
during the first act, and Marjorie spoke to her twice before she heard.

"Constance," she breathed, "won't you please, please tell me all about
it?"

"About what?" counter-questioned the other girl, reddening.

"About your father and your wonderful voice, and, oh, all there is to
tell."

"Marjorie," the Mary girl's tones were strained and wistful, "do you
really think it is wonderful?"

"You will be a great singer some day," returned Marjorie, simply.

"Oh, do you believe that?" Constance clasped her hands in ecstasy. "I
wish to be--I hope to be. If I could only go away to New York city and
study! Before we came here we lived in Buffalo. Father played in an
orchestra there. He had a friend who taught singing and I studied with
him for a year. Then he died suddenly of pneumonia and right after that
father fell on an icy pavement and broke his leg. By the time it was
well again another man had his place in the orchestra. He had a few
pupils, and long before his leg was well he used to sit in a big chair
and teach them. The money that they paid him for lessons was all we had
to live on."

The rising of the curtain on the second act cut short the narrative.
With "I'll tell you the rest later," Constance turned eager eyes toward
the stage.

"Isn't it a beautiful play?" she sighed, when the act ended.

"Lovely," agreed Marjorie; "now tell me the rest."

"Oh, there isn't much more to tell. It was the last of March when father
got hurt, but it was the middle of May before he was quite well again.
Then summer came and most of his pupils went away and we grew poorer and
poorer. Just when we were the poorest the editor of a new musical
magazine wrote him and asked him to write some articles. A friend of
father's in New York told the editor about father and gave him our
address. We decided to move to a smaller city, where we could live more
cheaply, and some of the musicians that father knew gave him a benefit
concert. The money from that helped us to move to Sanford, and father
has been writing articles off and on for the magazine ever since then.
It's better for all of us to be here. Uncle John isn't quite like other
people. When he was a young man he studied to be a virtuoso on the
violin. He overworked and had brain fever just before he was to give his
first recital. After he got well he never played the same again. He had
spent all the money his father left him on his musical education, so he
had to find work wherever he could. He played the violin in different
orchestras, but he was so absent-minded that he couldn't be trusted.
Sometimes he would go on playing after all the rest of the orchestra had
finished, and then he began to repeat things after people.

"When father first met him they were playing in the same theatre
orchestra. One night a great tragedian was playing 'Hamlet,' and poor
Uncle John grew so interested that he said things after him as loud as
he could. The actor was dreadfully angry, and so was the leader of the
orchestra. He made the poor old man leave the theatre. After that he
played in other orchestras a little, but he couldn't be depended upon,
so no one wanted to hire him.

"Father did all he could to help him, but he grew queerer and queerer.
Then he disappeared, and father didn't see him for a long while. One
cold winter night he found him wandering about the streets, so he
brought him to his room and he has been with father ever since. That was
years ago, before father was married. He isn't really my uncle. I just
call him that. The musicians used to call him 'Crazy Johnny.' His name
is John Roland."

Although Constance had averred that there wasn't "much to tell," the
third act interrupted her recital, and it was during the interval before
the beginning of the last act that Marjorie heard the story of the
fourth member of the Stevenses' household, little lame Charlie.

"Charlie has been with us a little over four years," returned Constance,
in answer to Marjorie's interested questions. "He is seven years old,
but you would hardly believe it. His mother died when he was a tiny
baby, and his father was a dreadful drunkard. He was a musician, too, a
clarionet player. He let Charlie fall downstairs when he was only two
years old and hurt his hip. That's why he's lame. His father used to go
away and be gone for days and leave the poor baby with his neighbors.
Father found out about it and took Charlie away from him, and we've had
him with us ever since."

"It was splendid in your father to be so good to the poor old man and
Charlie," said Marjorie, warmly.

"Father is the best man in the world," returned Constance, with fond
pride. "He is such a wonderful musician, too. He can play on the violin
as well as the piano, and he teaches both. If only he could get plenty
of work here in Sanford. He has a few pupils, and with the articles he
writes we manage to live, but the magazine is a small one and does not
pay much for them. He has tried ever so many times to get into the
theatre orchestra, but there seems to be no chance for him. I think
we'll go somewhere else to live before long. Perhaps to a big city
again. I'd love to stay here and go through high school with you, but I
am afraid I can't. I'm almost eighteen and I ought to work."

"Oh, you mustn't think of leaving Sanford!" exclaimed Marjorie, in
sudden dismay. "What would I do without you? Perhaps things will be
brighter after a while. I am sure they will. Why couldn't your
father----"

But the last act was on, and she did not finish what had promised to be
a suggestion. Nevertheless, a plan had taken shape in her busy mind,
which she determined to discuss with her father and mother.

As if to further her design they found Mr. Stevens waiting outside the
theatre for his daughter and Marjorie lost no time in presenting him to
her father and mother. He greeted the Deans gravely, thanking them for
their kindness to his daughter, with a fine courtesy that made a marked
impression on them, and after he had gone his way, a happy, smiling
Constance beside him, Marjorie slipped her arms in those of her father
and mother, and walking between them told Constance's story all over
again.

"I think it is positively noble in Mr. Stevens to take care of that old
man and little Charlie, when they have no claim upon him," she finished.

"He has a remarkably fine, sensitive face," said Mrs. Dean. "I suppose
like nearly all persons of great musical gifts, he lacks the commercial
ability to manage his affairs successfully."

"Don't you believe that if the people of Sanford only knew how
beautifully Mr. Stevens and the other man played together they might
hire them for afternoon teas and little parties and such things?" asked
Marjorie, with an earnestness that made her father say teasingly, "Are
you going to enlist in his cause as his business manager?"

"You mustn't tease me, General," she reproved. "I'm in dead earnest. I
was just thinking to-night that Mr. Stevens ought to have an orchestra
of his own. You know mother promised me a party on my birthday, and
that's not until January tenth. Why can't I have it the night before
Thanksgiving? That will be next Wednesday. Mr. Stevens and Mr. Roland
can play for us to dance. A violin and piano will be plenty of music. If
everybody likes my orchestra, then someone will be sure to want to hire
it for some of the holiday parties. Don't you think that a nice plan?"

"Very," laughed her father. "I see you have an eye to business,
Lieutenant."

"You can have your party next week, if you like, dear," agreed Mrs.
Dean, who made it a point always to encourage her daughter's generous
impulses.

"Then I'll send my invitations to-morrow," exulted Marjorie. "Hurrah for
the Stevens orchestra! Long may it wave!" She gave a joyous skip that
caused her father to exclaim "Steady!" and her mother to protest against
further jolting.

"Beg your pardon, both of you," apologized the frisky lieutenant, giving
the arms to which she clung an affectionate squeeze, "but I simply had
to rejoice a little. Won't Constance be glad? I could never care quite
so much for Constance as I do for Mary, but I like her next best. She's
a dear and we're going to be friends as long as we live."

But clouds have an uncomfortable habit of darkening the clearest skies
and even sworn friendships are not always timeproof.




CHAPTER XVII

MARJORIE MEETS WITH A LOSS


By eight o'clock the following night twenty-eight invitations to
Marjorie Dean's Thanksgiving party were on their way. No one of the
invitations ran the risk of being declined. Marjorie had invited only
those boys and girls of her acquaintance who were quite likely to come
and when the momentous evening arrived they put in twenty-eight joyful
appearances and enjoyed the Deans' hospitality to the full.

But to Constance, who wore her beautiful blue gown and went to the party
under the protection of her father, whose somber eyes gleamed with a
strange new happiness, and old John Roland, whose usually vacant
expression had changed to one of inordinate pride, it was, indeed, a
night to be remembered by the three. Charlie was to remain at home in
the care of a kindly neighbor.

The long living-room had been stripped of everything save the piano, and
the polished hardwood floor was ideal to dance on. Uncle John had
received careful instructions beforehand from both Mr. Stevens and
Constance as to his behavior, and with a sudden flash of reason in his
faded eyes had gravely promised to "be good."

He had kept his word, too, and from his station beside the piano he had
played like one inspired from the moment his violin sang the first magic
strains of the "Blue Danube" until it crooned softly the "Home, Sweet
Home" waltz.

The dancers were wholly appreciative of the orchestra, as their coaxing
applause for more music after every number testified, and before the
evening was over several boys and girls had asked Marjorie if "those
dandy musicians" would play for anyone who wanted them.

"Mother's giving a tea next week, and I'm going to tell her about these
men," the Crane had informed Marjorie.

"Hal and I are going to give a party before long, and we'll have them,
too," Jerry had promised. Lawrence Armitage, who had managed to be found
near Constance the greater part of the evening, insisted on being
introduced to her father, and during supper, which was served at small
tables in the dining-room, he had sat at the same table with the two
players and Constance, and kept up an animated and interested discussion
on music with Mr. Stevens.

But the crowning moment of the evening had been when, after supper, the
guests had gathered in the living-room to do stunts, and Constance had
sung Tosti's "Good-bye" and "Thy Blue Eyes," her exquisite voice coming
as a bewildering surprise to the assembled young people. How they had
crowded around her afterward! How glad Marjorie had been at the success
of her plan, and how Mr. Stevens' eyes had shone to hear his daughter
praised by her classmates!

In less than a week afterward Constance rose from obscurity to
semi-popularity. The story of her singing was noised about through
school until it reached even the ears of the girls who had despised her
for her poverty. Muriel and Susan had looked absolute amazement when a
talkative freshman told the news as she received it from a girl who had
attended the party. Mignon, however, was secretly furious at the, to
her, unbelievable report that "that beggarly Stevens girl could actually
sing." She had never forgiven Constance for refusing to dishonorably
assist her in an algebra test, and after her unsuccessful attempt to
fasten the disappearance of her bracelet upon Constance she had disliked
her with that fierce hatred which the transgressor so often feels for
the one he or she has wronged.

Next to Constance in Mignon's black book came Marjorie, who had caused
her to lose her proud position of center on the team, and in Miss Merton
and Marcia Arnold she had two staunch adherents. Just why Miss Merton
disliked Marjorie was hard to say. Perhaps she took violent exception to
the girl's gay, gracious manner and love of life, the early years of
which she was living so abundantly. At any rate, she never lost an
opportunity to harass or annoy the pretty freshman, and it was only by
keeping up an eternal vigilance that Marjorie managed to escape
constant, nagging reproof.

Last of all, Marcia Arnold had a grievance against Marjorie. She was no
longer manager of the freshman team. A disagreeable ten minutes with
Miss Archer after the freshman team had been disbanded, on that dreadful
day, had been sufficient to deprive her of her office, and arouse her
resentment against Marjorie to a fever pitch.

There were still a number of girls in the freshman class who clung to
Muriel and Mignon, but they were in the minority. At least two-thirds of
19-- had made friendly overtures not only to Marjorie, but to Constance
as well, and as the short December days slipped by, Marjorie began to
experience a contentment and peace in her school that she had not felt
since leaving dear old Franklin High.

"Everything's going beautifully, Captain," she declared gaily to her
mother in answer to the latter's question, as she flashed into the
living-room one sunny winter afternoon, with dancing eyes and pink
cheeks. "It couldn't be better. I like almost every one in school;
Constance's father has more playing than he can do; you bought me that
darling collar and cuff set yesterday; I've a long letter from Mary;
I've studied all my lessons for to-day, and--oh, yes, we're going to
have creamed chicken and lemon meringue pie for dinner. Isn't that
enough to make me happy for one day at least?"

"What a jumble of happiness!" laughed her mother.

"Isn't it, though? And now Christmas is almost here. That's another
perfectly gigantic happiness," was Marjorie's extravagant comment. "I
love Christmas! That reminds me, Mother, you said you would help me play
Santa Claus to little Charlie. I don't believe he has ever spent a
really jolly Christmas. Of course, Mr. Stevens and Constance will give
him things, but he needs a whole lot more presents besides. He climbed
into my lap and told me all about what he wanted when I was over there
yesterday. I promised to speak to Santa Claus about it. Charlie isn't
going to hang up his stocking. He's going to leave a funny little wagon
that he drags around for Santa Claus. He told me very solemnly that he
knew Santa Claus couldn't fill it, for Connie had said that he never had
enough presents to go around, but she was sure he would have a few left
when he reached Charlie.

"So Constance and I are going to decorate the wagon with evergreen and
hang strings of popcorn on it and fill it full of presents after he
goes to bed. He has promised to go very early Christmas eve. Mr. Roland
has a little violin he is going to give him, and Mr. Stevens has a
cunning chair for him. He has never had a chair of his own. Constance
has some picture books and toys, and I'm going to buy some, too. I saved
some money from my allowance this month on purpose for this."

Marjorie's face glowed with generous enthusiasm as she talked.

"I am going shopping day after to-morrow," said Mrs. Dean, "and as long
as it is Saturday, you had better go with me."

"Oh, splendid!" cried Marjorie, dancing up and down on her tiptoes.
"Things are getting interestinger and interestinger."

"Regardless of English," slyly supplemented her mother, as Marjorie
danced out of the room to answer the postman's ring.

"Here are two letters for you, Captain, but not even a postcard for me.
I'd love to have a letter from Mary, but I haven't answered her last one
yet. I'll write to her to-morrow and send her present, too, with special
orders not to open it until Christmas."

The next morning Marjorie hurried off to school early, in hopes of
seeing Constance before the morning session began. Her friend entered
the study hall just as the first bell rang, however, and Marjorie had
only time for a word or two in the corridor as they filed off to their
respective classes.

"I'll see her in French class," thought Marjorie. "I'll ask Professor
Fontaine to let me sit with her." But when she reached the French room
and the class gathered, Constance was not among them, nor did she enter
the room later. Wondering what had happened, Marjorie reluctantly turned
her attention to the advance lesson.

"We weel read this leetle poem togethaire," directed Professor Fontaine,
amiably, "but first I shall read eet to you. Eet is called 'Le
Papillon,' which means the 'botterfly.'"

Unconsciously, Marjorie's hand strayed to the open neck of her blouse.
Then she dropped her hand in dismay. Her butterfly, her pretty talisman,
where was it? She remembered wearing it to school that morning, or
thought she remembered. Oh, yes, she now recalled that she had pinned it
to her coat lapel. It had always shone so bravely against the soft blue
broadcloth. She longed to rush downstairs to her locker before reporting
in the study hall for dismissal, but remembering how sourly Miss Merton
had looked at her only that morning, she decided to possess her soul in
patience until the session was dismissed.

Once out of the study hall she dashed downstairs at full speed and
hastily opened her locker. As she seized her coat she noted vaguely that
Constance's hat and coat were missing, but her mind was centered on
her pin. Then an exclamation of grief and dismay escaped her. The lapel
was bare of ornament. Her butterfly was gone!

"I wonder if I really did leave it at home?" was her distracted thought,
as she climbed the basement stairs with a heavy heart, after having
thoroughly examined the locker. But a close search of her room that noon
revealed no trace of the missing pin. Hot tears gathered in her eyes,
but she brushed them away, muttering: "I won't cry. It isn't lost. It
can't be. Oh, my pretty talisman!" She choked back a sob. "I sha'n't
tell mother unless it is really hopeless. It won't do any good and
she'll feel sorry because I do. It's my own fault. I should have seen
that my butterfly was securely fastened."

On the way home from the school that afternoon Marjorie reported the
loss of her pin to Irma, Jerry and Constance, who had returned for the
afternoon session.

"What a shame!" sympathized Jerry. "It was such a beauty."

"I'm so sorry you lost it," condoled Irma.

"So am I," echoed Constance. "I don't remember it. I'm not very
observing about jewelry, but I'm dreadfully sorry just the same."

"It was----" began Marjorie, but a joyful whistle far up the street and
the faint ring of running feet put a sudden end to her description.
Lawrence Armitage, Hal Macy and the Crane had espied the girls from
afar and come with winged feet to join them. Their evident pleasure in
the girls' society, coupled with the indescribably funny antics of the
Crane, who had apparently appointed himself an amusement committee of
one, drove away Marjorie's distress over her loss for the time being,
and it was not until later that she remembered that she had not
described the butterfly pin to Constance.




CHAPTER XVIII

PLAYING SANTA CLAUS TO CHARLIE


The next morning Marjorie wrote a description of her pin. It was placed
at the end of the basement corridor above a small bulletin board, where
those who passed might read. She wondered if the loss of her talisman
would bring her bad luck. Before the day was over she gloomily decided
that it had, for during the last hour Miss Merton accused her of
whispering to the girl across the aisle, when she merely leaned forward
in her seat to pick up her handkerchief. Smarting with the teacher's
injustice, Marjorie politely but steadily contradicted the accusation,
and two minutes later found herself on the way to Miss Archer's office,
Miss Merton walking grimly beside her.

Miss Archer had been through a particularly trying day, and was
irritable, while Miss Merton was consumed with spiteful rage at
Marjorie's "impertinence," and did not hesitate to put her side of the
story forward in a most unpleasant fashion. The principal turned coldly
to Marjory with, "Apologize to Miss Merton at once, Miss Dean, for
disturbing her," and Marjorie said, with uplifted chin and resentful
eyes, "I am sorry you thought I whispered, Miss Merton, for I did not
open my lips." Something in the proud carriage of the girl's head caused
Miss Archer to divine the truth of the firm statement, and she said,
more gently, "Very well, you are excused, Miss Dean; but I do not wish
to hear again that you have failed in courtesy to your teachers. This is
not the first time I have received such reports of you."

With a steady, reproachful look at Miss Merton, whose shifting eyes
refused to meet hers, Marjorie walked from the room, ready to burst into
tears, and when the all but interminable afternoon was ended, hurried
home to the shelter of her faithful captain's arms and poured forth her
grief and wrongs.

But the notice of the lost pin posted on the bulletin board brought
forth no trace of the vanished butterfly. Marjorie made a valiant effort
to thrust aside her heavy sense of loss and allow the spirit of
Christmas to enter her heart. She had promised Constance her help in
arranging Santa Claus' visit to Charlie, and, when on Christmas eve, at
a little after seven o'clock she set out for the Stevens' weighed down
by numerous festively-wrapped, be-ribboned packages, she was filled with
that quiet exaltation that attends the performance of a good deed and
happier than she had been for several days.

"Shh!" Constance met her at the door, a warning finger on her lips.

"Hasn't he gone to sleep yet?" asked Marjorie, sliding into the house in
mouse-like fashion.

"Yes, but I thought he never would," returned Constance, with a relieved
sigh. "What do you think? Father is playing at the theatre to-night for
the first time. The pianist is ill. The leader of the orchestra was here
this afternoon to see if father would take his place. We can never be
grateful enough to you, Marjorie, for having father and Uncle John play
at your party."

"Let's talk about Charlie's little wagon," proposed Marjorie, quickly.
"Nora popped and strung a lot of corn for me. It's in this bag. Do tell
me where I can put the rest of this armful of things."

Constance made a place on one end of an old velvet couch for them.

"This is yours." Marjorie flourished a wide, flat package tied with
long, graceful loops of narrow pale blue ribbon. "I tied it with blue
because that's your color. Don't you dare peep at it until to-morrow
morning. These two little packages are for your father and Mr. Roland,
and all the rest is for Charlie."

"He will be the happiest boy in Sanford," said Constance, her own face
radiant. "He never dreamed of a Christmas like this."

"Can we begin now?" asked Marjorie. "I'm so impatient to see how this
wagon will look when we get it fixed."

"Wait a minute." Constance disappeared through the door leading into the
kitchen, returning with one arm piled high with evergreens, the other
wound around a small balsam tree.

"Lawrence Armitage brought me this yesterday," she explained. "A party
of boys went to the woods to cut down Christmas trees. He brought me
this cunning little tree and all this ground pine and holly. Wasn't it
nice in him?"

"Perfectly dear," agreed Marjorie. "I wonder if there is enough popcorn
for the tree, too. I have a lot of little ornaments and candles at home.
It won't take long to go there and back." She reached for her hat and
coat as she spoke and in spite of Constance's protests was soon speeding
home after the required decorations.

"I made good time, didn't I?" she observed, as half an hour later she
burst into the Stevens' living-room without knocking.

Then the work of making one small boy's Christmas merry was begun in
earnest. An hour later the sturdy baby balsam stood loaded with its crop
of strange fruit, and the faithful, rickety wagon, whose imperfections
were quite hidden beneath trails of thick, fragrant ground pine and
sprays of flame-berried holly, looked as though it had received a
visitation from the fairies. A diminutive black leather violin case,
encircled with a wreath of ground pine and tied with a huge red bow,
leaned against one wheel of the magic vehicle, and the cunning chair
with its absurd little arms and leather cushion was also twined with
green.

"It's too lovely for words," breathed Constance, her admiring gaze
fastened upon the once dingy corner now bright with the flowers of love
and generosity, which had bloomed in all shapes and sizes of packages to
gladden one youngster's heart.

"I wish I could be here when first he sees it," commented Marjorie.
"I'll be fast asleep then, for he told me that Mr. Roland promised to
call him very early."

"He proposed staying up all night, but I was not enthusiastic over that
plan," laughed Constance.

"I must go," decided Marjorie. "The hands of that clock fairly fly
around the dial. I'm sure I just came and yet they point to a quarter to
eleven." She reached reluctantly for her hat and her wraps.

"How can I ever thank you, Marjorie," began Constance, but Marjorie put
a soft hand over her friend's lips.

"Please don't," she implored. "I've loved to do it." She held out both
hands to Constance. "I wish you the merriest sort of a merry Christmas."

"I hope you will have a perfectly wonderful day," was the earnest
response. "You'll come over to-morrow and see how happy you've made
Charlie and all of us, won't you?"

"I'll come," promised Marjorie. "You couldn't keep me away."

She reached home just in time to catch a fleeting glimpse of her father
disappearing up the stairs with a huge box in his arms, while her mother
hastily dropped some thing into the drawer of the library table.

"There, I caught both of you," she cried in triumph. "Confess you were
hiding things from me, weren't you?"

"I'll answer your questions to-morrow," beamed her father.

"I forgive you both as long as the things are for me," was her calm
declaration.

"What is she talking about?" solemnly asked Mr. Dean, with an air of
complete mystification.

"You know perfectly well what I'm talking about!" exclaimed Marjorie,
making a rush for him.

"Help, help!" he called feebly. "The battalion has been ambushed and the
general captured."

"And held prisoner," added Marjorie, severely. "Unless he informs the
second lieutenant what is in a certain big, white box with which he
escaped upstairs, he shall be court-martialed."

"Put off the court-martial until to-morrow and perhaps I'll tell,"
compromised the captured general, throwing his free arm across his
lieutenant's shoulder in a most unmilitary manner.

"All right, I'll let you go on parole," returned his daughter. "I'm too
sleepy to do guard duty to-night. How I wish you might have seen
Charlie's little wagon when we finished it! We had a tree, too."

Forgetting that she was sleepy, Marjorie poured forth the story of her
evening's work to her sympathetic listeners and it was ten minutes to
twelve before she said good-night and went yawning to bed.

Eight o'clock Christmas morning found her awake and stirring. Wrapped in
her bathrobe, she pattered downstairs to the living-room, her arms full
of bundles, but her father and mother were already there before her, and
their packages greatly outnumbered hers. After the kisses and greetings
of the day had been given her father handed the big white box into her
outstretched arms. "Shall I tell you----" he began.

"Don't you dare! I'm going to see for myself. Oh-h-h!" She had the lid
off, and was clasping to her breast a mass of soft brown fur. "Oh,
General, you dear thing! You sha'n't ever go to prison again." She
smothered her father in the coat and a rapturous embrace, causing him to
protest mildly. Her mother's gift of a bracelet watch also evoked
another burst of reckless enthusiasm.

What a happy hour it was, to be sure, and how beautifully all her
friends had remembered her! Marjorie could hardly bear to leave her
presents long enough to eat breakfast, and when after breakfast she left
home for her Christmas call on the Stevens, she felt as though she must
sing "Peace on Earth, Good Will Toward Men," at the top of her voice as
she walked.




CHAPTER XIX

THE UNLUCKY TALISMAN


There was a rapturous shriek of joy from Charlie as Constance opened the
door for Marjorie and their hands and lips met in Christmas greeting.
Marjorie stooped to embrace the excited little figure. "Santa Claus did
come to see Charlie, didn't he?" she exclaimed, in pretended surprise.
"And what did he bring?"

For answer the child limped to his Christmas corner. "Oh, a fiddle," he
said reverently, clasping the little violin to his heart. "Now I shall
play in the band soon. Johnny said so." He thrust the violin under his
sharp little chin, the thin fingers of his left hand reaching across the
fingerboard, his left wrist curving into position.

"Why, he holds it like a real violinist!" exclaimed Marjorie. "Can he
play?"

Charlie answered her question by dragging his triumphant bow across the
helpless strings, drawing forth a wailing discord of tortured sound.

"He thinks he can," giggled Constance. "I suppose those awful sounds
are the sweetest music to his ears. Luckily, we don't mind them. I hope
you don't. I hate to stop him, he is so delighted with himself."

"I don't mind in the least," assured Marjorie. "I wouldn't spoil his
pleasure for anything in the world."

Charlie had no intention of giving a concert that morning, however; he
had too many other things to distract his mind.

Marjorie sat on the floor beside the Christmas tree, her feet tucked
under her, and listened with becoming gravity and attention while he
told her about Santa Claus' visit, and one by one brought forth his
precious presents for her to see.

"He must have had enough presents to go around this year or he wouldn't
have left me so many," asserted the child with happy positiveness.
"Connie's going to write him a letter and say thank you for me. If I
don't say 'thank you' when someone gives me something, then I can never
play in the band. Johnny and father always say it. I'm sorry I didn't
write to Santa Claus before Christmas and ask him for a new leg. I can't
go fast on this one. It's been wearing out ever since I was a baby and
it keeps on getting shorter."

"Santa Claus can't give you a new leg, Charlie boy," answered Marjorie,
her bright face clouding momentarily, "but perhaps some day we can find
a good, kind man who will make this poor little leg over like a new
one."

"When you find him, you'll be sure to tell him all about me, won't you,
Marjorie?" he asked eagerly.

"As sure as anything," nodded Marjory, brushing his heavy black hair out
of his eyes and kissing him gently.

"Will you walk down to the drugstore with me, Marjorie?" put in
Constance, abruptly.

Marjorie glanced up to meet her friend's troubled gaze. In an instant
she was on her feet.

"It's a good thing I didn't take off my hat and coat. I'm ready to go,
you see."

"Charlie can watch for us at the window," suggested Constance, hugging
the child. "We won't be long."

Once outside the house there was an eloquent silence. "It's dreadful,
isn't it?" There was a catch in Constance's voice when finally she
spoke.

"Can't he be cured?" queried Marjorie, softly.

"Yes; so a specialist said, if only we had the money."

"He is such a quaint child, and he really and truly believes in Santa
Claus," mused Marjorie, aloud. "Most children of his age don't."

"He's different," was the quick reply. "He has been brought up away from
other children and in a world of his own. He believes in fairies, too,
good ones and bad ones. But he loves music better than anything else in
the world, and his highest ambition in life is to play in the band. If
only I had the money to make him well! I'd love to see him strong and
sturdy like other children."

"You mustn't talk about such sad things to-day, but just be happy,"
counseled Marjorie, slipping her arm through that of her friend.
"Charlie is cheerful and jolly in spite of his poor lame leg. Perhaps
the New Year will bring you something glorious."

"You are so comforting, Marjorie," sighed Constance. "I'll throw all my
cares to the winds and keep sunny all day if I can."

"I must go now." They entered the little gray house again, just in time
to hear remonstrative squeaks from the E string of the diminutive
violin, blended with disheartened moans from the A and growls of protest
from the G string.

"How did you like that?" inquired Charlie, calmly.

"It was very noisy," criticised Constance.

"It was a very hard passage to play," explained the embryo musician,
soberly.

"It seems to have been," laughed Marjorie.

"That is what Johnny says when he doesn't pay attention and makes a
mistake on the fiddle," confided Charlie.

Constance's sad look vanished at this naive assertion. "He imitates
father and Uncle John in everything," she explained. "He will have
played his way through all the music in the house before to-morrow
night--most of it upside down, too."

"I'd love to stay longer, but I promised to stop at Macy's and we have
our dinner at one o'clock. I wish you could come, too, but I know you'd
rather be at home. Thank you again for the hemstitched handkerchiefs. I
don't see how you found the time to make them."

"Thank you for the lovely hand-embroidered blouse and all Charlie's
things," reminded Constance. "I hope we'll spend many, many more
Christmases together."

"So do I," echoed Marjorie, as she kissed Charlie and held out her hand
to her friend.

Her call on the Macys lasted the better part of an hour, for Jerry was
the recipient of a host of gifts, and insisted upon displaying them,
while Hal refused to pose gracefully in the background and absorbed as
much of Marjorie's attention as she would give him, secretly wondering
if she would be pleased with the box of American Beauty roses he had
ordered the florist to deliver at the Deans' residence at noon that day.

What a blissful Christmas it was! From the moment of Marjorie's
awakening that morning until the day was done it was one long succession
of joyous surprises. And, oh, glorious thought! there were ten blessed
days of vacation stretching before her.

"I'll see if Constance will go to the matinee Saturday," she planned
drowsily that night as she prepared for sleep. "We will take Charlie. I
promised him long ago that I would. I'll run over there to-morrow. Too
bad I didn't think of it to-day."

But "to-morrow" brought its own deeds to be done, and so did the
following two days, and it was Friday afternoon before Marjorie found
time for her visit to the little gray house.

Ever since Christmas it had snowed at intervals and the snow-plow men
had been kept busy clearing the streets. It was just the kind of weather
to wear one's fur coat, and Marjorie gave a little shiver of delight as
she slipped into her Christmas treasure. And how warm it was! The
searching east wind that was abroad that day held no discomfort for her.

As she stepped briskly along over the hard-packed walk, hedged in by
high-piled snow, she thought rather soberly of her own good fortune and
wondered why so many beautiful things had been given to her while to
Constance life had grudged all but the barest necessities. With a rush
of generous impulse she resolved to do all in her power to smooth the
troubled way of her friend.

When within sight of the house Marjorie's eyes were fastened upon the
living-room windows for some sign of Charlie, who would sit contentedly
at one of them by the hour watching the passersby. Catching sight of
his pale little face pressed to the window pane she waved her hand gaily
to him. He disappeared from the window and an instant later stood in the
open door, shouting gleefully, "Oh, Connie, here's Marjorie! Here's
Marjorie!"

Marjorie bent and embraced the gleeful little boy. "How is Charlie
to-day?" she asked.

"Pretty well," nodded the child. "I wish I had asked for that leg,
though. Mine hurts to-day."

"You poor baby!" consoled Marjorie, tenderly. "But where is Connie,
dear?"

"She's upstairs. I'll call her."

He limped across the room to the stair door, which was situated at one
side of the living-room, and opened it. "Connie," he called, "Marjorie's
come to see us."

There was a sound of quick footsteps on the stairs and Constance
appeared. "I didn't know you were here," she apologized.

"Where were you on Thursday?" began Marjorie, laughingly. "You promised
to come over. Don't you remember?"

"Yes," returned Constance, briefly. Then with a swift return of the old,
chilling reserve, which of late she had seemed to lose, "It was
impossible for me to come."

Marjorie scrutinized her friend's face. The look of impassivity had come
back to it. "What is the matter, Constance?" she questioned anxiously.
"Has anything happened?"

An expression of intense pain leaped into Constance's blue eyes. "I've
something to tell you, Marjorie. It's dreadful. I----" With a muffled
sob she threw herself, face down, upon the old velvet couch, her slender
shoulders shaking with passionate grief.

"Why, Constance!" Marjorie regarded the sobbing girl in sympathetic
amazement.

Charlie went over to the couch and patted Constance's fair head. "Don't
cry, Connie," he pleaded. Then, limping to a dilapidated writing desk in
the corner, which Marjorie never remembered to have seen open before, he
took from one of the lower pigeonholes a small, glittering object.

"This is what makes Connie cry." He opened his hand and disclosed a
little object on his outstretched palm. "Shall I throw the old thing
into the fire, Connie?"

With a sharp ejaculation of dismay, Constance sprang from the couch. One
swift glance toward the desk, then she caught Charlie's tiny hand in
hers. "Give it to Connie, this minute," she commanded sternly. For the
instant Marjorie was forgotten.

Charlie's lips quivered with grieved surprise. Relinquishing his hold on
the object he wailed resentfully, "It is a horrid old thing. It made you
cry, and me, too."

"Charlie, dear," soothed Constance. Then she glanced up to meet the
horrified stare of two accusing brown eyes. "Why--Marjorie!" she
exclaimed.

"Where--where--did you get that pin?" Marjorie's soft voice sounded
harsh and unnatural.

"That's what I started to tell you," faltered Constance. "Oh, it's so
dreadful I can't bear to speak of it. Yet I must tell you. I--the
pin----" she broke down and throwing herself on the lounge again began
to cry disconsolately.

An appalling silence fell upon the shabby, music-littered room, broken
only by Constance's sobs. Marjorie stood rooted to the spot. Could it be
true that Constance, the girl she had fought for, the girl for whose
sake she had braved class ostracism, had deliberately stolen her pin?
Yet she must believe the evidence of her own eyes which had told her
that in Charlie's hand lay her cherished pin, her lost, much-mourned-for
butterfly!

If Constance had deliberately taken the pin, then she was a thief. If
she had found it, but purposely failed to return it, she was still a
thief. Marjorie opened her lips to pour forth a torrent of reproaches,
but the words would not come. She had a wild desire to pry open the hand
which held her precious butterfly and seize it, but her hands remained
limply at her sides. It was her pin, her very own, yet she could not
touch it unless Constance chose to hand it to her.

But Constance made no such proffer. Still clutching the precious
butterfly she continued to weep unrestrainedly.

Marjorie waited patiently.

Having failed hopelessly as a comforter, Charlie had hobbled to his
corner, where his Christmas tree still stood, and, with that blessed
forgetfulness of sorrow which childhood alone knows, had dragged forth
his violin and begun a dismal screeching and scraping, a nerve-racking
obligato to his foster sister's sobs.

Five endless minutes passed, but Constance made no sign.

"I'm--I'm going now," choked Marjorie. Hot tears lay thick on her
eyelashes. She stumbled blindly toward the door, her face averted from
the girl who had so misused and abused her friendship. "Good-bye,
Constance."

Something in the reproachful ring of that "Good-bye," startled Constance
out of her grief. She had been too greatly overcome with her own trouble
to note the effect of her tears and broken words upon Marjorie. Surely
Marjorie was not angry with her for crying.

"Wait a minute, Marjorie," she called. "Please don't be angry. I won't
cry any more. I want to tell you about the pin. It was----"

But only the sound of a closing door answered her. Marjorie was gone.




CHAPTER XX

THE CROWNING INJURY


Marjorie never remembered just how she reached home that afternoon. She
followed the familial streets mechanically, her brain tortured with but
one burning thought--Constance was a thief. Over and over the dreadful
sentence repeated itself in her mind. "How could she?" was her
half-sobbed whisper, as she slipped quietly into the house, and, without
glancing toward the living-room, went softly upstairs to her room. She
wanted to be alone. Not even her beloved captain could ease the hurt
dealt her by the girl she had loved and trusted. Her mother must never
know that Constance was unworthy. No one should know, but she could
never, never be friends with Constance again.

With the tears running down her cheeks Marjorie took off the new fur
coat she had worn so proudly that afternoon and dropped it upon the
first convenient chair. Her hat followed it; then throwing herself
across the bed, she gave way to uncontrolled weeping. Until that moment
she had not realized how greatly she had loved this girl who had Mary's
eyes of true blue, but who was so sadly lacking in Mary's fine sense of
honor.

Until the afternoon light waned and the shadows began to creep upon her
she lay mourning, and inconsolable. Her generous heart had been sorely
wounded and she could not easily thrust aside her dreadful sense of
loss; neither could she understand why Constance had partly acknowledged
that she took the butterfly pin, but had not offered to return it.

"I couldn't ask her for it," she sighed to herself, as, at last, she
rose, switched on the electric light, and viewed her tear-swollen face
in the mirror, "not when she had kept it all this time. She knew how
dreadfully I felt over losing it, and she certainly saw the notice in
the hall." A flash of resentment tinged her grief.

"I can't forgive her. I'll never forgive her. I----" Marjorie's lips
began to quiver ominously. "I won't cry any more," she asserted stoutly.
"My face is a sight now. Mother will ask me what the trouble is, and I
don't want a soul to know. Of course, we can't go to the matinee
to-morrow. We can't ever go anywhere together again." Once more the
tears threatened to fall. She shut her eyes and forced them back, then
went dejectedly down the hall to the bathroom to lave her flushed face
and aching eyes.

By the time dinner was ready Marjorie showed no traces of her grief.
She was unusually quiet at dinner, however, and her mother inquired
anxiously if she were ill.

"Did you wear your new coat this afternoon?" her father asked soberly.

"Yes, General. I went to see Constance." Marjorie tried to speak
naturally.

"Ah, that accounts for it," he declared, putting on a professional air.
"Too much magnificence has struck in. You have, no doubt, a
well-developed case of pride and vanity."

"I haven't a single shred of either," protested Marjorie, laughing a
little at her father's tone, which was an exact imitation of their
former family physician. "That sounded just like good old Doctor Bates."

"Are you and Constance going to take Charlie to the matinee to-morrow,
dear?" asked her mother.

"No, Mother," returned Marjorie. Then as though determined to evade
further questioning, she asked: "May I go shopping with you?"

"I wish you would. You can select the material for your new dress and
the lace for that blouse I am making for you. It is so pretty. My new
fashion book came to-day. I have picked out several styles of gowns for
you."

"What did you pick out for me?" inquired Mr. Dean, ingenuously.

"You can't have any new clothes. Too much magnificence would strike in.
You would have, no doubt, a well-developed case of pride and vanity,"
retorted Marjorie, wickedly.

"Report at the guard house at once, for disrespectful conduct to your
superior officer," ordered Mr. Dean with great severity.

"Not to-night, thank you," bowed the disobedient lieutenant, as all
three rose from the table, "I'm going upstairs to my room to write a
letter."

Once in her room Marjorie went to her desk and opened it with a
reluctance born of the knowledge of a painful task to be performed.
Seating herself, she reached for her pen and nibbled the end soberly as
she racked her brain for the best way to begin a note to Constance.
Finally she decided and wrote:

"Dear Constance:

"I cannot come over to your house to-morrow or ever again. I know what
you wanted to tell me. It is too dreadful to think of. You should have
told me before. I will never let anyone know, so you need not worry. You
have hurt me terribly, and I can't forgive you yet, but I hope I shall
some day. I don't like to mention things, but for your own sake won't
you try to do what is right about the pin? I shall always speak to you
in school, for I don't wish the girls to know we have separated.

                                "Yours sorrowfully,

                                                "MARJORIE."

When she had finished, the all-too-ready tears had again flooded her
eyes and dropped unrestrained upon the green blotting pad on her desk.
After a little she slowly wiped her eyes, and, without reading what she
had written, folded the letter, addressed and stamped it. Slipping into
her coat, she wound a silken scarf about her head and went downstairs.

"I'm going out to the mailbox, Mother," she called, as she passed the
living-room door.

"Very well," returned Mrs. Dean, abstractedly. She was deep in her book
and did not glance up, for which Marjorie was thankful. If her mother
noticed her reddened eyelids, explanations would necessarily follow.

The next day dragged interminably. Even the usual pleasure of going
shopping with her captain could not mitigate the pain of yesterday's
shocking discovery. To Marjorie the bare idea of theft was abhorrent.
When, at the Hallowe'en dance, Mignon had accused Constance of taking
her bracelet, Marjorie's wrath at the insult to her friend had been
righteous and sweeping.

That night, as she sat opposite her mother in the living-room trying to
read one of the books she had received for Christmas the incident of the
missing bracelet and Mignon's accusation suddenly loomed up in her mind
like an unwelcome specter. Suppose Mignon had been right, after all.
Jerry had openly asserted that she did not believe Mignon had really
lost her bracelet, and in her anger Marjorie had secretly agreed with
the stout girl. Suppose Constance had taken it. What if she were one of
those persons one reads of in books whom continued poverty had made
dishonest, or perhaps she was a kleptomaniac? The last idea, though
unpleasant to contemplate, was not so repugnant to her as the first; but
she did not believe it to be true. Constance's partial confession,
coupled with her ready tears, was positive proof that she had been
conscious of her act of theft. There was only one other theory left; she
had found the pin and succumbed to the temptation of keeping it. Yet
Constance had always averred that she did not care for jewelry, and
would not wear it if she possessed it.

Marjorie went over these suppositions again and again, but each time her
theories ended with the bitter fact that, in spite of her tears,
Constance had kept her ill-gotten bauble.

The vacation which had promised so much, and which she had happily
supposed would be all too short, seemed endless. During the long days
that followed she received no word from the girl in the little gray
house. If Constance had received her letter, she made no sign, and this
served to add to Marjorie's belief in her unworthiness.

Jerry Macy's New Year's party proved a welcome relief from the hateful
experience through which she had passed. Although invited, Constance
was not among the merry gathering of young people, and Jerry loudly
lamented the fact. Mr. Stevens and Uncle John Roland, who furnished the
music for the dancing, greeted Marjorie with affectionate regard. It was
evident that they knew nothing of what had transpired. Constance was
ill, her father reported, but hoped to be able to return to school on
Tuesday. He thanked Marjorie for her remembrance of him and Charlie, and
Uncle John forgot himself and repeated everything after him with
grateful nods and smiles.

During the evening Marjorie frequently found herself near the two
musicians, and Lawrence Armitage, secretly disappointed because of
Constance's absence, also did considerable loitering in their immediate
vicinity. If the troubled little lieutenant had had nothing on her mind,
she would have spent a most delightful evening, for the Macy's enormous
living-room had been transformed into a veritable ballroom, where the
guests might dance without bumping elbows at every turn, while Hal and
Jerry were the most hospitable entertainers.

If Constance's father and foster uncle had not been present, she might
have forgotten her woes, but whenever she glanced at either, the
sorrowful face of the Mary girl rose before her. To make matters worse,
Jerry proposed to her that they call upon Constance the next day, and
Marjorie was obliged to refuse lamely without giving any apparent
reason. It was in the nature of a relief to her when the party broke up.
In spite of the gratifying knowledge that the girls had pronounced her
new white silk frock the prettiest gown of all, and that Hal Macy had
been her devoted cavalier, Marjorie Dean went to bed that night in a
most unhappy mood.

The Monday before she returned to school she began a long letter to
Mary. She and Mary had sworn that, though miles divided them, they would
tell each other their secrets. Resolved to keep her word, she had
written her heart out to her chum, then had read the letter and torn it
into little pieces. Having written only pleasant things of her new
friend to Mary, she could not bear to take away her good name with a few
strokes of her pen.

"If only Constance were true and honorable like Mary," she sighed as she
closed her desk, and selecting a book she wandered disconsolately
downstairs to the living-room to read; but her thoughts continually
reverted to her own grievance. "If she gives back my pin, I'll forgive
her," was her final conclusion as at last she laid her book aside with
an impatient sigh, and sitting down on a little stool near the fire,
stared gloomily into its ruddy depths; "but I never, never, never can
feel the same toward her again."

Marjorie went to school on Tuesday morning vaguely hoping that
Constance would see things in a finer light and act accordingly.
Unselfish in most respects, the poor little soldier had forgotten
everything save the fact that she was the injured one. To her it seemed
as though the other girl's crushing weight of half-acknowledged guilt
ought to make her a willing suppliant for pardon. During the early part
of the morning session she waited, half expecting to receive a contrite
plea for grace from the Mary girl.

When her French hour came, she hurried into the classroom, thinking that
she might see Constance before the class gathered; but Professor
Fontaine had closed the door and remarked genially, "_Bon jour,
mesdemoiselles. Comment vous portez vous, aujourd'hui_. I trost that you
have not forgotten your French during your 'oliday," when it opened
quietly to admit Constance.

Marjorie regarded her gravely, noting that she looked pale and tired.
Suddenly her eyes opened in wide, unbelieving amazement. With a
half-smothered exclamation that caused half the class to turn and look
at her, including Mignon, whose alert eyes traveled knowingly between
the two girls, she tore her gaze from the disturbing sight, and, putting
one hand over her eyes, leaned her head on her arm. For fastened at the
open neck of Constance's blouse was her butterfly pin.




CHAPTER XXI

MIGNON PLANS MISCHIEF


To Marjorie, torn between resentment of Constance's bold display of the
stolen pin and shame for her utter absence of honor, the French lesson
was a confused jumble. She heard but dimly the rise and fall of
Professor Fontaine's voice as he conducted the lesson, and when he
called upon her to recite she stared at him dazedly and finally managed
to stammer that she was not prepared.

"Ah, Mademoiselle Dean, I am of a certainty moch surprised that you
cannot translate thees paragraph," the little man declared
reproachfully. "I weel begeen eet for you, and you shall do the rest,
_N'est pas?_"

Marjorie stumbled through the paragraph with hot cheeks and a strong
desire to throw her book into the air and rush from the recitation. When
class was over she seized her books and left the room without looking in
Constance's direction.

The eyes of the latter followed her with an expression of perplexed,
questioning sorrow that, had Marjorie noted and interpreted as such,
might have caused her to doubt what seemed plain, thresh the matter out
frankly with Constance, and thus save them both many weeks of
misunderstanding and heartache.

At the close of the morning session Marjorie lingered until she was sure
that Constance had taken her wraps from the locker and departed. The
thought of her beloved pin ornamenting the other girl's blouse was too
bitter to be tamely borne. Fierce resentment crowded out her gentler
feelings, and she could not trust herself to come in contact with her
faithless classmate and remain silent.

On the steps of the school she met Jerry and Irma, who had posted
themselves to wait for her.

"I thought you had decided to stay in there all day," grumbled Jerry.

"It's only five minutes past twelve," protested Marjorie.

"I thought it was at least half-past," retorted Jerry. "Say, Marjorie,
didn't you say that you'd lost your butterfly pin?"

"Yes," replied Marjorie, shortly, bracing herself for what she felt
would follow. She was not the only one who had seen the pin in
Constance's possession.

"Did Constance Stevens find it?" quizzed Jerry.

"Yes."

"Oh, then that's all right. I saw her wearing it this morning; and I'm
not the only one who saw her, either. Mignon had her eye on it in French
class, and I wouldn't be surprised to hear of some hateful remark she
had made about it. You know, she still insists that Constance took her
bracelet. She might be mean enough to say that Constance found your pin
and didn't give it back to you."

Marjorie stared at Jerry in amazement. Without knowing it, the stout
girl had exactly stated the truth about the pin.

"You needn't stare at me like that," went on Jerry. "Of course, we know
that Constance wouldn't be so silly as to try to keep a pin belonging to
someone else that everyone recognized; but lots of girls would believe
it. I suppose you let Constance wear it because you two are so chummy;
but you'd better get it back and wear it yourself. Then Mignon can't say
a word."

"I'll think about it," was Marjorie's evasive answer, but once she had
said good-bye to the two girls she began to deliberate within herself as
to what she had best do. Here was an exigency against which she had
failed to provide. She had resolved never to betray Constance to the
girls, but now Constance had, by openly wearing the pin, betrayed
herself. Either she would be obliged to go to Constance and demand her
own or allow her to wear the bit of jewelry and create the impression
that she had sanctioned the wearing of it.

When she returned to school that afternoon she had half determined to
see Constance and put the situation fairly to her, but rather to her
relief Constance did not appear at the afternoon session, nor was she in
school the next day. When Friday came and she was still absent, Marjorie
was divided between her pride and a desire to go to the little gray
house and settle matters. On Saturday she was still halting between two
opinions, and it was four o'clock Saturday afternoon before she put on
her wraps with the air of one who has made up her mind and started for
the Stevens'.

As she approached the house she looked toward the particular window
where Charlie was so fond of stationing himself to peer out on the dingy
little street, but there was no sign of the boy's white, eager face. To
her vivid imagination the very house itself wore a sad, cheerless aspect
that filled her with a vague apprehension of some impending
unpleasantness.

She knocked briskly at the door, then waited a little. There was no
response. She knocked again, harder and longer, but still silence
unbroken by any footfall, reigned within. After pounding upon the door
at intervals for at least ten minutes, she turned and walked dejectedly
away from the house of denial, speculating as to what could possibly
have become of the Stevens'.

At the corner she almost ran against Mr. Stevens, who, with his soft
black felt hat pulled low over his forehead, was hurrying along, his
violin case under his arm.

"Oh, Mr. Stevens," cried Marjorie, "where is Constance? I have just come
from your house, and there is no one at home."

Mr. Stevens looked mildly surprised. "I thought you knew," he answered.
"Didn't Constance tell you she was going away? She and Charlie went to
New York City yesterday. They are to meet Constance's aunt there. It was
very unexpected. She received a letter from her aunt on Tuesday. I was
sure she had told you." Mr. Stevens' fine face took on an expression of
perplexity.

"I did not know it," responded Marjorie, soberly. "When will she
return?"

"I am not quite sure. I shall not know definitely until I hear from
her," was the discouraging reply.

"I'm sorry I didn't see her," was all Marjorie could find words for, as
she turned to go. "Good-bye, Mr. Stevens."

"Good-bye, Miss Marjorie." The musician bared his head, his thick, white
hair ruffling in the wind. "You will hear from Constance, no doubt."

"No doubt I won't," breathed Marjorie, as she walked on. "What would he
say, I wonder, if he knew? He'll never know from me, neither will anyone
else. I hope those girls will forget all about seeing Constance wear the
pin."

But the affair of the pin was destined not to sink into oblivion, for
the next morning Marjorie found on her desk the following note:

"Miss Dean:

"Do you think you are doing right in shielding a thief? It looks as
though a certain person either stole or found and kept a certain article
belonging to you and yet you allow her to wear it before your very eyes
without protest. If you do not immediately insist on the return of your
property and denounce the thief, we will put the matter before Miss
Archer, as this is not the first offense. This is the decision of
several indignant students who insist that the girls of the freshman
class shall be above reproach."

Marjorie's eyes flashed her contempt of the anonymous missive. She
folded it quietly, then, reaching into her desk, drew forth a sheet of
note paper and wrote:

"Miss La Salle:

"Although the note I found on my desk is not signed, I am sure that you
wrote it. I do not think you have the slightest right to dictate to me
in a personal matter. Miss Stevens and I are perfectly capable of
settling our own affairs without the help of any member of the freshman
class.

                                                "Marjorie Dean."

Mignon's pale face flushed crimson as she read the note which Marjorie
lost no time in sending to her via the student route, which was merely
the passing of it from desk to desk until it reached its destination.
With a scornful lifting of her shoulders she flung the note on her desk,
then snatching it up, tore it into tiny pieces.

When school was dismissed she lingered and twenty minutes afterward
emerged from Miss Archer's office in company with Marcia Arnold, an
expression of triumph in her black eyes.

When she reached home that afternoon she took from the drawer of her
dressing-table something small and shining and examined it carefully.
"It looks the same, but is it?" she muttered. "Where did the other come
from? I don't understand it in the least. Just the same, Marjorie Dean
thinks Miss Smarty Stevens took her pin. She was thunderstruck when she
saw that Stevens girl wearing it this morning. She's too much afraid of
not telling the truth to deny it in her letter. There's something gone
wrong with their friendship, too. I'm sure of it from the way they have
been acting. I don't know what it's all about, but I do know that this,"
she touched the small, shining object, "shall never help them solve
their problem."




CHAPTER XXII

PLANNING FOR THE MASQUERADE


On the morning following Mignon's visit to Miss Archer's office,
Marjorie was unpleasantly startled to hear Miss Merton call out
stridently just after opening exercises, "Miss Dean, report to Miss
Archer, at once."

A battery of curious eyes was turned in speculation upon Marjorie as she
walked the length of the study hall, outwardly composed, but inwardly
resentful at Miss Merton's tone, which, to her sensitive ears, bordered
on insult.

"Good morning, Miss Archer; Miss Merton said you wished to see me,"
began Marjorie, quietly, as she entered the outer office where Miss
Archer stood, reading a letter which her secretary had just handed to
her for inspection.

"Yes," returned the principal, briefly; "come with me." She led the way
to her inner office and, motioning to Marjorie to precede her, stepped
inside and closed the door.

"Sit here, Miss Dean," she directed, indicating a chair at one side of
her desk. Then, seating herself, she turned to the young girl, and said,
with kind gravity: "I sent for you this morning because I wish to speak
frankly to you of one of your classmates. I shall expect you to be
absolutely frank, too. Very grave complaints have been brought to me by
Miss La Salle concerning Constance Stevens. She insists that Miss
Stevens is guilty of the theft of her bracelet, which disappeared on the
night of the dance given by the young men of Weston High School. As I
left the gymnasium some time before the party was over, I knew nothing
of this, and no word of it was brought to me afterward.

"Miss La Salle also states that Miss Stevens has been wearing a gold
pin, in the form of a butterfly, which belongs to you and which you
advertised as lost. She declares that she is positive that Miss Stevens
found the pin and made no effort to return it to you, and that you are
shielding her from the effects of her own wrongdoing by allowing her to
continue to wear it. This latter seems to be a rather far-fetched
accusation, but Miss La Salle is so insistent in the matter that I was
going to settle that part of it, at least, by asking you where and when
you found your pin and whether you gave Miss Stevens permission to wear
it.

"This may seem to you, my dear, like direct interference in your
personal affairs, but it is necessary that this matter be cleared up at
once. Miss Stevens cannot afford to allow such detrimental reports to
be circulated about her through the school."

Miss Archer looked expectantly at Marjorie, who was strangely silent,
two signals of distress in her brown eyes.

"I cannot answer your questions, Miss Archer," she answered at last, her
clear tones a trifle unsteady.

The principal regarded her with amazed displeasure. Accustomed to having
the deciding voice in all matters pertaining to her position as head of
the school, she could not endure being crossed, particularly by a pupil.

"I must insist upon an answer, Miss Dean. Your silence is unfair, not
only to Miss Stevens, but to the school. If Miss Stevens is innocent of
any wrongdoing, now is the time to clear her name of suspicion. If she
is guilty, by telling the true circumstances concerning your pin, you
are doing the school justice. A person who deliberately appropriates
that which does not belong to him or to her is a menace to the community
in which he or she lives, and should be removed from it. Our school is
our community. It must be kept free from those who are a detriment to
it," concluded Miss Archer, her mouth settling into lines of obstinate
firmness.

The distress in Marjorie's face deepened. "I am sorry, Miss Archer, but
I can tell you nothing. Please don't think me stubborn and obstinate. I
can't help it. I--I have nothing to say."

"I have explained to you the necessity for perfect frankness on your
part, and you have refused to comply with my demand," reproved the
principal. "I am deeply disappointed in you, Miss Dean. I looked for
better things from you. The affair will have to stand as it is until
Miss Stevens returns. I am sorry that you will not assist me in clearing
it up." She made a gesture of dismissal. "That is all, I believe, this
morning. You may return to the study hall."

Without a word Marjorie rose and left the room, her eyes full of tears,
her proud spirit hurt to the quick. The icy reproach in the principal's
words was, indeed, hard to bear, and all for a girl who had proved
herself unworthy of friendship. Yet she could not help feeling a swift
pang of pity for Constance. How dreadful it would be for her when she
returned to Sanford and to school!

But Constance seemed in no hurry to return. Midyear, with its burden of
examinations, its feverish hopes and fears, came and went. Then followed
a three days' vacation, and the new term began with a great readjusting
of programs and classes. Marjorie passed her state examinations in
American history and physiology, and decided upon physical geography and
English history in their places, as both were term studies. She entered
upon her second term's work with little enthusiasm, however. The
disagreeable, almost tragic events following the holidays had left a
shadow on her freshman days, that had promised so much.

February came, smiled deceitfully, froze vindictively, threatened a
little, then thawed and froze again, as his next-door neighbor, March,
whisked resentfully down upon him, hurried him out of the running for a
whole year, and blustered about it for two weeks afterward. The swiftly
passing days, however, brought no word or sign concerning the absent
Constance, and, try as she might, Marjorie could not forget her.

Mignon La Salle, though greatly disappointed over the failure of her
plan to humiliate the musician's daughter, was craftily biding her time,
resolved to strike the moment Constance returned to school.

"Mignon certainly intends to make things interesting for Constance,"
declared Jerry to Marjorie, as the French girl switched haughtily by
them one mild afternoon in late March on the way home from school.

"Why do you say that?" asked Marjorie, quickly. "Have you heard anything
new?"

"Nothing startling," replied Jerry. "You know Irma and Susan Atwell used
to be best friends until they began chumming with Mignon and Muriel.
Well, Susan is awfully angry with Mignon for something she said about
her, so she has dropped her, and Muriel, too. She went over to Irma's
house the other night and cried and said she was sorry she'd been so
silly. She wanted to be friends with Irma again."

"What did Irma say?" asked Marjorie, breathlessly.

"Oh, she made up with her, then and there," informed Jerry with fine
disgust. "I'd have kept her waiting a while. She deserved it. She told
Irma she hoped I'd forgive her, but I didn't make any rash promises."

"What a hard-hearted person you are," smiled Marjorie. "But, tell me,
Jerry, what did you hear about Constance?"

"Oh, yes. That's what I started out to tell you. Mignon told Susan last
week that she was only waiting for Constance to come back to school to
take her to Miss Archer and accuse her of stealing her bracelet."

"How dreadful!" deplored Marjorie. "Perhaps Constance won't come back."

"Yes, she will. She wrote a note to Miss Archer when she went away
saying that she had to go to New York City on business, but would return
to school as soon as possible. Marcia Arnold saw the note, and told
Mignon. Mignon told Susan before they had their fuss. Susan told Irma,
and she told me. Almost an endless chain, but not quite," finished Jerry
with a cheerful grin.

"I should say so," returned Marjorie, in an abstracted tone. Her
thoughts were on the absent girl. She wondered why Constance had gone to
New York so suddenly and taken little Charlie with her. She wished she
had asked Mr. Stevens more about it.

"See here, Marjorie," Jerry's blunt tones interrupted her musing.
"What's the trouble between you and Constance? I know something is the
matter, but I'd like most awfully well to know what it is."

"I can't answer your question, Jerry," said Marjorie in a low tone.
"Would you care if I--if we didn't talk about Constance?"

"Not a bit," rejoined the stout girl good-naturedly. "Never tell
anything you don't want to tell. We'll change the subject. Let's talk
about the Sanford High dance. What character do you intend to
represent?"

"Is Sanford High going to give a party?" Marjorie voiced her surprise.

"Of course. The Sanford High girls give one every spring, and the Weston
boys give their dance in the fall."

"When is it to be?"

"Not until after Easter, and this year it's going to be a lot of fun. We
are to have a fairy-tale masquerade."

"I never heard of any such thing before."

"Neither did I," went on Jerry, "that is, until yesterday. The
committee just decided upon it. You see, the girls always give a fancy
dress party, but not always a masquerade. This year a freshman who was
on the committee proposed that it would be a good stunt to make everyone
dress as a character in some old fairy tale. The rest of the committee
liked the idea, so you had better get busy and hunt up your costume."

"But how did you happen to know so much about it?"

"Well," Jerry looked impressive. "I was on the committee and I happened
to be the freshman who proposed it."

"You clever girl!" exclaimed Marjorie, admiringly. "I think that is a
splendid idea. I wonder what I could go as?"

"Snow White," suggested Jerry, eyeing her critically. "I can get seven
of the Weston boys to do the Seven Little Dwarfs and follow you around."

"But Snow White had 'a skin like snow, cheeks as red as blood and hair
as black as ebony,'" quoted Marjorie. "I don't answer to that
description."

"You are pretty, and so was she, and that's all you need to care,"
returned Jerry, calmly. "Besides, the Seven Dwarfs will be great. Will
you do it?"

"All right," acquiesced Marjorie. "What are you going as?"

"One of the 'Fat Friars,'" giggled Jerry. "Don't you remember, 'Four
Fat Friars Fanning a Fainting Fly'? I'm going to ask three more stout
girls to join me. We'll wear long, gray frocks, get bald-headed wigs and
carry palmleaf fans. I don't know anyone who would be willing to go as
the 'Fainting Fly,' so we'll have to do without him, I guess."

"You funny girl!" laughed Marjorie. "But how will everyone know who is
who after the unmasking? There will be so many queens and princesses and
kings and courtiers."

"We thought of that and we are going to put up a notice for everyone to
carry cards. Some of the characters will be easy to guess without
cards."

"I must tell mother about it as soon as I go home and ask her to help me
plan Snow White's costume. When will we receive our invitations?"

"We only send printed invitations to the boys. Every girl in high school
is invited, of course. The invitations will be sent to the boys next
week, and the Sanford girls will be notified at once, so as to give them
plenty of time to plan their costumes."

"I wish it were to be next week," murmured Marjorie, after she had left
Jerry and turned into her own street. "Everything has been gloomy and
horrid for so long. I'd love to have a good time again, just to see how
it seemed."

She reflected rather sadly that the disagreeable happenings of her
freshman year had outweighed her good times. She had entered Sanford
High School with the resolve to like every girl there, and with the hope
that the girls would like her, but in some way everything had gone
wrong. Perhaps she had been to blame. She had been warned in the
beginning not to champion Constance Stevens. Yet the very girls who had
warned her could never have been her intimate friends. Her ideals and
theirs, if they had ideals, were too widely separated. No; she had been
right in standing up for Constance. The fault lay with the latter. It
was she who had betrayed friendship.

Determined to go no further into this most painful of subjects, Marjorie
resolutely centered her thoughts upon the coming party. The moment she
reached home she ran upstairs to her room. Sitting down on the floor
before her bookcase, she drew out a thick red volume of Grimms' Fairy
Tales and read the story of Snow White. To her joy she discovered that
the colored frontispiece was a picture of Snow White begging admittance
at the home of the Seven Little Dwarfs.

"I'll ask mother to make me a high-waisted white gown like this one,
with pale blue trimmings and a big blue sash," she planned. "I'll wear
my pale blue slippers, the ones that have no heels, and white silk
stockings. Thank goodness, my hair is curly. I'll let it hang loose on
my shoulders. Of course, it isn't as black as ebony; but then, I can't
help that." With the book still in her hand she ran down the stairs,
two at a time, to tell her mother.

What mother is not interested in her daughter's school fun and parties?
Mrs. Dean entered at once into the planning of the costume and suggested
that Snow White's cards be made in the shape of little apples, one half
colored red, the other half green, and her name written diagonally
across the surface of the apple.

Marjorie hailed the idea with delight. "May I buy the water-color paper
for the apples to-morrow, Captain?"

"Yes," replied Mrs. Dean. "You ought to begin them at once. What is
Constance going to wear? She hasn't been here for a long time. Poor
child, I suppose her family keep her busy. Why not ask her to dinner
some night this week, Marjorie?"

Marjorie flushed hotly. Her mother, who was busily engaged with an
intricate bit of embroidery, did not notice the added color in her
daughter's face.

"Constance is in New York visiting her aunt," returned Marjorie. "She
has been there for a long time. Charlie is with her. I don't know when
they will be home."

Something in her daughter's tone caused Mrs. Dean to glance quickly up
from her work. Marjorie was staring out of the window with unseeing
eyes.

"Constance has hurt Marjorie's feelings by not writing to her," was
Mrs. Dean's thought. Aloud she said: "Did you know before Constance went
to New York that she intended going?"

"No; she didn't tell me."

Marjorie volunteered no further information, and Mrs. Dean refrained
from asking questions. She thought she understood her daughter's
reticence. Marjorie naturally felt that Constance was neglectful and a
little ungrateful, but would not say so.

"I wish I could tell mother all about it," ruminated Marjorie, as she
went slowly upstairs to replace the Grimms'. "I can't bear to do it. I
suppose I shall some day, but it seems too dreadful to say, 'Mother,
Constance is a thief. She stole my butterfly pin. That's why she doesn't
come here any more.' It's like a disagreeable dream, and I wish I could
wake up some day to find that it's all been a dreadful mistake."

But light is sure to follow darkness, and the loyal little lieutenant's
awakening was nearer at hand than she could foresee.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE AWAKENING


It was wilful, changeable April's last night, and, being in a tender
reminiscent mood, she dispensed her balmiest airs for the benefit of the
distinguished company who filled to overflowing the gymnasium of Sanford
High School, prepared to dance her last hours away. For the heroes and
heroines of fairy-tale renown had apparently left the books that had
held them captive for so long, and, jubilant in their unaccustomed
freedom, promenaded the floor of the gymnasium in twos, threes or in
whole companies.

Simple Simon, whose tall, lank figure bore a startling resemblance to
that of the Crane, paraded the floor, calm and unafraid, with none less
personage than the terrible Blue Beard. Hansel and Gretel immediately
formed a warm attachment for Jack and Jill, and the quartet wandered
confidently about together. Little Miss Muffet, in spite of her reputed
daintiness, clung to the arm of Bearskin, who, despite the fact that his
furry coat was that of a buffalo instead of a bear, was a unique success
in his line. One suspected, too that the Brave Little Tailor, whose
waistcoat bore the modest inscription, "Seven at One Blow," and who
tripped over his long sword at regular two-minute intervals, had an
impish, freckled countenance. The straight, lithe figure of the youth
with the Magic Fiddle reminded one of Lawrence Armitage, while his
constant companion, Aladdin, a sultan of unequaled magnificence, had a
peculiar swing to his gait that reminded sharp-eyed observers of Hal
Macy. The Four Fat Friars loomed large and gray, and fanned imaginary
flies with commendable energy, while Snow White, accompanied by her
faithful dwarfs, made a radiantly beautiful figure and was greeted with
ejaculations of admiration wherever she chose to walk.

There were kings and courtiers, queens and goose girls. There were
jesters and princesses, old witches and fairies. Mother Goose was there.
So were Jack Horner, Bo-peep, Little Boy Blue and many more of her
nursery children, not to mention two fearsome giants, at least ten feet
high, whose voluminous cloaks concealed figures which appeared far too
tall to be true. Rapunzel trailed about on the arm of her prince, her
beautiful hair, which looked suspiciously like nice new rope, confined
in a braid at least three inches wide and hanging gracefully to her
feet. Cinderella came to the party in her old kitchen dress, accompanied
by her fairy godmother, and Beauty was attended by a strange being clad
in a huge fur robe and a papier-mache tiger's head, which was
immediately recognized as the formidable Beast.

The gallery of the gymnasium was crowded with the friends and families
of the maskers who were admitted by tickets, a limited number of which
had been issued. When the first notes of the grand march sounded there
was a great craning of necks and a loud buzz of expectation as the gaily
dressed company formed into line, and while the brilliant procession
circled the gymnasium a lively guessing went on as to who was who in
Fairyland.

Mother Goose led the march with the Brave Little Tailor, who frisked
along in high glee and executed weird and wonderful steps for the
edification of his aged partner and the rest of the company in general.

"Isn't it great, though," commented Aladdin to his partner, who was none
other than Snow White. "I know who you are. I'm sure I do. If I guess
correctly will you tell me?"

Snow White nodded her curly head.

"All right, here goes. You are Marjorie Dean."

"I'm so glad you guessed right the first time," declared Snow White in a
muffled voice from behind her mask. "I've been perfectly crazy to talk
to someone. It's a gorgeous party, isn't it, Hal?"

"The nicest one the Sanford girls have ever given the boys," returned
Hal Macy, warmly. "You'll give me the next dance, won't you, Marjorie?"

"Of course," acquiesced Marjorie. "I think the grand march is going to
end in a minute."

She danced the first dance with Hal. After that the Youth with the Magic
Fiddle claimed her, and when he asked in a tone of deep concern, "When
do you think Constance will be home, Marjorie?" she had no difficulty in
recognizing Lawrence Armitage.

"I don't know, Laurie," she said rather confusedly. "I--I haven't heard
from her."

"She wrote me one letter," declared Laurie, gloomily. "I answered it,
but she hasn't written me a line since."

"Then you know----" began Marjorie. She did not finish.

"Know what?" asked Laurie, impatiently.

"Nothing," was the answer.

"That's just it!" exclaimed the boy. "I know exactly nothing about
Constance. I thought you'd be sure to know something."

Just then the dance came to an end. Jack and the Beanstalk, clad in
doublet and hose, and decorated with long green tendrils of that
fruitful vine, his famous hatchet slung over his shoulder by a stout
leather thong, claimed her for the next dance, and she had no time to
exchange further words with Laurie.

The moment of unmasking was to follow the ninth dance. The eighth was
just about to begin. Marjorie caught sight of a huge lumbering figure
in princely garments heading in her direction, and turning fled toward
the dressing-room. She was quite sure of the prince's identity, which
was that of a youth whom she particularly disliked. Just as she reached
the sheltering door a familiar voice called out a low, cautious,
"Marjorie." Turning, she saw a stout, gray-robed friar hurrying toward
her.

"I've hunted all over for you," declared the friar, in Jerry's
unmistakable tones. "Come into the dressing-room. Someone is waiting to
see you there."

"Waiting to see me!" exclaimed Marjorie, in surprise.

"That's what I said. Come along." Jerry caught her arm and pulled her
gently into the dressing-room. At one end of the room stood the dingy
figure of Cinderella, deep in conversation with her fairy godmother.

At the sound of the opening door Cinderella wheeled and, with a
quavering little cry of "Marjorie!" ran forward to meet the newcomers.

Marjorie stopped short and stared unbelievingly at the shabbily clothed
figure, but Cinderella had now torn off her mask and was fumbling with
trembling eagerness in the pocket of her apron.

"Here it is, Marjorie, dear! I never dreamed you had one like it. No
wonder you felt dreadfully that day. Look at it." She thrust a small
glittering object into Marjorie's limp hand.

Marjorie regarded the object with a look of growing amazement, which
suddenly changed to one of alarm. "It isn't mine!" she gasped. "It's
exactly like it except for one thing. Mine has no pearls here." She
touched the tips of the golden butterfly's wings. "Oh, Constance, can
you ever forgive me?" The pretty butterfly pin slipped from her lax
fingers and Marjorie burst into tears.

"Don't cry, Marjorie," said Jerry, with unusual gentleness. "You didn't
know. It was just one of those miserable misunderstandings. Constance
wants to tell you about the pin."

"But how--where----" quavered Marjorie.

"Oh, I had an idea that there was some kind of a misunderstanding, so I
wrote Constance and asked her to come home as soon as she could,"
explained Jerry. "Her father gave me her address. She was coming home
next week, anyhow, but I wrote her again and asked her to get here in
time for the dance. The minute I saw that butterfly pin I asked her
straight out and out where she got it. She told me, and then I knew that
the thing for me to do was to bring you two together. She only came home
last night, so we had to plan a costume in a hurry. You haven't said a
word about her fairy godmother, either. Take off your mask, dear fairy
godmother."

"Irma!" cried Marjorie, as she glimpsed a laughing face. "Oh, it's too
wonderful!" She wound two penitent arms around Constance and kissed her.

"I guess that will settle Mignon," commented Jerry, in triumph. "It is a
shame, but I suppose your butterfly pin is really lost. Constance will
tell you the history of hers."

"I wish the bracelet problem could be solved, too," sighed Constance.
"Jerry tells me that Mignon is going to accuse me of taking it when I go
back to school. How can she be so cruel? I don't remember seeing it in
the dressing-room on the night of the Weston dance."

"But I do!" called out a positive voice that caused them all to face the
intruder in astonishment.

A slim, pale-faced girl, dressed as a shepherdess, emerged from behind a
curtain which hung in a little alcove at one end of the dressing-room.

"Please excuse me for listening," apologized the girl. "I was standing
here looking out of the window when you girls came in and began to talk.
Before I could make up my mind what it was all about I heard Miss
Stevens talking about Miss La Salle's bracelet and the Weston dance. Did
Miss La Salle accuse you of taking her bracelet that night?" she asked,
her eyes upon Constance.

"Yes," began Constance, "she----"

"Miss La Salle is the real thief," interrupted the girl, dryly. "I saw
her take off her bracelet and lay it on the dressing table. I saw her
come and take it away after Miss Stevens left the room. I had to catch
the last train home that night. You know, I don't live in Sanford, and I
was sitting over in one corner of the dressing-room behind a chair
putting on my shoes. Neither Miss Stevens nor Miss La Salle saw me. I
wondered what Miss La Salle meant by doing as she did, but I never
understood until this minute. I'm glad I happened to be there that night
and I'm glad I happen to be here now. If there is likely to be any
trouble, just send for me. I'm Edna Halstead, of the junior class."

The four girls had received this rapidly repeated information with
varying degrees of amazement. It was Marjorie who first sprang forward
and offered her hand to Edna Halstead. "It is the last word we needed to
clear Constance," she asserted, joyously. "Will you go to Miss Archer
with us on Monday?"

"I should be glad to do so. I never could endure that La Salle girl,"
was the frank response.

"We'll go together," planned Jerry. "Every one of you meet me in Miss
Archer's living-room office on Monday morning before school begins."

"I must go home now," demurred Constance. "I don't wish anyone to know
that I've been here."

"Not even Laurie?" asked Marjorie, slyly. "He spoke of you to-night."

Constance smiled. "You may tell him after the 'Home, Sweet Home' waltz."

"There goes the music for the ninth dance," informed Jerry, who had
stepped to the door.

"Oh, gracious, I promised this dance to Hal! I can't go. I simply must
hear about the pin, Connie."

"I'll tell you just one thing about it," stipulated Constance, "but the
rest must wait until to-morrow, for Hal is too nice a boy to leave
without a partner."

"Then tell me that one thing," begged Marjorie.

"My aunt sent me the pin," was the quick answer. "Now kiss me good-night
and hurry along to Hal."

And Marjorie kissed her and went with happiness singing joyfully in her
heart.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE EXPLANATION


Owing to the fervent manner in which each succeeding dance was encored,
it was after midnight before the fairy-tale masquerade came to an end
and the lords and ladies of fairy lore became everyday boys and girls
again; and went home congratulating themselves on the blessed fact that
to-morrow was Saturday and that they could make up lost sleep the next
morning.

Marjorie Dean, however, was not among the late sleepers. She was up and
about the house at her usual hour, for the day held promise of unusual
interest. First of all, Constance was coming to see her at ten o'clock.
Then too, it was May day, a gloriously sunshiny May day, without the
faintest trace of cloud in the deep blue sky. As a third pleasant
anticipation, her class had planned a Mayday picnic at a point about
two miles up the river. It had been an unusually early spring, and the
wild flowers had blossomed in such profusion in the neighboring woods
about the town and along the river that the picnic had been planned
with a view to spending the day in gathering as many of them as
possible.

The expedition having been organized by the officers of the class there
was no question of who should be invited or who should be left out. The
class was exhorted to turn out in a body, and with the exception of a
few girls who had made plans for that Saturday prior to their knowledge
of the picnic, the freshmen of 19-- had promised to attend.

"Oh, dear, I wish ten o'clock were here!" sighed Marjorie as she
straightened the last object on her dressing table and viewed with
satisfaction the immaculate order to which she had reduced her room.
Keeping her room clean and dainty was almost a sacred obligation with
Marjorie. Her mother had spared neither time nor expense to make it a
marvel of pink-and-white beauty. The furniture was of white maple, the
thick, soft rug had a cream background scattered with small pink roses.
The window curtains were cunning ruffled affairs of fine white dotted
Swiss, while the window draperies were in pink-and-white French
cretonne. An attractive willow stand, which stood beside the bed, the
two pretty willow rockers piled high with pink and white cushions and
the creamy wallpaper with its graceful border of pink roses made the
room a perpetual joy to its appreciative owner. Marjorie always
referred to it as her "house" and when at home spent a great deal of her
time there.

But this morning the May sunshine poured rapturously in at her open
windows, touched her brown hair with mischievous golden fingers that
left gleaming imprints on her curls, and mutely coaxed her to come out
and play.

"I can't stand it indoors another minute," she breathed impatiently.
"It's almost ten. I'll walk down to the corner. Perhaps I'll see
Constance coming."

As she was about to leave the window she caught a glimpse of a slender
blue figure far down the street. With a cry of, "Oh, there she is!"
Marjorie raced out of her room, down the stairs and across the lawn to
the gate.

"You dear thing!" she called, her hands extended.

The next instant the two girls were embracing with a degree of affection
known only to those who, after blind misunderstanding, once more see the
light.

Tears of contrition stood in Marjorie's eyes as she led Constance into
the house and upstairs to her room. "Can you ever forgive me?" she
faltered, pushing Constance gently into a chair and drawing her own
opposite that of her friend.

"There is nothing to forgive," returned Constance, unsteadily. "You
didn't know. If only I had made you stay that day until we came to an
understanding! When you said 'Good-bye' in that queer tone, I called to
you to wait, for it seemed to me you were angry; but you had gone. Then
your note came. I didn't know how you could possibly have learned about
the pin, for I hadn't told a soul besides father and Uncle John. It
occurred to me that perhaps you had seen Uncle John and he had told you.
When I read what you said about not seeing me again I thought just one
thing, that, knowing my story, you didn't care to be friends with me any
more."

"What do you mean, Constance?" Marjorie's query was full of compelling
insistence. "I don't know any story about you."

"I know that you don't, dear; but I thought you knew. When Uncle John
came in that afternoon I asked him if he had seen you in the last two
days, and he said 'no,' and then 'yes.' I asked him if he had told you
about what had happened to me, and he declared that he couldn't
remember. I was sure that he had told you, because he often says that
when he is afraid father or I won't approve of something he has done.
That is the reason I didn't come to see you. Then I went to New York in
a hurry without dreaming of what your letter really meant. Jerry wrote
me two days before I had planned to come home. So I changed my plans and
started for Sanford the same day her letter reached me. Charlie was so
much better that I wasn't needed."

"Charlie?" repeated Marjorie, in bewildered interrogation.

"Yes," nodded Constance. "Haven't you seen father since I left? Didn't
he tell you?"

"Only once. I--he--I didn't let him know about us. It was right after
you went away. He said you had taken Charlie with you. I met him in the
street and stopped only a minute. I had come from your house that day
but there was no one at home. I couldn't bear to let things go on as
they had.

"Now," declared Marjorie, drawing a long breath, "begin at the beginning
and tell me every single thing."

"I will," assured Constance, emphatically. "Let me see. It began the day
after Christmas. A letter came from New York in the morning mail
addressed to father. I gave it to him, and after he read it he sat so
still and looked so white that I thought he was going to faint. Then he
made me come and sit down beside him and told me that the letter was
from my mother's sister in New York and that she was rich and wanted me
to come and live with her.

"I said that I would never desert my own father no matter how poor he
was, and then he told me that he was only my foster father, just as he
was Charlie's. That my own father had been his best friend when they
were boys. Later on, my father became a worthless, drunken wretch and my
mother had to do sewing to take care of herself and me. My mother's
family never forgave her for marrying my father and would not help her.
She was not strong and could not stand it to be so poor and work so
hard. She died when I was a year old, and just a month afterward my
father died with pneumonia. No one wanted me, so I was put in an orphan
asylum, but Father Stevens, who had been trying to find my father, heard
where I was and took me to live with him. He wrote to my aunt first, but
she said she didn't want me. That is the first part of my story."

"It sounds like a story in a book," said Marjorie, softly. "Go on,
Connie."

"This letter that father received was from my aunt," continued
Constance. "She had been trying to find us for more than two years.
Finally, she saw father's name signed to an article in the musical
magazine, so she wrote a letter and asked the publishers to forward it.
She said in the letter that she was now an old woman who had found that
blood was thicker than water, and that she wanted her sister's daughter,
who must now be a young woman, to come and live with her. With the
letter came a jeweler's box, and in the box was the butterfly pin. She
sent it to me as a Christmas gift.

"I cried and said I would not go, but father said it was the opportunity
of my life time and that I must. He said that he had no legal right to
me and that he loved me too dearly to stand in my way. It almost broke
my heart. How I hated that butterfly and my aunt, too. When you came to
see me that unlucky day I was feeling the worst. That very night I wrote
my aunt a long letter. I told her just how I felt, how much I loved
father and Charlie and poor old Uncle John and that I could never, never
give them up. Father didn't know I wrote the letter. He thought I was
becoming resigned to going away. I went back to school and wore the pin,
as my aunt had asked me to do in a little note enclosed in father's
letter.

"Then her letter came and it was so much nicer than the other that I
cried out of pure happiness. She asked me to bring Charlie to New York.
She knew a famous specialist who she thought might help, if not cure
him. She asked me to make her a visit and said she would never wish me
to come to live with her except of my own free will.

"We went to New York as you know, and, Marjorie"--Constance made an
impressive pause--"Charlie is going to be entirely well in a little
while. The specialist operated on his hip and the operation was
successful. He will be able to walk before very long. When he knew I was
coming home he said, 'Tell Marjorie that I don't need to ask Santa Claus
for a new leg next year, because the good, kind man she told me about
fixed mine.'"

"Dear little Charlie," murmured Marjorie. "I'm so glad."

A pleasant silence fell upon the two young girls. So much had happened
that for a brief moment each was busy with her own thoughts.

"Are you coming back to school to finish the year, Constance?" asked
Marjorie, at last.

"Yes. I am going to try to make up for lost time. I'll take in June the
examinations I should have tried in January. I hope to be a Sanford
sophomore, Marjorie. Aunt Edith is coming to visit us this summer. She
is going to bring Charlie home."

Constance remained with Marjorie until almost noon.

"I wish you'd stay to luncheon," coaxed the little lieutenant.

"I can't. I'm sorry. I promised father I'd be home at noon."

"Then I wish you were going to the picnic this afternoon."

Constance shook her head, looking wistful, nevertheless.

"I'd rather not. Mignon will be there. It is better to be out of sight
and out of mind until after Monday."

"Everything is turning out beautifully," sighed Marjorie. "There's only
one thing more that I could possibly wish for."

"What is that?" asked Constance quickly.

"My lost butterfly."

"Perhaps it will fly back home when you least expect it," consoled
Constance.

"Lost pins don't fly," retorted Marjorie. "If they did my butterfly
would have come back to me long ago."

But, even then, though she could not know it, her cherished butterfly
was poising its golden wings for the homeward flight.




CHAPTER XXV

MARJORIE DEAN TO THE RESCUE


By one o'clock that afternoon 19-- had assembled at the big elm tree on
the river road which had been chosen as a meeting place. The flower
hunters had planned to follow the road for a mile to a point where a
boat house, which had a small teashop connected with it, was situated.
Owing to the continued spring weather the proprietor had opened the
place earlier than usual and it was decided that the picnickers should
make this their headquarters, returning there for tea when they grew
tired of roaming the neighboring woods.

Marjorie Dean had not hailed the prospect of 19--'s picnic with
enthusiasm. She did not welcome the idea of coming into close contact
with the little knot of freshmen that were loyal to Mignon La Salle's
interests. However, it would be a pleasure to walk in the fresh spring
woods and gather flowers, so she started for the rendezvous that
afternoon determined to have the best kind of a time possible under the
circumstances.

She had promised to call for Jerry, but the latter, accompanied by
Irma, met her halfway between the two houses.

"I thought you were never coming," grumbled the stout girl, in her
characteristic fashion.

"I've heard those words before," giggled Marjorie. "Haven't you, Irma?"

"Something very similar," laughed Irma.

Jerry grinned broadly.

"Shouldn't be surprised if you had," she admitted. "It's the first May I
ever remember that it hasn't rained. I hope the weather doesn't change
its mind and pour before we get home."

"Don't speak of it," cautioned Irma, superstitiously. "You'll bring rain
down upon us if you do. May is a weepy month, you know."

"Weeps or no weeps, I suppose we'll have the pleasure of seeing our dear
friends, Mignon and Muriel, to-day. I could weep for that," growled
Jerry, resentfully.

Arrived at the elm tree, the girls found the majority of their
classmates already there. To Marjorie's secret disgust, Marcia Arnold
was among the number of upper-class girls chosen to chaperon the
picnickers.

"Mignon's work," confided Jerry, as she caught sight of Marcia. "I hope
she falls into the river and gets a good wetting," she added, with
cheerful malice.

"Jerry!" expostulated Irma in horror. "You mustn't say such awful
things."

"I didn't say I hoped she'd get drowned," flung back Jerry. "I'd just
like to see her get a good ducking."

It was impossible not to laugh at Jerry, who, encouraged by their
laughter, made various other uncomplimentary remarks about the offending
junior.

The picnic party set out for the boathouse with merry shouts and echoing
laughter. The quiet air rang with the melody of school songs welling
from care-free young throats as the crowd of rollicking girls tramped
along the river road.

Spring had not been niggardly with her flower wealth, and gracious,
smiling May trailed her pink-and-white skirts over carpets of living
green, starred with hepaticas and spring beauties, while, from under
clusters of green-brown leaves, the trailing arbutus lifted its shy,
delicate face to peep out, the loveliest messenger of spring.

The girls pounced upon the fragrant clumps of blossoms and began an
enthusiastic filling of baskets. Held captive by the lure of the waking
woods, the time slipped by unnoticed, and it was after four o'clock
before the majority of the flower-hunters turned their steps toward the
boathouse.

Mignon La Salle, Muriel Harding, Marcia Arnold and half a dozen girls
who were worshipful admirers of the French girl, soon found flower
gathering decidedly monotonous.

"Let's hurry out of these stupid woods," proposed Mignon. "My feet are
damp and I'm sure I saw a snake a minute ago."

"Let's go canoeing," proposed Muriel Harding, as they came in sight of
the boathouse.

"The very thing," exulted Mignon. "Let me see; there are nine of us.
That will be three in a canoe. I'll hire the canoes and tell the man to
send the bill to my father."

With quick, catlike springs, she ran lightly down the bank, across the
road and disappeared into the boathouse. Ten minutes later three canoes
floated on the surface of the river, swollen almost to the banks by
April's frequent tearful outbursts. Mignon stood on the shore and gave
voluble orders as the girls cautiously took seats in the bobbing craft.

"Get in, Marcia," she commanded, pointing to the third canoe.

Marcia obeyed with nervous expressions of fear.

An hour later, from a little slope just inside the woods, Marjorie and
her friends, who had reluctantly directed their steps toward the
boathouse, glimpsed the returning canoeing party through the trees. The
canoers had lifted their voices in song, and Marcia Arnold, forgetful of
her fears, was singing as gaily as the rest.

"It's dangerous to go canoeing now," commented Jerry, judicially. "The
river's too high."

"Can you swim?" asked Irma, irrelevantly of Marjorie.

"Yes," nodded Marjorie. "I won a prize at the seashore last year
for----"

A sharp, terror-freighted scream rang out. The eyes of the trio were
instantly fastened upon the river, where floated an overturned canoe
with two girls struggling near it in the water. They saw the one girl
strike out for shore, and, unheeding her companions' wild cries, swim
steadily toward the river bank.

"Oh!" gasped Marjorie. Then she darted down the slope, scattering the
flowers from her basket as she ran. At the river's edge she threw aside
her sweater and, sitting down on the ground, tore off her shoes. Poising
herself on the bank, she cut the water in a clean, sharp dive and, an
instant later, came up not far from Marcia Arnold, who was making
desperate efforts to keep afloat.

A few skilful strokes and she had reached the now sinking secretary's
side. Slipping her left hand under Marcia's chin, she managed to keep
her head above water and support her with her left arm while she struck
out strongly for shore with her right. The water was very cold, but the
distance was short, and Marjorie felt herself equal to her task.

To the panic-stricken girls on shore it seemed hours, instead of not
more than ten minutes, before Marjorie reached the bank with her burden.
Willing hands grasped Marcia, who, with unusual presence of mind for one
threatened by drowning, had tried to lighten Marjorie's brave effort to
rescue her. Once on dry land she dropped back unconscious, while
Marjorie clambered ashore, little disturbed by her wetting.

It was Jerry, however, who now rose to the occasion.

"Marjorie Dean," she ordered, "go into that tea shop this minute. I'm
going to my house to get you some dry clothes. I'll be back in a little
while."

Marjorie allowed herself to be led into the back room of the little
shop, where Marcia was already being divested of her wet clothing.
Fifteen minutes afterward the two girls sat garbed in voluminous
wrappers, belonging to the boat tender's wife, sipping hot tea. Marjorie
smiled and talked gaily with her admiring classmates, but Marcia sat
white and silent.

Suddenly a girl entered the room and pushed her way through the crowd of
girls to Marcia's side. It was Muriel Harding.

"How do you feel, Marcia?" she asked tremulously.

"I'm all right now," quavered Marcia.

Muriel turned impulsively to Marjorie, and bending down, kissed her
cheek. "You are a brave, brave girl, Marjorie Dean, and I hope some day
I'll be worthy of your friendship." Then she turned and fairly ran from
the room.

Before Marjorie could recover from her surprise, Jerry's loud, cheerful
tones were heard outside.

"Here's a whole wardrobe," she proclaimed, setting down two suitcases
with a flourish. "I came back in our car, and as soon as you girls are
dressed, I'll take you home, and as many more as the car will hold," she
added genially.

It was a triumphant little procession that marched to the spot where the
Macy's huge car stood ready. As Marjorie put her foot on the step a
girl's voice called out, "Three cheers for Marjorie Dean!" and the car
glided off in the midst of a noisy but heartfelt ovation.

They were well down the road when Marjorie felt a timid hand upon hers.
Marcia Arnold's eyes looked penitently into her own. "Will you forgive
me, Marjorie?" she said, almost in a whisper. "I've been so hateful."

"Don't ever think of it again," comforted Marjorie, patting the other
girl's hand.

"I must think of it," returned Marcia, earnestly. "I--I can't talk about
it now, but may I come to see you to-morrow afternoon? I have something
to tell you."

"Come by all means," invited Marjorie. "I must say good-bye now. Here we
are at my house. I hope mother won't be too much alarmed when I tell
her. I'll have to explain Jerry's clothes. They are not quite a perfect
fit, as you can see."

Marcia held the young girl's hand between her own. "I'll come to see you
at three o'clock to-morrow afternoon. Maybe I can show you then how
deeply I feel what you did for me to-day."

"I wonder what she is so mysterious over," thought Marjorie, as she ran
up the steps. "I never dreamed that she and I would be friends. And
Muriel, too. How perfectly dear she was. But"--Marjorie stopped short in
the middle of the veranda--"what do you suppose became of Mignon?"




CHAPTER XXVI

LETTING BYGONES BE BYGONES


Marjorie touched the button of the electric bell for admittance, but her
finger had scarcely left it when the door was opened by her mother, who
regarded her daughter with mingled amazement and alarm.

"Why, Marjorie!" she cried. "What has happened to you?"

"Don't be frightened, Mother. I know I look awfully funny!" Marjorie
stepped into the hall, with a superb disregard for her strange
appearance, assumed with a view to calming Mrs. Dean's fears.

"I--a canoe tipped over and I helped one of the girls out of the river
and got wet. My clothes are down at the boathouse drying. Jerry went
home and brought back some of hers for me. That's why I look so
different. She didn't come here for fear of scaring you."

"You have been in the river!" gasped her mother in horror, "and it's
unusually high just now."

"But it didn't hurt me a bit," averred Marjorie, cheerfully. "I can
swim, and someone had to help Marcia. Come upstairs with me while I get
into my own clothes and I'll tell you all about it."

They had reached her room and Mrs. Dean was eyeing her lively little
lieutenant doubtfully. "Are you sure you feel well, Marjorie?" she asked
anxiously.

"Perfectly splendid, Captain," was the extravagant assurance, as
Marjorie gently backed her mother into a chair. "I'm going to get out of
Jerry's clothes and into my own and then we'll have a nice comfy old
talk."

Slipping into a one-piece frock of blue linen, Marjorie brushed her
dampened brown curls thoroughly dry and let them fall over her
shoulders. Placing a sofa pillow on the floor close to her mother, she
settled herself cozily at her mother's side and leaned against her knee,
looking far more like a little girl than a young woman of seventeen.

It was a very long talk, for there was much to be said, and it lasted
until the sun dropped low in the west and the early twilight shadows
fell.

A sudden loud ring of the doorbell sent Marjorie scurrying to the door.
She opened it to find a messenger boy, bearing a long, white box with
the name of Sanford's principal florist upon it.

"For Miss Marjorie Dean," said the boy, handing her the box.

"Oh!" ejaculated the surprised lieutenant, almost dropping the box in
her astonishment. Carrying it to the living-room table, she lifted the
lid and exclaimed again over its fragrant contents. Exquisite,
long-stemmed pink roses had been someone's tribute to Marjorie, and a
card tucked in among their perfumed petals proclaimed that someone to be
Harold Macy. At the bottom of the card was inscribed in Hal's boyish
hand, "To my friend, Marjorie Dean, a real heroine."

Marjorie had scarcely recovered from this pleasant shock when her father
appeared upon the scene and gathered her into his arms with an anxious,
"How's my brave little lieutenant?"

"Why, General, who told you?" cried Marjorie. "I never dreamed you'd
hear of it."

"It came to me through Mr. Arnold, who has the next office to mine,"
said Mr. Dean. "Mrs. Arnold telephoned him as soon as her daughter
reached home. She was afraid he might hear an incorrect report of it
from some other source."

"We never thought of that. We should have telephoned you. But it's my
fault. I kept mother up in my room and talked so long to her that she
forgot it," avowed Marjorie, apologetically.

"It's too late for apologies," Mr. Dean assumed an air of deep injury.
Then he laughed and drew from his coat pocket a small package. "Here's
an appreciation of bravery," he declared. "To the brave belongs the
golden circlet of courage. We might also call it your commission to
first lieutenancy. I think you've won your promotion."

Marjorie's second surprise was a gold bracelet, delicately chased, for
which she had sighed more than once.

Sunday dawned as radiantly as had the preceding day. Marjorie went to
church in a peculiarly exalted mood, and came home feeling at peace with
the world. After dinner she took a book and went out into a little
vine-covered pagoda built at one end of the lawn, which was fitted with
rustic seats and a small table. Here it was that she and her captain had
planned to spend many of the long summer afternoons reading and sewing,
and it was here that Marcia found her.

"I have something for you, Marjorie," she said in a low voice. Then she
opened a little silver mesh bag and drawing forth a small, glittering
object handed it to the other girl.

Marjorie's eyes opened wide. With a gurgle of joy she caught the little
object and fingered it lovingly. "My very own butterfly! Where in the
world did you find it, Marcia?"

"I didn't find it," returned Marcia, huskily.

"Then who did?"

"Mignon. She found it the day after you lost it. I don't like to tell
you these things, but I believe it is right that you should know. She
kept it merely to hurt you. She knew you were fond of it. Muriel told
her all about your receiving it as a farewell gift from your friends.
I--I--am to blame, too. I knew she had it. She intended to give it back
after a while. Then she saw Miss Stevens with one like it and noticed
the queer way you looked at her pin in French class that day. She is
very shrewd and observing. She suspected that you girls had quarreled,
and so she put two and two together. She actually hates Miss Stevens,
and told me she would never give the pin back if she could make Miss
Stevens any trouble by keeping it.

"Then she went to Miss Archer and told her about her bracelet and the
pin, too." Marcia paused, looking miserable.

"Miss Archer sent for me and questioned me about my pin," said Marjorie,
gravely. "She is vexed with me still because I wouldn't say anything.
You see I had misjudged Constance. I thought she had found it and kept
it. It is only lately that I learned what a dreadful mistake I made. I
think I ought to let you know, Marcia, that Constance is in Sanford. She
is coming back to school on Monday and going straight to Miss Archer's
office to prove her innocence. Constance was Cinderella at the dance
Friday night. Jerry made her come to the party on purpose to bring us
together. Constance's butterfly pin was a present from her aunt. We know
the truth about Mignon's bracelet, too. Did you know that Mignon never
lost it, Marcia? She only pretended that she had."

The secretary shook her head in emphatic denial. "I'm not guilty of
that, at least. I hope I'll never do anything underhanded or
dishonorable again. It's dreadful to think that Miss Archer will have to
know what a despicable girl I've been, but that's part of my punishment.
I suppose she won't have me for her secretary any more."

Marcia's face wore an expression of complete resignation. She had been a
party to a dishonorable act, and her reaping promised to be bitter
indeed.

"It means a whole lot to you to be secretary, doesn't it, Marcia?" asked
Marjorie, slowly.

"Yes. This is my third year. I've been saving the money to go to
college. Father couldn't afford to pay all my expenses. I----" Marcia
broke down and covered her face with her hands.

Marjorie regarded the secretary with a puzzled frown. She was apparently
turning over some problem in her mind.

"Marcia, how did you obtain my butterfly from Mignon?"

Marcia's hands dropped slowly from her face. "I went to her house this
morning and made her give it to me. She tried to make me promise that I
would say she found it only a day or two ago. I didn't promise. I'm glad
I can say that."

"Would you go with me to her home?" asked Marjorie, abruptly. "I have
thought of a way to settle the whole affair without Miss Archer knowing
about either of you."

"Oh, if it could only be settled among ourselves!" cried Marcia,
clasping her hands. "I'll go with you. She is at home this afternoon,
too. I came from her house here."

"Wait just a moment, then, until I run indoors for my hat."

Marjorie walked briskly across the lawn to the house. She was back in a
twinkling, a pretty white flower-trimmed hat on her head, carrying a
white fluffy parasol that matched her dainty lingerie gown.

"How beautiful Mignon's home is!" she exclaimed softly, as they entered
the beautiful grounds of the La Salle estate and walked up the broad
driveway bordered with maples. "There's Mignon on the veranda. She is
alone. I am glad of that."

"What are you going to say to her?" asked Marcia, her curiosity getting
the better of her dejection, for Mignon had risen with a muttered
exclamation, and was coming toward them with the quick, catlike
movements that so characterized her.

"What do you mean, Marcia Arnold," she began fiercely, "by----"

"Miss Arnold is not responsible for our call this afternoon, Miss La
Salle," broke in Marjorie, coolly. "I asked her to come here with me."

Mignon glared at the other girl in speechless anger. Her roving black
eyes suddenly spied the butterfly pinned in the lace folds of Marjorie's
frock.

"Oh, I see," she sneered. "You think I'm going to tell you all about
your trumpery butterfly pin. You are mistaken, I shall tell you
nothing."

"I believe I am in possession of all the facts concerning my butterfly,"
returned Marjorie, dryly, "and also those relating to your supposedly
lost bracelet."

"'Supposedly lost?'" repeated Mignon, arching her eyebrows. "Have you
found it? If you have, give it to me at once."

"There is only one person who can do that," said Marjorie, gravely, "and
that person is you."

The betraying color flew to the French girl's cheeks. "What do you
mean?" she asked, but her voice shook.

"Why do you ask me that?" retorted Marjorie, with sudden impatience.
"You know that on the night of the Weston dance you pretended you had
lost your bracelet in order to throw suspicion on Miss Stevens. Someone
saw you lay your bracelet on the dressing table. The same person saw you
leave the room, return a few minutes afterward and pick it up from the
table. How could you be so cruel and dishonorable?"

"It isn't true," stormed Mignon. "Constance Stevens is a thief. A
thief, do you hear? And when she comes back to Sanford the school shall
know it."

"No, Constance Stevens is not a thief. You are the real thief," said
Marjorie with quiet condemnation. "Knowing the butterfly pin to be mine,
you kept it for many weeks. However, I did not come here to quarrel with
you. I came to help Marcia and to save you from the effects of your own
wrongdoing. Constance Stevens is in Sanford. She is going to Miss Archer
to-morrow to prove her innocence. I am going with her. The girl who
knows the truth about your bracelet will be there, too. You knew long
ago that Constance's butterfly pin was her very own."

"Of course I knew it," sneered Mignon. There was a look of consternation
in her eyes, however.

"Then that is another point against you. You do not deserve to be let
off so easily, but for Marcia's sake, I am going to say that if you will
go with Constance and me to Miss Archer to-morrow morning and withdraw
your charges against Constance, stating that you have your bracelet, we
will never mention the subject again. Meet me in Miss Archer's outer
office at twenty minutes past eight." She did not even turn to look at
the discomfited Mignon as she issued her command.

"Marjorie," said Marcia, hesitatingly, as they walked in silence down
the poplar-shaded street. "Shall I--had I--do you wish me to go with
you to Miss Archer?"

Marjorie cast a quick, searching glance at the thoroughly repentant
junior. "What for?" she smiled, ignoring all that had been. They had now
come to where their ways parted. Marjorie held out her hand. "We are
going to be friends forever and always, aren't we, Marcia?"

Marcia clasped the extended hand with fervor. "'Forever and always,'"
she repeated. And through all their high school days that followed she
kept her word.

Three unusually silent young women met in Miss Archer's living-room
office the next morning and awaited their opportunity to see the
principal.

"Miss Archer will see you," Marcia Arnold informed them after a wait of
perhaps five minutes, and the trio filed into the inner office.

"Good morning, girls," greeted Miss Archer, viewing them searchingly.
"Miss Stevens, I am glad that you have returned, but I am sorry to say
that during your absence I have heard a number of unpleasant rumors
concerning you."

Constance flushed, then her color receded, leaving her very white.

Before the principal could continue, Marjorie's earnest tones rang out.

"Miss Archer, Miss Stevens and I had a misunderstanding. When you asked
me about it I could not tell you. It has since been cleared away. My
butterfly pin has been found, but it was not the one Miss Stevens wore.
See, here are the two pins. Mine has no pearls at the tips of the wings."
She extended her open palm to the principal. In it lay two butterfly
pins, precisely alike save for the pearl-tipped wings of the one.

Miss Archer looked long at the pins. Then she lifted them to meet the
blue and the brown eyes whose gaze was fastened earnestly upon her. What
she saw seemed to satisfy her. She held out her hand to Marjorie and
Constance in turn.

"They are very alike," was her sole comment, as Marjorie returned
Constance's pin. Then Miss Archer turned to Mignon.

"I am sorry I accused Miss Stevens of taking my bracelet," murmured
Mignon, sulkily. "I have it in my possession. Here it is." She thrust
out an unwilling wrist, on which was the bracelet.

"I am glad that you have exonerated Miss Stevens from all suspicion."
Miss Archer's quiet face expressed little of what was going on in her
mind. "I am also thankful that an apparently serious matter has been so
easily settled." She did not offer her hand to Mignon, who left the
office without answering.

A moment later, Marjorie and Constance were in the outer office standing
at Marcia Arnold's desk. "It's all settled, Marcia, with no names
mentioned," she said reassuringly. "Good-bye, we'll see you later.
We'll have to hurry or we'll be late for the opening exercises."

In the corridor outside the study hall, Marcia and Constance paused by
common consent and faced each other.

"Connie, dear," Marjorie said softly. "There's only a little more than a
month of our freshman year left. It isn't very much time, but I believe
we won't have to try very hard to make up in happiness for what we've
lost."

"I am so happy this morning, and so grateful to you, Marjorie, for all
you've done for me, and most of all for your friendship," was
Constance's earnest answer. "I hope you will never have cause to
question my loyalty and that next year we'll be sophomore chums, tried
and true."

"We'll simply have to be," laughed Marjorie, with joyous certainty, "for
I don't see how we can very well get along without each other."


THE END

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE GIRL SCOUTS SERIES

By Edith Lavell

A new copyright series of Girl Scouts stories by an author of wide
experience in Scouts' craft, as Director of Girl Scouts of Philadelphia.

Clothbound, with Attractive Color Designs. Price, 65 Cents Each.

THE GIRL SCOUTS AT MISS ALLEN'S SCHOOL
THE GIRL SCOUTS AT CAMP
THE GIRL SCOUTS' GOOD TURN
THE GIRL SCOUTS' CANOE TRIP
THE GIRL SCOUTS' RIVALS
THE GIRL SCOUTS ON THE RANCH
THE GIRL SCOUTS' VACATION ADVENTURES
THE GIRL SCOUTS' MOTOR TRIP

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
Publishers.

A. L. BURT COMPANY 114-120 EAST 23rd STREET NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

MARJORIE DEAN COLLEGE SERIES

By Pauline Lester

Author of the Famous Marjorie Dean High School Series.

Those who have read the Marjorie Dean High School Series will be eager
to read this new series, as Marjorie Dean continues to be the heroine in
these stories.

All Cloth Bound. Copyright Titles. Price, 65 Cents Each.

MARJORIE DEAN, COLLEGE FRESHMAN
MARJORIE DEAN, COLLEGE SOPHOMORE
MARJORIE DEAN, COLLEGE JUNIOR
MARJORIE DEAN, COLLEGE SENIOR

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
Publishers.

A. L. BURT COMPANY 114-120 EAST 23rd STREET NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

MARJORIE DEAN HIGH SCHOOL SERIES

By Pauline Lester

Author of the Famous Marjorie Dean College Series.

These are clean, wholesome stories that will be of great interest to all
girls of high school age.

All Cloth Bound. Copyright Titles. Price, 65 Cents Each.

MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL FRESHMAN
MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL SOPHOMORE
MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL JUNIOR
MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
Publishers.

A. L. BURT COMPANY 114-120 EAST 23rd STREET NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS SERIES

By Hildegard G. Frey

A Series of Outdoor Stories for Girls 12 to 16 Years.

All Cloth Bound. Copyright Titles. Price, 65 Cents Each.

THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS IN THE MAINE WOODS;
    or, The Winnebagos go Camping.

THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS AT SCHOOL;
    or, The Wohelo Weavers.

THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS AT ONOWAY HOUSE;
    or, The Magic Garden.

THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS GO MOTORING;
    or, Along the Road That Leads the Way.

THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS' LARKS AND PRANKS;
    or, The House of the Open Door.

THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS ON ELLEN'S ISLE;
    or, The Trail of the Seven Cedars.

THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS ON THE OPEN ROAD;
    or, Glorify Work.

THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS DO THEIR BIT;
    or, Over the Top with the Winnebagos.

THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS SOLVE A MYSTERY;
    or, The Christmas Adventure at Carver House.

THE CAMP FIRE GIRLS AT CAMP KEEWAYDIN;
    or, Down Paddles.

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
Publishers.

A. L. BURT COMPANY 114-120 EAST 23rd STREET NEW YORK



      *      *      *      *      *      *



Transcriber's Notes

1. Punctuation and hyphenation have been brought into conformity
   with current standards.
2. Obvious typographical errors corrected.
3. Modifications to text:
   p. 62 came to she ears -> came to her ears
   p. 132 "Yes," answered the Marjorie -> Yes, answered Marjorie
   p. 144 voicing the pent-up long -> voicing the pent-up longing
   p. 197 lace took on an expression -> face took on an expression



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARJORIE DEAN HIGH SCHOOL FRESHMAN***


******* This file should be named 23644-8.txt or 23644-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/6/4/23644



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

