The Project Gutenberg EBook of Daniel Boone, by Katharine E. Wilkie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Daniel Boone
       Taming the Wilds

Author: Katharine E. Wilkie

Release Date: March 2, 2008 [EBook #24730]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DANIEL BOONE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






Daniel Boone


TAMING THE WILDS




by Katharine E. Wilkie




SCHOLASTIC BOOK SERVICES

Published by Scholastic Book Services, a division of
Scholastic Magazines, Inc., New York, N.Y.


Transcriber's Note: Extensive research did not reveal any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.




DANIEL BOONE: TAMING THE WILDS is one of the books in the _Discovery
Series_ published by The Garrard Publishing Company, Champaign,
Illinois. Other Discovery Books available in hardcover editions from
The Garrard Publishing Company are:

Clara Barton
Alexander Graham Bell
Buffalo Bill
Daniel Boone
Luther Burbank
Richard E. Byrd
Kit Carson
George Washington Carver
Henry Clay
Stephen Decatur
Amelia Earhart
Thomas Alva Edison
Benjamin Franklin
Ulysses S. Grant
Henry Hudson
Andrew Jackson
Thomas Jefferson
John Paul Jones
Francis Scott Key
Lafayette
Robert E. Lee
Leif the Lucky
Abraham Lincoln
Francis Marion
Samuel F. B. Morse
Florence Nightingale
Annie Oakley
Robert E. Peary
William Penn
Paul Revere
Theodore Roosevelt
Booker T. Washington
George Washington
Eli Whitney
Wright Brothers

Copyright © 1960 by Katherine E. Wilkie. Copyright © 1961 by Scholastic
Magazines, Inc. This Scholastic Book Services edition is published by
arrangement with The Garrard Publishing Company.

8th printing August 1966

Printed in the U.S.A.

Single copy price 45¢. Quantity prices available on request.




Daniel Boone

TAMING THE WILDS




_For David Lee_




CONTENTS


                                   Page

Daniel's Indian Friend                7

Moving On                            15

A Knock at the Door                  20

On to Kentucky                       27

Attacked by Indians                  34

The Wilderness Road                  39

The Rescue                           45

The Fort Is Saved                    51

Daniel Boone's Reward                59




Daniel's Indian Friend


Daniel Boone was a boy who lived on the edge of the deep woods in
Pennsylvania. At that time this country still belonged to England.

Friendly Indians often came out of the woods to visit the white men.
Daniel liked the Indians. He liked them so well that he wished he could
live with them.

One day he was taking care of his father's cattle. The pasture was
several miles from the settlement. Although Daniel was a ten-year-old
boy, he sometimes became lonely by himself.

Today he lay on a hillside and sang aloud. He wanted to hear a voice,
even if it was only his own.

There was a low laugh behind him. Daniel sprang to his feet. A tall,
slim Indian boy stood a few feet away. The white boy liked him at once.

"I sing, too," the young Indian said.

He threw back his head and sang. Daniel could not understand a word.

"I sing to the sun and the wind and the rain," the boy explained.

"I like your Indian song," Daniel said, "but I'm glad you speak
English."

The boy patted the bow that hung over his right shoulder. "You like
this?"

The bow was strong and shining. Daniel ran a finger along the smooth
wood.

"I like it very much," he said.

The other boy took an arrow and placed it on the bowstring. He pulled
back the bow. The arrow flew away.

"You get," the Indian said.

Daniel ran after the arrow. He picked it up and looked back. The Indian
boy was right beside him.

He took the arrow from Daniel. Again he shot it. Again the white boy
ran after it. The young Indian ran beside him.

He shook his head when Daniel handed him the arrow.

He handed Daniel the bow.

"Shoot!" he said.

Daniel took the bow in his hands. He pulled it back and let the arrow
fly.

By now Daniel had forgotten the cattle. He had forgotten everything but
the wonderful bow, his new friend, and the wide, wild woods.

After a while the boys came to a high hill. At the bottom was an Indian
village. The brown-skinned boy took Daniel by the hand and ran toward
the settlement.

Several dogs barked at them. Some women were hoeing their gardens. They
hardly looked up as the boys passed.

An old woman was stirring something in an iron pot over a fire. It
smelled good. Daniel remembered that he had eaten nothing since
breakfast.

His friend stopped and pointed to Daniel and himself. The old woman
nodded. With a sharp stick, she lifted a piece of meat from the pot.

The Indian boy took a broad leaf from a near-by bush. The woman dropped
the hot meat on it.

Now Daniel knew what to do. He, too, found a leaf. The woman gave him
some meat. Soon the hungry boys had finished their lunch.

That afternoon they swam in the clear, broad river. Then they lay on
the bank in the sunshine. Daniel had never been so happy. However, he
knew he must soon go home. His mother would worry if he did not return
before dark.

"I must go now. I must drive the cows home," he told his Indian friend.

The boy frowned. "Women's work," he told Daniel.

Daniel laughed. "It may be for the Indians, but it's not at the Boones'
house. I think I'd like being an Indian. An Indian boy has more fun
than a white boy."

"There is much for an Indian to learn," the other told him. "We must
learn to hunt, track animals, fish, and find our way in the
wilderness."

"Those things are not work. They are fun," Daniel told him. "I wish I
were an Indian. I believe I'd make a better Indian than a white boy."

When Daniel reached home at last, his mother scolded him.

"You should not have gone off with that Indian boy. You can't trust the
Indians," she told her son.

"He was a good boy. I liked him," Daniel said.

His mother shook her head. "Indians are not like us. We think
differently from them."

Daniel said nothing. But he thought his mother was mistaken.

"_I believe I can think like an Indian_," he said to himself. "_Except
for color, I'm more like an Indian than a white boy._"




Moving On


Several years went by. Then Father Boone called the family together.
"Pack your things," he told them. "We are leaving here. Boones never
stay long in one place. Besides, our farm land is worn out. We can buy
rich land cheap to the southwest of here. We will settle there."

Sixteen-year-old Daniel was happy. "I'm glad we are going," he said. "I
feel crowded here. There are too many houses and too many people. And
the game is getting scarce."

Father Boone made ready for the journey. He got out the big wagon and
hitched two horses to it. Mother Boone packed clothes, quilts, dishes,
pots, pans, and kettles. She would fix food for the family along the
way. Daniel tied a cow behind the wagon.

The family said good-by to the neighbors and to their old home, and
started. Mother, the girls, and the little children rode in the wagon.
Father and the boys took turns riding the horses. Sometimes all of the
Boones walked so that the horses could rest. Father and the boys had
guns to kill birds and small animals for food along the way.

The Boones traveled across Pennsylvania. On and on they went toward the
new country. Daniel caught many rabbits, which his mother stewed. Once
he shot a small black bear. Another time he killed a deer. This gave
the Boones food for several days.

At last the family came to the rolling, green Yadkin Valley in North
Carolina. There were a few houses there already, but it was much wilder
than in Pennsylvania.

Father Boone said, "This is good farming land. We will stop here."

Daniel looked all about him. There was level land close by. There were
woods not far away. And there were mountains in the west. Daniel knew
the hunting would be good.

"I like this place," he said. "There's plenty of room here."

Father Boone and the boys jumped off the horses. Mother Boone and the
girls climbed down from the wagon. They fed the horses and the cow.
They made a campfire. Father and the boys cut down trees and started to
build a log house. Soon the Boones had a new home in the new land.

The years went by. Daniel grew taller. His shoulders became wider. He
was fair-haired and blue-eyed, lean and rugged. He hunted in the woods
of the Yadkin Valley. He often brought home deer and bear. The Boones'
neighbors said that Daniel was the best shot for miles around. Daniel
Boone had grown up.




A Knock at the Door


When Daniel Boone was a young man, there was war between England and
France. England sent troops to fight against the French in America. The
French claimed the land west of the mountains. The English claimed the
same land. The Indians sided with the French.

Daniel Boone drove a supply wagon for the English and the Americans. He
made friends with another young wagoner named John Finley. Finley had
been to the land southwest of the mountains. Each night he and Boone
sat by the campfire and talked.

"I've been deep in the wilderness they call Kentucky," Finley told
Boone. "It is a wonderful place. The forests go on and on and on. There
are thousands of buffalo in Kentucky. There are deer, bear and small
animals, too. It is a great land for hunters."

"I want to go there," Daniel said.

"There are Indians in the wilderness," Finley told Daniel. "They live
to the north of Kentucky and to the south of Kentucky. They call the
land their hunting ground. They do not like the white men to go there."

"There should be room enough for both Indians and white men," Daniel
Boone replied. He thought for a while. "Some day I am going to
Kentucky."

When Daniel went back home to the Yadkin Valley, he married a tall,
dark-haired girl named Rebecca Bryan. Sometimes he liked to tease her.
One summer day before they married he was sitting beside her under a
big tree. Suddenly he took his broad-bladed knife and cut a long slit
in her fresh white apron.

"Why did you do that, Daniel?" she asked mildly.

His blue eyes twinkled. "I guess I wanted to see if you had a temper,"
he said.

Because she wasn't angry, Daniel felt that she would make him a good
wife. Life in the wilderness was often difficult and dangerous. He
wanted a wife who did not become upset easily.

They were married, and soon the first of their many children arrived.
Daniel loved his children. As soon as his son James was old enough, he
taught him to hunt.

In the spring and summer Daniel would farm. In the autumn he hunted,
and in the winter he trapped. He made long trips in the forest and
brought home food for his family and valuable furs and deerskins. Many
of these he sold. He enjoyed exploring as much as he enjoyed hunting.
Once he even went as far south as Florida with the idea of settling
there. But he was disappointed in the land. He longed to explore
Kentucky, but did not want to go alone.

One day the Boone family heard a knock at the door. It was Boone's old
friend, John Finley.

"Let's go to Kentucky, Daniel!" he said.

"Let's!" Daniel agreed. "I think about it all the time. You know how
much I love the wilderness. That's the one place I really feel at
home."




On to Kentucky


Early in 1769, Daniel Boone, John Finley, and four other strong men
started for Kentucky. One of the men was Daniel's brother-in-law. They
took their guns. They carried animal traps, too. They planned to bring
back skins and furs to sell.

The hunters rode their horses across the mountains. Soon they came to
Cumberland Gap, a narrow mountain valley which led into Kentucky. The
Indians used the Gap also, but the white men did not see any of them at
this time. It was weeks before they saw a single Indian.

But they did see rich green meadows, which stretched ahead for miles.
Silver rivers wound like ribbons through them. In some places there
were low rolling hills and in others great towering mountains. The
woods were thick and still. The sunlight made dancing patterns on the
pine needles. Kentucky was as beautiful as John Finley had said.

Everywhere they went the men found lots of game. There were deer and
buffalo. There were fur-bearing animals, such as mink and otter and
beaver. There were many different kinds of birds.

When the men went hunting, they separated into pairs. One winter day
Boone and his brother-in-law were captured by Indians. The Indians did
not harm them, but they took all the white men's deerskins.

"Get out of Kentucky and stay out!" the Indians told them.

Daniel Boone did not scare easily. He and his brother-in-law did not
want to leave Kentucky.

But the other four were afraid. They returned to the settlements. Boone
never saw Finley again. But Boone was soon joined by his brother,
Squire, and a friend named Alexander Neeley. Squire had promised to
harvest the crops back home and then join them in the late autumn with
fresh horses, traps, and gunpowder. Skilled woodsmen that they were,
the brothers somehow found each other in the wilderness.

While they were hunting, the men separated again. They met every two
weeks. One week Boone's brother-in-law did not return to camp. He never
did come back. Five years later a skeleton with a powder horn beside it
was found in a hollow tree. Perhaps he was wounded by an Indian. No one
really knows what happened to him.

Neeley was scared. He decided to go home alone. But Daniel and Squire
stayed on all winter and spring. They hunted and trapped until they had
a lot of skins. Then Squire went home to sell the skins and buy more
gunpowder and traps.

Daniel stayed on in the wilderness. He did not mind being alone. He was
never afraid. With his trusty rifle, Tick-Licker, over his shoulder, he
explored much of Kentucky. He was happy because the wilderness was wide
and he felt free. After a few months, Squire came back. Again the
brothers hunted together.

At last Daniel said to Squire, "I'll go home with you this time. We
have all the skins we can carry."

"When we sell them, we'll have plenty of money to take to our
families," Squire said happily.

It did not happen that way. Indians attacked the brothers when they
were nearly home and took the skins. The Boones were still poor men.

But Daniel was happy. He was glad that he had roamed the wilderness for
nearly two years. He was sorry he had lost the skins, but he was happy
that he had seen Kentucky.




Attacked by Indians


Two years later Daniel Boone decided that he had been away from
Kentucky long enough. "Pack up, Rebecca," he said to his wife. "Pack
up, children. We Boones can't stay in one spot forever. We're going to
move to Kentucky. It's wild and beautiful there. There'll be plenty of
land for you young ones when you want homes of your own."

So the Boones packed up. Six other families joined them. People always
seemed ready to join Daniel in his search for adventure. The household
goods and the farm tools were piled on pack horses. A few of the people
rode horseback. But most of them walked. They drove their pigs and
cattle before them. The rough trails made travel slow, but the families
did not seem to mind.

Just before they reached Cumberland Gap, Daniel Boone sent his
sixteen-year-old son, James, on an errand.

"Turn back to Captain Russell's cabin and ask him for the farm tools he
and I were talking about," he told the boy. "You can catch up with us
tomorrow."

James reached Captain Russell's safely. He camped that night with
several men who planned to join Boone. In the darkness some Indians
crept up and killed them all.

When the families with Boone heard the news, they no longer wanted to
go to Kentucky. They turned and went back over the mountains. The Boone
family was sad because of James' death. But Daniel would not give up
his dream of living in Kentucky. It would just have to wait a little.
He took his wife and children to a spot where they would be safe. But
they did not go all the way back to the Yadkin Valley.

Daniel learned that all through the Kentucky Wilderness the Indians
were fighting the white men.

Too many white men were coming west. Indians wanted to keep their
hunting grounds for themselves. Daniel Boone and another man went into
Kentucky to warn the surveyors who were measuring land there. Nearly
all of them escaped safely. For a time, the Indians stopped fighting
and Kentucky was peaceful again.




The Wilderness Road


Now a rich man named Richard Henderson had a big idea. He would try to
buy Kentucky from the Indians for himself and start another colony. His
own company would sell land to settlers. Henderson was Daniel's friend.
Boone had talked to the Indians about the idea and thought they would
sell the land. Many Indian tribes hunted in Kentucky, but the Cherokees
were the most important. They had conquered the other tribes and ruled
the land. Henderson sent Boone to ask the Cherokees to meet him at
Sycamore Shoals in what is now Tennessee.

Twelve hundred Indian men, women, and children came to the meeting
place. Henderson had all his trading goods spread out. There were yards
and yards of red cloth. There were hundreds of bright new guns. There
were beads and pins and little mirrors for the women. Henderson's
company had paid a great deal of money for the trading goods.

The Indians were like children about the business of trading land for
goods. They loved the bright-colored trinkets. But they knew nothing
about the value of land.

Although they had their own lawyer, they traded Kentucky to Henderson
for a tiny part of what it was worth. The Cherokees warned the white
men of savage Indians who came hunting from the west and the north.
They told Henderson he might have trouble settling the land.

Boone did not go with Henderson to Sycamore Shoals. He waited near
Cumberland Gap with thirty men. When Henderson sent word that he had
bought Kentucky, Boone spoke one word to his men.

"Start!" he said.

The men began to make the famous Wilderness Road that was to lead to
Kentucky. Later it would be traveled by settlers with their horses,
wagons, and cattle. Just now Boone's men chose the shortest and easiest
way over the mountains and through the woods. They followed Indian
trails and buffalo paths. They swung their axes. They cut down trees.
They crossed streams. Daniel Boone worked as hard as anyone. And all
the time he kept a sharp lookout for unfriendly Indians.

The men did not stop until they reached the banks of the Kentucky
River. Here they began to build a fort. Boone knew that the Shawnees
and other Indian tribes would not admit that Henderson had bought
Kentucky.

When Henderson came to the settlement, he said, "We will call this
place Boonesborough. It is right to name it for the man who led us
here."

Boone went back to get his family. Some of his children had grown up
and married before the Boones set out for Kentucky the first time.
Thirteen-year-old Jemima was his last unmarried daughter. She and her
mother were the first white women to stand on the bank of the Kentucky
River.




The Rescue


One Sunday afternoon, Jemima and two other girls went for a canoe ride
on the Kentucky River at Boonesborough. They knew they should not go
out of sight of the fort, but they went anyway. They paddled down the
river and around the bend. The current drew them in to the opposite
bank.

"Let's land and pick some of those bright-colored flowers," one of the
girls suggested.

Jemima shook her head. "I'm afraid of the Indians," she said. "Those
Shawnees are mean."

By now the canoe had drifted near the shore. The girl at the bow shoved
with her paddle. The boat would not move. It was stuck fast in the mud.

All at once five Indians leaped from the underbrush. They grabbed the
screaming girls and carried them into the forest. They planned to take
them north to the Indian towns and keep them there as slaves.

Back at the fort no one missed the girls until after dark. Then someone
saw that the canoe was gone. When Daniel Boone heard this, he picked up
his gun and rushed toward the river. He did not stop to put on his
shoes.

He felt sure that Indians had taken Jemima and her friends away.

Three young men who loved the girls very much went with Boone. The men
took another canoe and began to paddle down the river. They could not
go far in the dark. Before long, they had to stop and wait for morning.

When the sun came up, Boone found the girls' trail. He thought the
Indians were taking them toward the Ohio River. He knew he must catch
them before they crossed it and went to the Indian towns in the north.

The white men left their canoe. They traveled all day through the deep
woods. Then they made camp and waited for the long night to end. At
daylight they started out again.

Boone took short cuts through the woods, but he always found the trail.
His sharp eyes saw what the girls had left for him to see. One had dug
her heels into the soft mud. Another had left bits of her dress here
and there.

Boone led the young men straight through the heart of the forest to
Jemima and her friends. About noon the men caught sight of the girls.
The Indians had stopped with them for their noon meal. The white men
crept up. Bang! Bang! Bang! went their guns.

"It's Father!" Jemima cried.

"Fall flat on your faces, girls!" Daniel Boone shouted.

The white men ran toward the Indians. They shot their guns as they ran.

The Indians were taken by surprise. One Indian threw his tomahawk. It
almost hit the girls. Two Indians were shot. The others ran away.

The men took the three girls back to Boonesborough. Later the three
girls married the three young men.




The Fort Is Saved


Boone became known far and wide as the greatest man in the Kentucky
Wilderness. One winter, about a year after he had saved the girls from
the Indians, he went with some other men to a place where there were
salt springs. These were called salt licks because the wild animals
liked to lick the salt. The men planned to camp there several weeks.
They would boil the water in big kettles until there was only salt
left. Then they would take the salt back to the people at
Boonesborough.

One day Boone went out hunting alone. Suddenly he was surprised by
Indians. They were a war party led by Chief Blackfish. They were on
their way to Boonesborough. These Shawnee Indians came from north of
Kentucky. They felt that Henderson had no right to claim their hunting
grounds. Certainly _they_ had not sold Kentucky to him. They might not
have been so warlike if the American Revolution had not started. The
British were making friends with the Indians everywhere and helping
them fight the settlers.

Boone knew how the Shawnees felt about having to share their hunting
ground with the white men. But he knew also that he must find a way to
save the fort.

"Don't go to Boonesborough now," he told the Indians. "You don't have a
big enough war party. Boonesborough is far too strong for you to
capture."

This was not true at all. There were not many men at the fort. But
Daniel hoped to stall off the Shawnees until Boonesborough had time to
send for help.

"Wait until spring," he went on. "Then you won't have to fight. The
people will come willingly. I will bring them north to you. Right now
it is too cold for the women and the children to travel. But in the
spring they will come with you."

Chief Blackfish was delighted to find that Boone was so friendly. He
had admired Boone for a long time. He did not know that Boone was
trying hard to fool him.

"What about your men?" Chief Blackfish asked.

Boone thought quickly. He knew the Indians had seen the men at the salt
licks.

"I will lead you to my men," he told Chief Blackfish, "if you will
promise not to kill them."

Chief Blackfish promised. Boone took the Indians to his men.

"We are in great danger," he whispered to them. "We must go north with
the Indians, or they will kill us. The fort is in danger too. But
perhaps we can escape and warn our families."

At the end of the long journey the Indians and their prisoners reached
the Shawnee towns in the north. There, Chief Blackfish told Boone that
he wanted him for a son. He made Boone go through a long adoption
ceremony and gave him the name of Big Turtle.

Boone liked Chief Blackfish, but he did not really want to be a
Shawnee. He pretended to be pleased about becoming the Chief's son, but
he only pretended.

One day the Indians went hunting. While they were gone, Boone ran away
and started for Boonesborough.

The Indians followed him, but he was too clever for them. They lost his
trail. In four days he traveled one hundred and sixty miles.

Finally he reached Boonesborough.

"The Indians are on the way! Get ready to fight!" he told the people.

Soon Chief Blackfish came with over four hundred Shawnees. He called
Boone to come outside the fort. Daniel Boone went out bravely.

"Why did you run away?" Chief Blackfish asked Boone.

"I wanted to see my wife and my children," Boone answered.

"You have seen them," the Chief replied. "Now come back with me. You
and all your people."

"Give me a little time to think it over," Boone said.

He hoped that help would come from other forts. He waited and waited,
but no help came.

"We shall defend the fort as long as a man is living," Boone told the
people.

The fight began. The Indians fired at the fort. The white men fired
back. Everyone worked hard. The women and the children loaded guns and
carried food to the men. The white men were outnumbered, but the
Indians did not know this.

The men did not stop fighting for eight days and eight nights. By then
everyone was very tired. The Indians had shot flaming torches, and the
roofs of the cabins were on fire. Not a drop of water was left in the
fort.

"Look! Look!" someone shouted.

The sky had been dark all day. Now it was starting to rain. It rained
and it poured. The rain came down and put out the fires. It filled the
tubs and pails with water to drink. Everyone felt hopeful again.

When morning came, no Indians were in sight. Every single one of them
was gone. They had disappeared into the forest. The fort was saved.




Daniel Boone's Reward


The Indian raids kept on all over Kentucky. When the American
Revolution ended, the British stopped helping the Indians fight the
settlers. Some tribes kept on fighting on their own, but finally the
settlers defeated the Indians and forced them to sign a treaty. Things
slowly became more peaceful.

More and more settlers came west. They came over the Wilderness Road
that Boone and his men had made. They came down the Ohio River in big
flatboats. These settlers killed game in the forest. They cleared land,
grew crops, built houses, and started towns.

Daniel Boone was fifty years old now. One day he discovered that he did
not own any of the land he had thought was his.

"This does not seem right," he said. "I was one of the first to come to
Kentucky. My life was hard. I risked it for the people many times."

It was not right, but it was true. Boone had been too busy hunting and
trapping to put his claims on paper.

Boone lost almost all his land. He tried to farm, but he was not a good
farmer. He tried to keep a store, but his heart was not in it. His good
wife, Rebecca, often took his place in the store, while Daniel worked
as a guide showing new settlers the way down the Ohio River. And he
held some jobs with the new government.

One day hunters told Daniel Boone about land farther west near the
great Mississippi River. "It's wild and free," they said. "There are
bear and deer. There are herds of buffalo. It's the kind of land
Kentucky used to be."

"That's the place for me," Boone said. "It's too crowded here. The
other day I looked out of the window and saw the smoke of another man's
cabin. I'll go west. I want elbow room."

And besides elbow room, he wanted land. He had always dreamed about
owning a lot of land.

He was disappointed about losing his claims in Kentucky.

So Boone and his family went west. The land where they settled belonged
to Spain. Later it was traded to the French and then bought by America.
It is the land we now call Missouri.

The Spaniards were proud to have Daniel Boone live among them. They
gave him all the land he wanted. He hunted and trapped in the new
country as he had in the old. He sold the furs and skins for a good
price.

Then Boone made a trip back to Kentucky. He called together all the
people he had once known.

"I owed money to you when I left here," he said. "I want to pay my
debts."

When he returned to his family in Missouri, Boone was a poor man again.
But he had a smile on his face.

"I am a free man," he said. "I owe nothing to any man. That makes it
worth being poor again."

The United States Congress voted to give Boone one thousand acres of
land. It was a reward for all he had done in exploring and settling the
West. He hunted and fished until he was very old. He never stopped
exploring. He was still looking for adventure and elbow room!

But Daniel Boone, traveler, hunter, woodsman, and fighter, will be
remembered longest as the man who opened the way to Kentucky.


                     *      *      *      *      *


"Get out of Kentucky and stay out!" the Indians told Daniel Boone. But
Daniel Boone did not scare easily.

There was the time his daughter was kidnaped by the Indians. Boone
tracked the kidnapers through the forest and rescued her.

There was the time Boone was captured by the Shawnees. He escaped in
time to warn the people of Boonesborough: "The Indians are coming! Get
ready to fight!"

Boone's life was full of adventure. And this book tells his story.


SCHOLASTIC BOOK SERVICES, NEW YORK






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Daniel Boone, by Katharine E. Wilkie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DANIEL BOONE ***

***** This file should be named 24730-8.txt or 24730-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/7/3/24730/

Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
