The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brochure Series of Architectural
Illustration, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Brochure Series of Architectural Illustration
       Vol 1, No. 9 1895

Author: Various

Release Date: June 9, 2008 [EBook #25735]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROCHURE SERIES ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE BROCHURE SERIES

OF ARCHITECTURAL ILLUSTRATION.

VOL. I.
SEPTEMBER, 1895.
No. 9.




PULPITS OF SOUTHERN ITALY.


The pulpits and ambos chosen for the illustrations in this issue of THE
BROCHURES are mainly interesting for their wonderful mosaic decorations
which are among the finest of their kind which have ever been executed.
The work of the family of Cosmati, by whose name the Roman mosaic or
inlay of this description is known, such as that in plate LXXI, is
similar in design and method of execution to that shown in the other
plates. There is one point, however, in which the Roman work is quite
different. In Sicily and southern Italy the bands and borders of
geometrical patterns are largely made up of glass or composition, while
the Cosmati confined themselves to the use of colored marbles. In the
south, and particularly in Sicily, gold is freely used, but this is
lacking in the work of the Cosmati. As a result of this difference in
material a wider range of color is possible in the southern mosaics than
in those of Rome; and this is especially noticeable in the use of blues,
which give much of the character to the beautiful examples shown in our
plates, which we regret we cannot reproduce in color. The altar, pulpit,
and bishop's throne in the churches of SS. Nerone ed Achille and S.
Cesario in Rome may be taken as additional examples.

This is a form of decoration which may be found in many of the Byzantine
churches of the eleventh and twelfth centuries and also in the Tuscan
churches of the same epoch, notably in the Baptistery at Pisa and in the
church of San Miniato al Monte in Florence.

The mosaic floors, dados, and solid railings of the Palermitan monuments
all seem to belong to this class: a ground of gray or white marble slabs
with large panels of colored marble, mosaic bands of geometrical pattern
let into the marble, and sometimes a plain framework of one member with
a carved row of conventional leaves. In Palermo a grayish veined Greek
marble similar to that used in Venice and Ravenna was almost exclusively
used as a background. It formed a most admirable setting for the inlaid
marble mosaics which were laid in rebated panels in the marble slabs,
making a perfectly smooth surface. In the floor mosaics green serpentine
and red or purple porphyry are the usual colors besides the gray, while
brighter reds, gold, blues, white, and a variety of other glasses
(_smalti_) are employed with the serpentine and porphyry in the mosaics
on walls, pulpits, and screens.

In all of the work referred to above, the separate pieces of marble or
glass are carefully shaped to fit the patterns they are intended to
form, and in this respect differ from the Byzantine and other wall
mosaics, and from the earlier Roman mosaic pavements such as those which
are familiar in the Pompeiian buildings. In the latter the shape and
often the size of the pieces making up the pattern were of comparatively
little importance, and the pieces were imbedded in a matrix which filled
up the interstices and gave a background of neutral color.

The marble pavements, made up of discs, squares, and other geometrical
forms of colored marbles surrounded by bands or borders of a smaller
scale, were similar in design to some of the mosaics shown in our
plates. This work is known as Opus Alexandrinum and is familiar from the
pavements of St. Mark's and the church of Santa Maria dei Miracoli in
Venice.


   [Illustration: LXV. Ambo in the Capella Palatina, Palermo,
   Sicily.]


The Capella Palatina was built and dedicated to St. Peter by King Roger
the Second of Sicily. It must have been begun soon after Roger's
coronation, and was finished in the year 1143.

It is of the same period as the cloister of Monreale, which was
described and illustrated in the March number of THE BROCHURE SERIES;
and the work here shown distinctly recalls the mosaics upon the twisted
columns in this cloister.

The interior is famous as one of the most beautiful works of color
decoration extant. Its general tone is bluish green with mosaic walls
and floor and a wooden ceiling decorated in tempera with cufic
inscriptions. It is scantily lighted with small windows, giving a rather
sombre effect. The best mosaics are in the chancel and apses.

The beautiful ambo is one of its most attractive features. The famous
candelabrum of five tiers of figures, at the projecting angle, is of
white marble.


    [Illustration: LXVI. Ambo in the Cathedral, Salerno, Italy.]


    [Illustration: LXVII. Pulpit in the Cathedral, Salerno, Italy.]


Salerno and Ravello were both included under the Norman rule of the
kingdom of Naples and Sicily in the eleventh century, and the work here
shown all belongs to the Norman period.

The Cathedral of Salerno was founded and dedicated to St. Matthew in
1084 by Robert Guiscard, who plundered the temples of Paestum of their
marbles and sculptures to embellish it.

The two pulpits and that in the choir in front of the archbishop's
throne, which are said to have been executed by order of John of
Procida, are fine examples of the rich mosaic work of the period. The
two large pulpits are placed in the nave, before the choir, which here
has retained its original position in front of the high altar. Stairs
opening out of the choir, finely decorated in mosaic, lead to each
pulpit. In front of the larger one on the right is a fine Paschal
candelabrum, decorated in mosaic. The pulpit itself is supported on
twelve granite columns, while the four supports of the opposite ambo are
the very rare black porphyry called _Porfido Nero-Bianco._ The raised
space between is paved in Opus Alexandrinum.


    [Illustration: LXVIII. Pulpit in the Cathedral, Ravello.]


The Cathedral at Ravello, dedicated to S. Pantaleo, was founded by
Niccolo Rufolo, Duke of Sora and grand admiral under Count Roger of
Sicily.

The marble pulpit, or Gospel ambo, inlaid with mosaics, was built,
according to a Latin inscription which it bears, in the year 1272, at
the cost of Niccolo Rufolo, a descendant of the grand admiral. Another
inscription records the fact that it was the work of Nicholas, the son
of Bartolommeus of Foggia.


    [Illustration: LXIX. Ambo in the Cathedral, Ravello.]


The Epistle ambo, situated on the opposite side of the church from the
main pulpit, is of earlier date than the latter. The mosaics represent
on one side Jonah being swallowed by the whale, and on the other his
being ejected. It bears the name of Costantino Rogadeo, the second
bishop of Ravello, and probably dates from about 1130.


    [Illustration: LXX. Pulpit in the Church of S. Giovanni,
    Ravello.]


The church of San Giovanni del Toro also dates from the time of King
Roger. The story of Jonah will be seen again depicted here.


    [Illustration: LXXI. Ambo in S. Lorenzo fuori le Mura, Rome.]


The Basilica of S. Lorenzo fuori le Mura was originally only an oratory
over the Catacombs of S. Cyriaca, and was said to have been founded by
Constantine about A.D. 330. It was enlarged and partly rebuilt in the
fifth and sixth centuries, and in 1216 was again remodeled by Honorius
III, who built the present long nave and its portico, raised the
chancel, and filled up with rubbish the lower church. It is thus a grand
collection of details of various periods, but all of much interest.

Its two ambos stand on each side of the raised portion of the floor
which corresponds to the choir in the Basilica of Honorius. The Gospel
was chanted from the one on the south side with the reading desk turned
towards the choir; and the Epistle from the one on the north, with a
single desk towards the high altar. Before the Gospel ambo is a fine
mosaic candelabrum standing on a Roman cippus reversed, having an olive
branch and birds sculptured on it.

The pavement as well as the work upon these two ambos is in the style of
the Cosmati.


    [Illustration: LXXII. Pulpit in the Cathedral at Messina,
    Sicily.]


The Cathedral (S.M. Nuova) was founded by Count Roger in 1098, and was
finished by his son Roger. The interior is 305 feet in length, and is a
Latin cross with three aisles, separated by twenty-six columns of
Egyptian granite said to have been taken from the temple of Neptune at
Faro; they have gilt Corinthian capitals. The roof is of wood and is a
restoration by King Manfred of an ancient roof burned in 1254 at the
funeral of Conrad, son of Emperor Frederick II, the canopy over the
corpse having been so high that the lights by which it was crowned set
fire to the rafters. The three apses are filled with fine mosaics.

The pulpit of white marble is attributed to Gogini, and the font near it
to Gaddo Gaddi of Florence.

       *       *       *       *       *




Competition for Advertising Design.


The publishers of THE BROCHURE SERIES will give three prizes, valued at
$5.00 each, for the best three designs for a full-page advertisement of
the Boynton Furnace Co. These prizes will be:--

    1. A complete set of Volume I of the _Architectural Review_ (see
    advertisement in front pages of this number for description).

    2. A subscription to Volume IV of the _Architectural Review_.

    3. Details of Decorative Sculpture, both Italian and French
    Renaissance (2 books).

The authors of the best designs may have their choice of any of these
three prizes. A prize will be awarded for the best design received on or
before November 30, 1895. A second prize for the best design received
after November 20, and on or before December 10, 1895. A third prize for
the best design received after November 30, and on or before December
20, 1895.

It is probable that all acceptable designs will be used, in which case
payment will be made, the amount of which will be determined by
correspondence with the author; and all designs not accepted will be
returned to the authors.

The advertisements of the Boynton Furnace Co. may be referred to for
material, and the following data can be drawn upon:--

    The business was established in 1849; the company was
    incorporated in 1884. Over 100,000 heaters have been made and
    sold. Furnaces, hot water and steam heaters, ranges, and
    Baltimore heaters are manufactured. The Boynton goods have
    always ranked high, the company being one of the "old stand-bys"
    in the heating trade. Satisfactory service in carrying out
    architects' specifications is made a feature of their business.

The net size of the space allowed for advertisement is 5-1/2 inches wide
and 8 inches high. No restriction upon the design is made, except that
it shall not go beyond these dimensions. Drawings must be made one half
larger than the advertisement would be. They are not to bear the
designer's name, or any distinguishing device, but a sealed envelope
containing his name and address is to be securely attached to the back
of the drawing, or of each drawing should a designer submit two or more.
They must be in black ink upon white paper, and sent postpaid to the
Editor of THE BROCHURE SERIES, 6 Beacon Street, Boston, Mass.

The designing of effective architectural advertisements presents a good
field for draughtsmen to cultivate. In both THE BROCHURE SERIES and the
_Architectural Review_ a considerable quantity of such work could be
used if it were the right kind. The publishers are in hopes this
competition will bring out designs that will serve as a guide to
securing special work for which there is a more or less constant demand.
If this competition proves successful in bringing out the proper kind of
material, others will be arranged for in future, and larger prizes
offered.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Brochure Series

of Architectural Illustration.

PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY

BATES & GUILD, 6 BEACON STREET, BOSTON, MASS.

    Subscription Rates per year                   50 cents, in advance
    Special Club Rates for five subscriptions     $2.00

Entered at the Boston Post Office as Second-class Matter.

       *        *        *        *        *

    SPECIAL NOTICE.

    Back numbers of THE BROCHURE SERIES _are not_ kept in stock. All
    subscriptions will be dated from the time received and
    subscribers who wish for the current numbers must place their
    subscriptions at once.


The placing in position of the great decorative wall painting of Puvis
de Chavannes in the Boston Public Library again directs public attention
to this remarkable building. To us this last addition to the
architectural work (for every feature of the building, whether
constructional, utilitarian, or purely decorative, is architectural in
the sense of forming an essential part of an otherwise incomplete
composition) is the one feature thus far introduced which does most to
bind together the varying elements in the decorative scheme of the
interior. It occupies the most important position in the building, at
the head of the monumental staircase, and forms not only a centre of
interest aesthetically, but serves as a connecting link between the other
features, which have before seemed more or less unrelated. The grand
staircase, built of Siena marble, the finest example of the intelligent
use of colored marble in this country, has until now lacked its foil,
which the dull blue walls now give. The added pleasure which is apparent
in viewing the stairway emphasizes the importance of the guiding
intelligence which has made all this possible. There is in our
experience only one other building in the country in the interior
treatment of which this intelligence is evident in anything like the
same degree. The house built by Messrs. McKim, Mead, and White for Mr.
Henry Villard is the most completely satisfying residence we have ever
seen, and its success is due to the element of restraint shown
throughout, and to the harmony between its parts. There are other houses
in which may be found just as effective single features, but there is
some discordant note which destroys the harmony. The Library is not an
expensive building; its single features may, with the exception of the
staircase, be equaled in beauty by many other buildings in this country,
but no other can compare with it in the sense of complete satisfaction
which it awakens on account of this harmony of parts.

We have pointed out only the harmony in color, which of course in itself
is of secondary importance, and if it were not accompanied by
intelligent harmony of plan, and treatment of detail in proportion and
scale could not make the composition a satisfactory one. The question of
decorative color treatment comes up at this time because of the
surprising effect which the addition of a little patch of colored wall
makes in the whole interior. Even the uneducated, superficial observer
is impressed with the feeling of completeness and thoughtful intention
in everything connected with the building.

       *       *       *       *       *




Brochure Series Competition.

Number One.

DESIGN FOR THE CASE OF AN UPRIGHT PIANO. PRIZES OFFERED BY THE
HENRY F. MILLER & SONS PIANO CO., BOSTON.


The object of this competition was not to secure designs for pianos at
the least possible cost, as is the object of many competitions in
design, but merely to attract the attention of designers to this special
problem, and take one more step towards a better condition of things in
the piano business. The Henry F. Miller Co. have for several years
followed a policy the results of which are seen in some of their later
designs. It has been the practice to turn special cases over to
furniture and cabinet makers, entailing an expense that has been
practically prohibitory for all but the richest clients architects have.
The Miller piano factory has been equipped with every facility for
executing work from architects' special designs and within a reasonable
cost. The prizes have been offered in the most liberal spirit, and while
a large number of the designs submitted were unsatisfactory, they have
been instructive and their shortcomings will be borne in mind in
preparing the program of another competition, with larger prizes, which
will shortly be announced in THE BROCHURE SERIES.


    [Illustration: First Prize. A.B. Le Boutillier.]


Seventy-five designs were submitted, several of which arrived too late
to be entered. The drawings were very carefully examined by the officers
of the company, assisted by Mr. C. Howard Walker, and the following
awards were made:--


    [Illustration: Second Prize. E.F. Maher]


First prize, $25, A.B. Le Boutillier, Boston; second prize, $15, Edward
F. Maher, Boston; third prize, $10, James C. Green, Brooklyn, N.Y.


REPORT OF THE JURY.

In judging the designs for piano cases, the element of economy, though
recognized, played but a small part in the decision of the judges. The
qualities which made the premiated designs superior to others, were
those of refinement, beauty of line, and of general proportions.

A piano case presents, necessarily, but restricted opportunity for
design, and any attempt at great novelty is apt to be disastrous; if
originality appears, it will be in the smaller details.


    [Illustration: Third Prize. J.C. Green.]


There also exists the question of style, which is determined largely by
the character of the room in which the piano is to be placed, and yet,
if the element of style is forced too far, it prevents the use of the
design for any but one case.

Of the premiated designs those placed first and second are in distinct
styles, the one having almost the character of François I, the other
being of the time of the Empire. Both, however, are simple and could be
placed in rooms of other styles of architecture.

The first prize design is especially commended for the disposition of
its ornament, and the delicate but vigorous lines of the bracket beneath
the keyboard, or what is technically called the "truss."

The design placed second has excellent proportioning of panels and
Empire ornament in excellent relative scale, well disposed.

The design placed third is a most direct development of the
requirements, and is a very simple, practicable design with good
proportions and lines.

The three remaining designs published were considered worthy of mention,
each in its own way. The Gothic design could be made very rich and
interesting with panel colored decoration. The upper portion is well
proportioned, the lower portion somewhat too meagre. The Colonial design
is interesting above the keyboard; the arches below the "trusses" are
out of scale. The Baroque design would depend for its good or bad
quality entirely upon the delicacy and skill with which the carving was
done. Both the Gothic and Baroque designs could only be used in rooms of
their own respective styles.


    [Illustration: Design by E.B. Wells.]

       *       *       *       *       *




Club Notes.


It is encouraging to note that a new accession to the already imposing
list of architectural clubs has been made so early in the season by the
organization of a club in Detroit.

On Monday, September 16, thirty-five draughtsmen met at the Detroit
Museum of Art and effected a temporary organization of the Detroit
Architectural Sketch Club, Emil Lorch being elected Chairman and Alex.
Blumberg Secretary. A committee, consisting of W.E.N. Hunter, R.
Mildner, and G.H. Ropes, was appointed to draw up a Constitution and
By-laws.

The report of this committee was adopted at the second meeting, on
September 25, and the following officers and directors elected:
President, Emil Lorch; Vice-President, G.H. Ropes; Secretary, E.A.
Schilling; Treasurer, R. Mildner; Directors, W.E.N. Hunter, F.G. Baxter,
and Alex. Blumberg.


    [Illustration: Design by E.R. Clark.]


The object of the Club and its proposed methods of study are like those
of similar organizations elsewhere.

Few of the existing clubs have started under better auspices, and fewer
still could count as many members at their inception.

A number of the other clubs have begun early in the systematic work of
the year. The Philadelphia, Baltimore, Cleveland, and Chicago clubs in
particular are starting with unusual vigor and promise. Our next issue
will have more detailed account of these plans for the future.


    [Illustration: Design by A.H. Cox.]

       *       *       *       *       *




Books.


_Architecture for General Readers_: A Short Treatise on the
    Principles and Motives of Architectural Design. With an
    Historical Sketch. By H. Heathcote Statham, Fellow of the
    Institute of Architects, Editor of _The Builder_. With
    illustrations drawn by the Author. London, New York: Charles
    Scribner's Sons. 1895.

This work is, as its title indicates, a popular handbook of the
principles of architecture, and furnishes what has hitherto been
practically inaccessible to general readers--a concise explanation of
what architecture really means.

The greater part of the work is devoted to the explanation of the theory
of design and construction and the general principles in their simpler
applications. The subject of ornament including the use of mouldings,
sculpture, and plain surfaces, is taken up, and architectural working
drawings are explained.

The historical sketch is excellent, although in this direction there is
not the same lack of good handbooks as in the theoretical field. The
analysis is clear and more easily comprehended than is usual in such
treatises.

       *       *       *       *       *




Notes.


To an architect a convenient drawing table is one of the most important
requirements. There are many devices made to meet this requirement, but
none have proved more useful or given more general satisfaction than the
"Seldis," furnished by Messrs. Frost & Adams, 37 Cornhill, Boston. The
special advantages of this table are many, but among them is the fact
that the draughtsman can work in a natural position, as the board can be
adjusted, so that all parts may be easily reached. Any board can be used
and it will not tip over, and being self-locking will remain in any
position, and can be adjusted in height to suit the draughtsman. When
not in use it can be folded to occupy the same length and width as an
ordinary drawing-board. Descriptive circulars will be sent upon
application by Messrs. Frost & Adams.


    [Illustration: House in Brookline. Winslow & Wetherell,
    Architects. From Dexter Bros.' "Some Houses Near Boston."]


Messrs. Dexter Bros., of 55 Broad Street, Boston, are adopting a very
effective method of advertising their English Shingle Stains. We have
already referred to their collection of photographic prints published
under the title of "Some Houses Near Boston." The illustration on this
page is reduced from one of the plates in this collection. They have
followed this with an even more attractive pamphlet showing
Kennebunkport houses, on which their stains have been used, and they
have a third collection in preparation, illustrating Bar Harbor houses.
Either of the first two will be sent to any reader of THE BROCHURE
SERIES upon receipt of a two-cent stamp, and due notice of the issue of
the collection of Bar Harbor houses will be given in these columns. As
Dexter Bros.' Stains are used by leading architects throughout the
country they have plenty of subjects to choose from in each publication,
thus enabling them to publish work that is architecturally interesting.
This raises the character of their advertising above the ordinary trade
level. Usually publications representing the buildings in which a
certain material is used, show good, bad, and indifferent architecture,
the good being present in small quantity. The Dexter Bros.' collections
show intelligent discrimination, and it is this one thing that makes
them worthy of notice.

All who are in any way interested in suburban architecture will find
these pamphlets worth sending for. They should have a wide circulation,
for they have more than an advertising value.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Brochure Series of Architectural
Illustration, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BROCHURE SERIES ***

***** This file should be named 25735-8.txt or 25735-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/7/3/25735/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
