The Project Gutenberg EBook of Recueil des exemples de la malice des
femmes, et des malheurs venus à leur occasion, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Recueil des exemples de la malice des femmes, et des malheurs venus à leur occasion

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: November 16, 2008 [EBook #27278]

Language: French

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LA MALICE DES FEMMES ***




Produced by Laurent Vogel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by the
Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at
http://gallica.bnf.fr)








RECUEIL DES EXEMPLES DE LA MALICE DES FEMMES.

Et des malheurs venus à leur occasion.

_Ensemble les execrables cruaultez exercees par icelles._

[TENDIT URSUM]

A PARIS,

Chez Pierre HURY, au mont S. Hylaire, à la Cour d'Albret.

M. D. XCVI.




RECUEIL DES EXEMPLES DE LA MALICE DES FEMMES.


Si j'entreprenois de descrire les malheurs que le genre feminin a faict
clairement veoir à noz yeux depuis tant de siecles Je me trouverois
enfermé en un labyrinthe plus cruel que celuy du Roy Minos preparé pour
les enfans d'Athenes qui luy estoient envoyez en tribut, ainsi que le
racomptent les historiens de ce temps là, Et demeurerois presque accablé
soubz le faix d'une si pesante charge & une si extreme quantité
d'Exemples qui se trouvent sur ce subject. Car il n'y a Poete ancien ou
moderne de qui les livres ne soient remplis de tant de prodigieuses
cruautez que le Jugement nous fault, la veue nous esblouyt, & tous les
sentimens nous defaillent, voyans tant de tragiques malheurs advenuz &
qui adviennent tous les jours par les femmes, comme les exemples en
servent d'un beau miroir pour nos les representer devant les yeux. Et
semble que toutes les imperfections ayent voulu s'incorporer en un,
expres pour former la femme & en rendre du tout odieux l'object. Lequel
voilé d'une beauté falsifiee ravit tellement les sens & l'entendement de
ceulx qui s'y mettent trop avant que la sortye leur en est interdite, &
se pensent bien-heureux d'avoir la veue de ce qui cause leur mal. Une
femme est toute pleine de vanité, d'inconstance, de fraulde, de perfidie
de cruaulté, deception & mille autres vices que je ne veux nommer, qui
la conduisent ordinairement au precipice de sa ruyne, & ceulx qui les
suyvent, voila que c'est, nous l'aymons comme bien souvent le mallade
choisit & demande plustost la chose qui luy peust nuyre que ce qui luy
est profitable, nous en sommes de mesmes: car voyans une femme qui nous
plaist, il la faut avoir, il faut employer ses amis à un si mauvais
affaire comme pour demander une femme vous vous soubmettez a des choses
irraisonnables pour l'avoir & aucunesfois elle se moque de vous, s'il
advient que vous l'ayez vous vous en resjouyssez comme si vous y aviez
gaigné un Royaume helas pauvre homme tu ne sçais ce que tu faicts, tu es
aliené d'entendement tu ne congnois pas que tu meines en ta maison le
serpent qui te devorera puis apres, tu es doncq malade du sens de
l'entendement & de la raison cherchant le poison qui te fera mourir
lentement pour te donner plus de peine, ce pendant tu l'aymes c'est le
comble de ta felicité tu penses ja estre vollé jusques au tiers ciel, &
tu metz desja un pied dans la fosse. Voila comme tu es endormy d'un
sommeil si pernicieux si tu te resveilles tu recognois ta faute (helas
mon amy) c'est bien tard: tu es lié, il fault demeurer là, C'est
pourquoy ordinairement quand l'on veult arrester quelque jeune homme on
dict qu'il le fault marier vous voila donc prins, il fault penser à
d'aultres choses qu'a estre libre, croiriez vous bien (mon amy) que
aucunesfois une fille prenne un homme par amitié? nenny, c'est le plus
souvent pour l'argent que le bon homme peult avoir & aulcunesfois elle
le prend a faulte d'aultre & de craincte de demeurer vieille fille. Et
que leur beaulté se venant a flestrir & fener, elles demeurassent sans
party, il fault prendre la fortune par sa chevelure de devant, car elle
est chauve derriere & si vous faillez une fois à la prinse la poursuitte
sera vayne puis apres, & d'aultre part s'il advient que le mary ne
puisse fournir a l'appoinctement selon qu'elle pense meriter pour son
jeune aage ou selon son appetit, elles scavent le moyen qu'il faut tenir
pour ne sen laisser avoir faulte, & puis scavent palier le faict que le
bon homme ne s'en pourra appercevoir aulcunement, car elles ayant
l'esprit subtil & cault, il ne leur manque poinct d'excuses comme de
venir veoir son pere, ses cousins, ses parens, sa commere qui est
accouchee, ou de devotion, puis avecques cela elles saultent au col de
leurs sots marys, le baisent luy jurent qu'elles l'ayment mieulx que
leur propre vie. Mais c'est au plus loing de leur pensee, car elles le
vouldroient veoir pendu, puis tant d'aultres belles parolles qu'elles y
scavent adjouster que c'est une chose incroyable pour abuser les pauvres
gens. Aussi Thales l'un des sept saiges de grece recongnoissant cela
s'en exempta, car voulant monster a l'homme qu'il n'estoit bon de se
marier, quelqu'un l'interogeant ainsi qu'il estoit encores en la fleur
de son aage pourquoy il ne se marioit, disoit qu'il n'estoit pas encores
temps puis devenu sur l'age interogé de la mesme chose, il n'est plus
temps dict-il, voulant monstrer par là a l'homme qui veult demeurer a
son ayse franc de tout soucy il ne fault poinct qu'il s'accompaigne
d'une chose si pernicieuse & qui trouble plus le repos comme est la
femme, toutesfois je ne parle que de celles qui se trouvent le plus
communement, car je ne veulx pas nier qu'il n'y en aye de bonnes car
parmy un si grand nombre il n'est pas qu'il ne s'en trouve quelqu'une
qui aye un peu plus de perfection que les aultres: parquoy pour une qui
faict bien toutes les aultres en sont honnorees comme anciennement de
celuy qui gaignoit le prix de la lutte ou de la course es jeux
olympiques, sa race en estoit eternellement illustree. Mais pour revenir
a nostre premier discours elles font ce qu'elles peuvent pour captiver
les coeurs des hommes & les piper par tant d'attraicts qu'elles les
puissent avoir en leur possession pour tirer d'eux ce qu'elles en
pourront avoir. Les autres pour se mocquer de leur inconstance & les
autres pour s'en servir & en contenter leur appetit & bien souvent les
faire tuer apres si elles peuvent. Brief ce n'est que toute malice qui
habite en la femme & ne visent a aultre but qu'a tromper & decepvoir
ceux qui ne se doubtent poinct de leurs embusches Et qu'ilz font comme
les maladvisez & indiscretz mariniers qui attrappez du doulx chant des
sirenes se destournent de leur droict chemin pour s'aller perdre au far
de Messine. C'est pourquoy avec raison plusieurs Philosophes disent que
nature ayant donné a tout animal son contraire elle a voulu aussi donner
a l'homme a qui toutes autres choses sont assubjecties la femme pour son
contraire & dont la malice est ennemye juree de la raison humaine, ceux
qui parlent du mariage & de s'accompaigner avec la femme alleguent
plusieurs belles instructions pour vous monstrer ce qui est en doubte.
Car si tu consideres bien de prendre femme pauvre elle en sera mesprisee
& toy moins estimé, si tu la prens riche elle te vouldra commander & de
franc & libre te randre esclave, si que pensant espouser une compaigne
esgalle, tu espouseras une insupportable maistresse. Je ne scai si je
doibts dire diablesse puis si tu prens femme belle tu te mects en grand
danger que ta teste ronde ne devienne fourchue qui est une espouventable
metamorphose. Que dirons nous encores la richesse rend la femme superbe,
la beauté la faict suspecte & la laydure la rend odieuse, je vous laisse
a juger quel contentement il y peult avoir flottant tousjours en doubte
parmy tant de dangers de faire naufrage, celuy disoit Hesiode qui se fie
en femme est aultant asseuré comme celluy qui est pendant aux feuilles
d'un arbre mesmement a la fin d'automne, auquel temps les feuilles
commencent a cheoir. Il me souvient encores de trois choses que j'ay ouy
reciter au mespris du mariage, le dire d'un facetieux, le faict d'un
aultre & la responce d'un bon homme qui portoit propos de quelque
mariage, on a raison disoit le premier de dire quant on veult marier un
jeune homme qu'il le fault arrester, car de faict je croy que nous
volerions jusques au ciel si cest arrest ne nous retenoit, l'aultre
oyant precher qu'il failloit que chascun portast sa croix, pour estre
sauvé, courut prendre sa femme & la charge sur son col, & le bon homme a
qui on disoit qu'il falloit attendre que son filz fust saige pour le
marier, ne te trompe pas amy luy dict il, car s'il devient sage il ne se
mariera jamais, n'y ayant que deux bons jours en mariage, celuy des
nopces, & celuy de la mort de sa femme, & aussi ce que disoit Diphile
qu'une bonne femme une bonne mule & une bonne chievre sont trois
meschantes bestes, ceux qui ont remarqué les malheurs dont ce sexe a
esté cause en trouvent un nombre incroyable & en premier lieu alleguent
la deception du premier homme par Eve sa femme c'est doncq le péché & la
mort; que voudriez vous un plus grand malheur que celluy là: car toutes
miseres s'en sont ensuivies & eurent deslors entree au monde Sanson
trahy par Dalida celle qu'il aymoit & cherissoit plus que soy-mesme, &
pour revanche de ceste amitié le vendit aux Philistins qui estoient ses
mortelz ennemiz apres l'avoir desnué de sa force qui consistoit en ses
cheveulx donnant coulleur a sa mauldicte trahison par pleurs &
gemissemens pour en tirer la verité, l'ayant sceu elle le livra puis
apres a la mort comme l'agneau au sacrifice, ses ennemiz l'ayant
exercerent envers luy beaucoup de cruaulté voila la recompence de son
amitié si forte, en apres Salomon abesty par ses concubines, luy qui
estoit l'un des premiers hommes du monde en sagesse, en fin fut
contraint ceder aux importunes caresses qu'elles usoient envers luy, &
tant de mignardises attrayantes qu'il se laissa couler dans une mer de
delices qui luy causa sa totalle ruyne, Achab ruyné par Jezabel, puis
les histoires tragicques nous font veoir l'inhumaine cruauté de Pandore
qui ne se contentant de son effrené apetit de vengeance avoir esté
executé par ses propres mains en la personne de son Mary le pauvre
enfant qui estoit au ventre de ceste cruelle mere en soufrit mort estant
deschiré par pieces comme un Mouton tombant entre les griffes d'une
Louve affamee (ha) pauvre petit enfançon ta destinee estoit bien
rigoureuse de t'avoir formé au ventre de celle qui sans pitié ne
compassion maternelle a eu le courage de te donner la mort de ses
propres & meurtrieres mains, les Lions, les Tigres, les Ours & toutes
autres sortes de bestes farouches qui se trouvent és desertz de Lidye, &
d'arcadye ayment leurs faons, & toy mille & mille fois plus brutalle que
tous ces animaux cy, as heu le coeur si felon de deschirer ta petite
creature ta petite Image, ta semblance celle que tu as porté dans tes
flancz, ceste cy est l'une des plus enormes cruautez qui se puisse
imaginer. Helene qui a esté cause de la destruction de Troye la grande
l'une des plus nobles anciennes & opulentes citez de l'univers & qui
fleurissoit par sus toutes celles qui furent de son temps avec la mort
de tant de peuples Tullia fut si extremement oultree de rage & de
collere, qu'elle contraignit & força chevaux cochier & chariot de passer
pardessus le corps de son pere gisant mort en terre, Antonius egal en
l'Empire Romain avec Cesar ayant envoyé adjourner Cleopatra Royne
d'Egipte pour se venir justifier de quelques cas qui luy estoient mis
sus, elle y vint avec une pompe si desmesuree qu'elle est presque
incroyable, puis y estant elle usa de tant de charmes mellez parmy sa
beauté & bonne grace qu'elle le rendit entierement sien & si extremement
passionné de son amour qu'il n'avoit bien que quant il jouyssoit de sa
presence, & non tant seulement luy remit-il son offence mais la fit dame
de pays innombrable, qui plus est l'amitié qui luy portoit luy feit
folement soubmettre six vingtz mille hommes de pied & six cens Navires
aux dangers de la mer & de la guerre, & sa personne & son honneur,
s'estant a son occasion declaré ennemy de Cesar lequel le poursuivoit &
mesmes l'avoit assiegé Antonius, pensant que Cleopatra l'eut trahy fit
de piteuses plainctes, & voyant celle qu'il aimoit tant donna fin a ses
jours se fourrant son espee dans le ventre voila comme il finit sa vie &
elle peu apres estant mordue d'un aspic mourut, fut il oncques veu plus
barbare cruaulté que celle de l'amoureuse Medee laquelle affin que plus
seurement elle peust suivre Jason duquel elle estoit extremement
amoureuse, espandit par le chemin les membres d'Absirte son frere
qu'elle avoit taillé en pieces, a ce que par la doulleur que prendroit
son pere de la mort de son petit fils cela le feist retarder en sa
prompte suitte, elle mesme esmeue de rage pource qu'elle veit preferer
les jeunes amours de Creusa aux vieilles siennes jetta aux piedz de
Jason les pieces de deux enfans qu'elle avoit engendrez de luy, n'est ce
pas une cruaulté extreme? Que feit Progné quand elle sceut que Philomene
sa soeur avoit esté par Teree son mari indignement viollee ne luy
presenta elle pas sur sa table les membres de son petit filz Itis pour
les manger & devorer, a cause des foles amours pareillement Clytemnestra
avec Egiste son Ruffien conjura la mort d'Agamemnon son mary & encores a
l'occasion de ses amours & de ce meurdre fut esmeu la fureur d'Oreste
Scille fille de Nisus donna au beau Roy Minos de l'amour duquel elle
estoit eprise avec le poil d'or, ensemble la vye & l'Empire de son pere
mais de ceste meschanceté la malheureuse fille fut punie, une
courtisanne nommée Aspasie ayant semé a force femmes folles & de mauvais
gouvernement par la grece les Megarois les ravirent qui fut cause que
Pericles gasta, pilla, & brusla, la pluspart des villes & bourgs de la
Moree; Hannibal chef des Carthaginois qui estoit le plus brave guerrier
de son temps fut rompu par les delices des folles femmes Cappouane nous
lisons de Pasiphee, laquelle non contente de l'embrassement du bel &
puissant Roy Minos s'habandonna a un Taureau couverte d'une peau de
vache Mais pour revenir a nostre discours est il chose (comme dict
Plutarque) plus legere que la langue d'une femme effrenee, plus
picquante que ses oultrages, plus temeraire que son audace plus
execrable que sa mallignité & plus dangereuse que sa fureur? un noble
Romain feit responce & bien apropos a quelques uns de ses familliers
amys qui luy disoient qu'il avoit grande occasion de se tenir
tresheureux & content pour avoir une femme belle riche & de nobles
parens extraicte, il leur monstra son pied disant mes amys vous voyez
que mon soullier est tout neuf, & bien faict mais il n'y a nul de vous
qui puisse sçavoir en quel endroict il me blesse, Pythagore estant
invité pour aller aux nopces d'un sien amy s'excuse disant, que jamais
ne luy prendroit envye d'aller a tel festin, & se trouver a tel objet
estimant qu'espouser une femme fust aultant qu'espouser un cercueil ou
prendre un linceul pour le comencement de sa sepulture, l'ancien Adage
ne dit il pas que femme & navires ne sont jamais si accomplies qu'il n'y
ait tousjours a refaire? Dont je conclurois volontiers que si celuy qui
se marie ne se fache, pour le moins il se lasse. Il y a encores un
nombre infiny d'autres exemples sur ce subject comme Venus en Cippre,
une Lays a Corinthe, une Thays en Alexandrie, une Phirné en Athenes,
Rodoppe en Thrace, puis Semiramis Phedre Mirrhe, Biblis & Jocaste, &
tant d'autres que je ne veulx nommer, car ce seroit une chose trop
prolixe encores le poison, le venin, & la pestiferee humeur de ce puant
& salle sexe, se font bien paroistre grandement pernicieux quand ils
font aigrir le moult, mourir les plantes, tomber les fruictz des arbres
avant qu'ilz soient meurs, toiller la glace des miroirs, amoussir le
tranchant du fer obscurcir le lustre de l'yvoire corrompre l'air, mourir
les essains des abeilles, devenir les chiens enragez & les enfans
ensorcelez, voila en fin les perfections de ce sexe libidineux & plain
de corruption tant des meurs que de l'interieur du corps. Tout ce que
j'ay dict icy, ne prejudicie en rien aux saiges ains les rend de tant
plus illustres & les faict resplandir comme la roze par dessus toutes
les aultres fleurs des champs, se faisant admirer pour chose rare, digne
de louange & de loz immortel.


_Fin de la malice des femmes & non de leur meschanceté._




[NOTES CONCERNANT LA VERSION ÉLECTRONIQUE

On a différencié les u/v et i/j conformément à l'usage moderne, et
résolu les abréviations conventionnelles (de type bõne > bonne).
L'orthographe et la ponctuation sont conformes à l'original, les
coquilles les plus manifestes ayant toutefois été corrigées.]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Recueil des exemples de la malice des
femmes, et des malheurs venus à leur occasion, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LA MALICE DES FEMMES ***

***** This file should be named 27278-8.txt or 27278-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/2/7/27278/

Produced by Laurent Vogel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by the
Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at
http://gallica.bnf.fr)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
