The Project Gutenberg EBook of La Fin Des Livres, by Albert Robida and Octave Uzanne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: La Fin Des Livres

Author: Albert Robida and Octave Uzanne

Release Date: September, 2001 [EBook #2820]
[Most recently updated: February 19, 2020]

Language: French

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LA FIN DES LIVRES ***




Produced by Michael J. Ward




La Fin Des Livres

by Albert Robida and Octave Uzanne

The End Of Books

A prognostication from the past

[Illustration]




Introduction


In 1895 Octave Uzanne and Albert Robida published, in France, _Contes
pour les Bibliophiles_ ("Stories for Bibliophiles"). The eleven stories
in _Contes_, all revolving around books (or at least printing) are
interesting, bizarre, weird... one could go on in true Fanthorpian
fashion. But even better than the stories are the illustrations by
Albert Robida.

Robida was born in 1848 and died in 1926. During his lifetime he
reportedly drew 60,000 pictures and wrote and/or illustrated over 200
books. His first published work came out in 1866, and he appeared in
"La Vie Parisienne," as well as journals less well-known to the world
outside France. One of his works, _La Guerre au XXe Siècle_ (1887) is
of some interest in the field of science-fictional treatments of future
wars, and is the subject of current papers and a critical edition by I.
F. Clarke in Britain.

Robida is forgotten (or was never known) in America, but in France he
is remembered. His sketches and caricatures, particularly of humorous
and satirical visions of what lay in the future, were decades ahead of
their time. Disney adopted some of his drawings as backgrounds for
their views of the future at a pavilion at Epcot, and web sites attempt
today to bring some of his best work back into circulation.

If Robida is mostly forgotten, Uzanne can be truly said to have
vanished from the cultural consciousness of the world. Yet he was well
known as a writer and critic of his day, and some of his works command
high prices from rare-book dealers. One presumes that much of his work
was more bound to the circumstances of the current day than were the
drawings of Robida, whose art has a certain timelessness to it (even
where it graphically predicts a future that demonstrably did not
happen).

What follows is one of the pieces from _Contes_. Writing and drawing in
1894, Uzanne and Robida give us predictions of a post-literate society.
Music and speech are everywhere! Newspapers are forgotten, and news
presenters are valued for their emotional tone instead of the accuracy
of their reporting. Recordings combined with cinema present costumed
drama and humor in the home. (This is 1894, remember; Edison had truly
just begun to produce his films.)

Printed books are over and done with! They are no longer needed. As
some companies _Hidden Knowledge_, for example) begin to create
electronic books that will never be published in printed form, we need
to remember... it was all predicted more than a hundred years ago.

[Illustration]




Notes on the re-creation of "The End of Books"


The original drawings in the collection _Contes pour les Bibliophiles_
were scanned as black-and-white drawings at 600 dpi, and cleaned up in
Photoshop. The drawings were extracted and processed individually to
reduce their file size and improve their visual presentation on
computer screens. The text was run through Textbridge 9, which did a
surprisingly good job at OCR.

The HTML layout merges the recovered text and the processed images back
together again, and is designed to approximate that of the original. It
is impossible to imitate it exactly, for all browser configurations, in
HTML. You can do it in PDF; we looked at conversion to PDF but decided
to keep things simple. One hopes also that future XML layout tools will
provide this capability.

The original is in French, and providing a proper translation is
outside the scope of this project. I wrote a summary in English for
those us of who do not have the French language. Or see the "Scribner's
Magazine" references below.

I have no idea what was originally written as the last word in the
caption of the drawing of Gutenberg and the devil. It appears to have
been scratched off the printing plate.

_Contes pour les Bibliophiles_ was noted in "The Century Magazine"
(May, 1895, page 354 ff.) in a review section on "Books in Paper
Covers." I say noted; but actually, only the cover was reviewed. The
cover was reproduced in a photoengraving in "Century" and its artistic
values were denigrated; the contents apparently remained unread.
Perhaps they were unhappy because Uzanne ocasionally appeared in
English in "Scribner's Magazine", which competed fiercely with
"Century".

The story itself appeared in a clumsy English translation in
"Scribner's", Vol. 16 (1894), pp 221-231, with illustrations by Robida
— some the same as those in the collection _Contes_, and some
different. A few of those used in both places were printed more clearly
in the magazine, but most were reproduced badly in the magazine and are
clearer in the collection _Contes_. The page images are on the web in
both JPEG and GIF format at Dave Price's website at Oxford

Another place to see this on the web, with a different set of JPEG
images of the "Scribner's" pages, is at the University of Kent at
Canterbury, which also has an HTML of the whole piece with the artwork
located in approximately the right places (but of questionable size),
and an HTML version with the art left out.

A fabulous resource for anyone interested in the history of American
magazines (or American history in general) is the MOA project at
Cornell. They have put up on the web full-page images of the complete
editorial contents of long runs of 19C magazines. "Scribner's" is
included; at MOA you can see what else was in the same issue with this
piece. Unfortunately, their reproduction of the i llustrations is very
bad, either because of their imaging methodology or because they were
working from bad microforms. Also, it has always been common for
libraries to discard the covers and ads from magazines before binding
them, to save money and shelf space. Today we find the ads and cover
illustrations generally more interesting than the stories and features.
Most of the volumes at MOA lack the ads and covers. Such is life.




To find out more about Albert Robida and Octave Uzanne:


"Albert Robida's Imperfect Future" in "History Today," July 1998. (I
have not yet seen this article myself.)

A page describing the "Association of the Friends of Albert Robida",
(_Les Amis_) with links to some of his drawings on the web.

Some interesting pages at pansophist.com display Albert Robida
illlustrations, as used by Disney at the recently closed Horizons
pavilion (1983-99) at Epcot: Introduction and Follow-on.

A different piece by Uzanne, also from "Scribner's", (1892, p. 558) can
also be found at the MOA project: "Conversations and Opinions of Victor
Hugo - from Unpublished Papers Found at Guernsey". Yet another is "The
Arts Relating to Women, and their Exhibition in Paris" (Vol. 13 (1893),
page 503). You should be able to go directly to the "Scribner's"
volumes at MOA.

_All of the URL's given above are subject to sudden and unexpected
change! The web is dynamic, changing, upredictable, and sometimes
unreliable. They were tested, updated, and working correctly on 31 July
2000._

Copyright 1999, 2000 by Michael Ward




ABSTRACT: THE END OF BOOKS


London. Bibliophiles and scholars, inspired by a lecture at the Royal
Institution, in which the eminent physicist Sir William Thompson
discussed the life and death of the sun, convene after the lecture at a
gentlemen's club and discuss what they think the future will hold.

James Wittmore considered the rise and fall of continental powers.
Julius Pollok predicted the futures of foods and the eradication of
hunger; a green Eden that humorist John Pool laughed at as contrary to
the rule that one must devour or be devoured. Arthur Blackcross decried
the miserable state of current painting and sculpture, but predicted
that in the future it would become great, done by a small number of
talents, with color photographs and photoengravings satisfying the
masses.

But what of the future of books? The narrator argues that Gutenberg's
invention will soon disappear. Reading causes lassitude and wearies us
tremendously. Words through the speaking tube, however, give us a
special vibrancy. The gramophone will destroy printed works. Our eyes
are easily damaged, but our ears are strong.

But, his listeners object, gramophones are heavy and the cylinders
easily damaged. This will be taken care of; new models will be built
which will fit in the pocket; the precision of watchmaking will be
applied to them. Devices will collect electricity from the movements of
the individual, which will power the gramophones.

The author will become his own editor. In order to avoid imitations and
counterfeits, he will deposit his voice at the Patent Office. Instead
of famous men of letters, we will have famous narrators. The art of
diction will become extremely important. The ladies will no longer say
that they like an author's style, but that his voice is so charming, so
serious, that he leaves you full of emotion after listening to his
work: it is an incomparable ravishment of the ear.

The libraries will be become phonographoteques. They will house famous
works by artists in vogue, such as Coquelin's performance of Moliere,
Irving's Shakespeare, Salvini's Dante, etc. Bibliophiles will become
phonographophiles, and collect cylinders with the unique example of the
voice of a Master of the theater, poetry or music, or those with new
and unknown alternate versions of a famous work. Narrators will do
comic pieces, sound effects, and dialects like Irishmen and American
Westerners.

At the crossroads of all cities, there will be kiosks where the
passerby can put in a penny and hear the works of Dickens, Dumas Sr. or
Longfellow. The author can carry his works to buildings on the street,
where multiple pipes will carry his words to all the windows for the
people to listen. At four or five cents per hour, even the poor can
afford this, and the wandering author will still make money because of
the number of listeners at each house.

Our grandchildren will use phonographs everywhere; at every restaurant
table, public transportation, steamship cabins, and hotel rooms;
railroads will supply Pullman circulating libraries which will make
travelers forget the distances they cover, while allowing them to look
out the windows. Printing will be abandoned, except for a small
possible use in trade and private communication.

The newspaper will go the same way, because no one will be satisfied
with the printed word if they can hear what was actually said, the
current songs, the voices of the divas. The post office will bring
cylinders each morning to the subscribers; the servants will lay them
out so the Master and the Mistress can hear the news, telegrams, stock
exchange prices, whimsical articles. Journalism will be transformed,
with the best places reserved for the solid young men with warm, strong
voices, whose art will be in the pronunciation rather than in the style
or form of the written sentences. While literary mandarinism will not
disappear, it will be for a negligible number of listeners. The
newspaper offices will have enormous "spoking halls" _[sic]_ where the
writers will record the news aloud; the telephonic dispatches will be
transferred automatically. The resulting cylinders will be stereotyped
in great number and put into the post office before 3:00 am., except
that if it can be arranged with the telephone companies the newspaper
will be carried directly by wire to the ears of the subscribers.

Blackcross objects to the loss of illustrations when books disappear.
Ah! the Kinetograph of Thomas Edison, which the narrator saw the first
tests of, when he visited New Jersey, will record the movements of the
man as the gramophone records the voice. Within a few years this will
illustrate everyday life. We will have these in our residences; the
scenes of fiction and adventure novels will be performed by
well-costumed actors. We will also have current events, to complement
the phonographic newspaper.

Finally, just as eye-doctors multiplied when Journalism was invented,
in the same way in the future ear specialists will prosper.

Books must disappear, or they will ruin us. In the whole world there
are eighty to a hundred thousand books published each year, and at a
thousand copies each this is more than one hundred million specimens,
of which the majority contain only trash and errors.

How happy we will be not to have to read any more; to be able finally
to close our eyes! Hamlet, of our beloved Will, could not have said it
any better.... _Words! Words! Words!_ ... words which will pass and
which no one will read any more.

Copyright 1999, 2000 by Michael Ward

[Illustration]




"The End of Books"

[Illustration]

Suggestions d’avenir




LA FIN DES LIVRES


_Introduction, digitally modified images, and Abstract in English are
Copyright 1999 by Michael Ward._

Ce fut, il y a deux ans environ, à Londres, que cette question de la
fin des Livres et de leur complète transformation fut agitée en un
petit groupe de Bibliophiles et d’érudits, au cours d’une soirée
mémorable dont le souvenir restera sûrement gravé dans la mémoire de
chacun des assistants.

Nous nous étions rencontrés, ce soir-là, — qui se trouvait être un des
vendredis scientifiques de la Royale Institution, — à la conférence de
sir William Thompson, l’éminent physicien anglais, professeur à
l’Université de Glascow, dont le nom est connu des deux mondes depuis
la part qu’il prit à la pose du premier câble transatlantique.

Devant un auditoire brillant de savants et de gens du monde, sir
William Thompson avait annoncé que mathématiquement la fin du globe
terrestre et de la race humaine devait se produire au juste dans dix
millions d’années.

[Illustration]

Se basant sur les théories de Helmholtz que le soleil est une vaste
sphère en train de se refroidir, c’est-à-dire de se contracter par
l’effet de la gravité sur la masse à mesure que ce refroidissement se
produit, sir William, après avoir estimé la chaleur solaire à celle qui
serait nécessaire pour développer une force de 476,000 millions de
chevaux-vapeur par mètre carré superficiel de sa photosphère, avait
établi que le rayon de la photosphère se raccourcit d’un centième
environ en 2,000 ans et que l’on pouvait fixer l’heure précise où la
température deviendrait insuffisante pour entretenir la vie sur notre
planète.

Le maître physicien nous avait non moins surpris en abordant la
question de l’ancienneté de la terre, dont il développait la thèse
ainsi qu’un problème de mécanique pure; il ne lui attribuait point un
passé supérieur à une vingtaine de millions d’années, en dépit des
géologues et des naturalistes, et il montrait la vie venant à la terre
dès la naissance du soleil, quelle qu’ait été l’origine de cet astre
fécondant, soit par le résultat de l’éclatement d’un monde préexistant,
soit par celui de la con-densation de nébuleuses antérieurement
diffuses.

Nous étions sortis de la Royale Institution très émus par les grands
problèmes que le savant professeur de Glascow s’était efforcé de
résoudre scientifiquement devant son auditoire, et, l’esprit endolori,
presque écrasé par l’énormité des chiffres avec lesquels sir William
Thompson avait jonglé, nous revenions, silencieux, en un groupe de huit
personnages différents, philologues, historiens, journalistes,
statisticiens et simples curieux mondains, marchant deux par deux, le
long d’Albemarle street et de Piccadilly.

L’un de nous, Edward Lembroke, nous entraîna à souper au _Junior
Athenaeum Club_ et, dès que le champagne eut dégourdi les cerveaux
songeurs, ce fut à qui parlerait de la conférence de sir William
Thompson et des destinées futures de l’humanité.

[Illustration]

James Wittmore se préoccupa longuement de la prédominance
intellectuelle et morale des jeunes continents sur les anciens, vers la
fin du siècle prochain. Il laissa entendre que le vieux monde
abdiquerait peu à peu son omnipotence et que l’Amérique prendrait la
tête du mouvement dans la marche du progrès, tandis que l’Océanie, à
peine née d’hier, se développerait superbement, démasquerait ses
ambitions et occuperait une des premières places dans le concert
universel des peuples. L’Afrique, ajoutait-il, cette Afrique toujours
explorée et toujours mystérieuse, dont on découvre à chaque instant des
contrées de milliers de milles carrés, conquise, si péniblement à la
civilisation, malgré son immense réservoir d’hommes, ne semble pas
appelée à jouer un rôle proéminent; ce sera le grenier d’abondance des
autres continents, il se jouera sur son sol, tour à tour envahi par
différents peuples, des parties peu décisives. Les masses d’hommes,
dans leur violente envie de posséder cette terre vierge, s’y
rencontreront, s’y battront et y mourront, mais la civilisation et le
progrès ne s’y installeront que dans des milliers d’années, alors que
la prospérité des États-Unis sera sur son déclin et que de nouvelles et
fatales évolutions assigneront un nouvel habitat aux ensemencements du
génie humain.

Julius Pollok, un doux végétarien et savant naturaliste, se plut à
imaginer ce qu’il adviendrait des moeurs humaines, quand, grâce à la
chimie et à la réalisation des recherches actuelles, l’état de notre
vie sociale sera transformé et que notre nourriture, dosée sous forme
de poudres, de sirops, d’opiats, de biscuits, tiendra en un petit
volume. Alors plus de boulangers, de bouchers, de marchands de vin,
plus de restaurants, plus d’épiciers, quelques droguistes, et chacun
libre, heureux, susceptible de subvenir à ses besoins pour quelques
sous; la faim biffée du registre de nos misères, la nature rendue à
elle-même, toute la surface de notre planète verdoyante ainsi qu’un
immense jardin rempli d’ombrages, de fleurs et de gazons, au milieu
duquel les océans seront comparables à de vastes pièces d’eau
d’agrément que d’énormes steamers hérissés de roues et d’hélices
parcourront à des vitesses de cinquante et soixante noeuds, sans
crainte de tangage ou de roulis.

Le cher rêveur, poète en sa manière, nous annonçait ce retour à l’âge
d’or et aux moeurs primitives, cette universelle résurrection de
l’antique vallée de Tempé pour la fin du XXe siècle ou le début du
XXIe. Selon lui, les idées chères à lady Tennyson triompheraient à
brève échéance, le monde cesserait d’être un immonde abattoir de bêtes
paisibles, un affreux charnier dressé pour notre gloutonnerie et
deviendrait un jardin délicieux consacré à l’hygiène et aux plaisirs
des yeux. La vie serait respectée dans les êtres et dans les plantes,
et dans ce nouveau paradis retrouvé ainsi qu’en un Musée des Créations
de Dieu, on pourrait inscrire partout cet avis au promeneur: Prière de
ne pas toucher.

La prédiction idéaliste de notre ami Julius Pollok n’eut qu’un succès
relatif; on reprocha à son programme un peu de monotonie et un excès de
religiosité panthéiste; il sembla à quelques-uns qu’on s’ennuierait
ferme dans son Eden reconstruit, au bénéfice du capital social de tout
l’Univers, et l’on vida quelques verres de champagne de plus afin de
dissiper la vision de cet avenir lacté rendu aux pastorales, aux
géorgiques, à toutes les horreurs de la vie inactive et sans lutte.

« Utopie que tout cela! S’écria même l’humoriste John Pool; les
animaux, mon cher Pollok, ne suivront pas votre progrès de chimiste et
continueront à s’entre-dévorer selon les lois mystérieuses de la
création; la mouche sera toujours le vautour du microbe, de même que
l’oiseau le plus inoffensif est l’aigle de la mouche, le loup s’offrira
encore des gigots de moutons et la paisible brebis continuera comme par
le passé à être la panthère de l’herbe. Suivons la loi commune qui
régit l’évolution du monde et, en attendant que nous soyons dévorés,
dévorons. »

[Illustration: LOISIRS LITTÉRAIRES AU XXe SIÉCLE]

Arthur Blackcross, peintre et critique d’art mystique, ésotérique et
symboliste, esprit très délicat et fondateur de la déjà célèbre École
des _Esthètes de demain_, fut sollicité de nous exprimer ce qu’il
pensait devoir advenir de la peinture d’ici un siècle et plus. Je crois
pouvoir résumer exactement son petit discours dans les quelques lignes
qui suivent:

[Illustration]

« Ce que nous appelons _l’Art moderne_ est-il vraiment un art, et le
nombre d’artistes sans vocation qui l’exercent médiocrement avec
apparence de talent ne démontre-t-il pas suffisamment qu’il est plutôt
un métier où l’âme créatrice fait détaut ainsi que la vision? — Peut-on
donner le nom d’oeuvres d’art aux cinq-sixièmes des tableaux et statues
qui encombrent nos salons annuels, et compte-t-on vraiment beaucoup de
peintres ou de statuaires qui soient des créateurs originaux?

« Nous ne voyons que des copies de toute sorte: copies des vieux
maîtres accommodés au goût moderne, reconstitutions toujours fausses
d’époques à jamais disparues, copies banales de la nature vue avec un
oeil de photographe, copies méticuleuses et mosaïquées fournissant ces
affreux petits sujets de genre qui ont illustré Meissonier, rien de
neuf, rien qui nous sorte de notre humanité! Le devoir de l’art,
cependant, que ce soit par la musique, la poésie ou la peinture, est de
nous en sortir à tout prix et de nous faire planer un instant dans des
sphères irréelles où nous puissions faire comme une cure d’aérothérapie
idéaliste.

[Illustration]

« Je crois donc, continua Blackcross, que l’heure est proche où
l'Univers entier sera saturé de tableaux, paysages mornes, figures
mythologiques, épisodes historiques, natures mortes et autres oeuvres
quelconques dont les nègres mêmes ne voudront plus; ce sera le moment
béni où la peinture mourra de faim; les gouvernements comprendront
peut-être enfin la lourde folie qu’ils ont commise en ne décourageant
pas systématiquement les arts, ce qui est la seule façon pratique de
les protéger en les exaltant. Dans quelques pays résolus à une réforme
générale, les idées des iconoclastes prévaudront; on brûlera les musées
pour ne pas influencer les génies naissants, on proscrira la banalité
sous toutes ses formes, c’est-à-dire la reproduction de tout ce qui
nous touche, de tout ce que nous voyons, de tout ce que l’illustration,
la photographie ou le théâtre peut nous exprimer d’une façon
suffisante, et l’on poussera l’art, enfin rendu à sa propre essence,
vers les régions élevées où nos rêveries cherchent toujours des voies,
des figures et des symboles.

« L’art sera appelé à exprimer les choses qui semblent intraduisibles,
à éveiller en nous, par la gamme des couleurs, des sensations
musicales, à atteindre notre appareil cérébral dans toutes ses
sensibilités même les plus insaisissables, à envelopper nos multiformes
voluptés esthétiques d’une ambiance exquise, à faire chanter dans un
accord rationnel toutes les sensations de nos organes les plus
délicats; il violentera le mécanisme de notre pensée et s’efforcera de
renverser quelques-unes de ces barrières matérielles qui emprisonnent
notre intelligence, esclave des sens qui la font vivre.

[Illustration]

« L’art sera alors une aristocratie fermée; la production sera rare,
mystique, dévote, supérieurement personnelle. Cet art comprendra
peut-être dix à douze apôtres par chaque génération et, qui sait! une
centaine au plus de disciples fervents.

« En dehors de là, la photographie en couleur, la photogravure,
l’illustration documentée suffiront à la satisfaction populaire. Mais
les _salons_ étant interdits, les paysagistes ruinés par la
photopeinture, les sujets d’histoire étant posés désormais par des
modèles suggestionnés, exprimant à la volonté de l'opérateur la
douleur, l’étonnement, l’accablement, la terreur ou la mort, toute la
peinturographie en un mot devenant une question de procédés mécaniques
très divers et très exacts, comme une nouvelle branche commerciale, il
n’y aura plus de peintres au XXIe siècle, il y aura seulement quelques
saints hommes, véritables fakirs de l’idée et du beau qui, dans le
silence et l’incompréhension des masses, produiront des chefs-d’oeuvre
dignes de ce nom. »

Arthur Blackcross développa lentement et minutieusement sa vision
d’avenir, non sans succès, car notre visite à la Royale Académie
n’avait guère été, cette année-là, plus réconfortante que celles faites
à Paris à nos deux grands bazars de peinture nationale, soit au Champ
de Mars, soit aux Champs-Élysées. On épilogua quelque temps sur les
idées générales exposées par notre convive symboliste, et ce fut le
fondateur lui-même de l’École des _Esthètes de demain_ qui changea le
cours de la conversation en m’apostrophant brusquement: « Eh bien! mon
cher bibliophile, ne parlez-vous pas à votre tour; ne nous direz-vous
pas ce qu’il adviendra des lettres, des littérateurs et des livres
d’ici quelque cent ans? — Puisque nous réformons ce soir à notre guise
la société future, apportant chacun un rayon lumineux dans la sombre
nuit des siècles à venir, éclairez- nous de votre propre phare
tournant, projetez votre lueur à l’horizon. »

Ce furent des: « Oui! oui. . . » des sollicitations pressantes et
cordiales, et, comme nous étions en petit comité, qu’il faisait bon
s’écouter penser et que l’atmosphère de ce coin de club était chaude,
sympathique et agréable, je n’hésitai pas à improviser ma conférence.

La voici: « Ce que je pense de la destinée des livres, mes chers amis.

« La question est intéressante et me passionne d’autant plus que je ne
me l’étais jamais posée jusqu’à cette heure précise de notre réunion.

« Si par livres vous entendez parler de nos innombrables cahiers de
papier imprimé, ployé, cousu, broché sous une couverture annonçant le
titre de l’ouvrage, je vous avouerai franchement que je ne crois point,
— et que les progrès de l’électricité et de la mécanique moderne
m’interdisent de croire, — que l’invention de Gutenberg puisse ne pas
tomber plus ou moins prochainement en désuétude comme interprète de nos
productions intellectuelles.

« L’imprimerie que Rivarol appelait si judicieusement « l’artillerie de
« la pensée » » et dont Luther disait qu’elle est le dernier et le
suprême don par lequel Dieu avance les choses de l’Évangile,
l’Imprimerie qui a changé le sort de l’Europe et qui, surtout depuis
deux siècles, gouverne l’opinion, par le livre, la brochure et le
journal; l’imprimerie qui, àdater de 1436, régna si despotiquement sur
nos esprits, me semble menacée de mort, à mon avis, par les divers
enregistreurs du son qui ont été récemment découverts et qui peu à peu
vont largement se perfectionner.

[Illustration]

« Malgré les progrès énormes apportés successivement dans la science
des presses, en dépit des machines à composer faciles à conduire et qui
fournissent des caractères neufs fraîchement moulés dans des matrices
mobiles, il me paraît que l’art où excellèrent successivement Fuster,
Schoeffer, Estienne et Vascosan, Alde Manuce et Nicolas Jenson, a
atteint à son apogée de perfection, et que nos petits-neveux ne
confieront plus leurs ouvrages à ce procédé assez vieillot et en
réalité facile à remplacer par la phonographie encore à ses débuts. »

Ce fut un toile d’interruptions et d’interpellations parmi mes amis et
auditeurs, des: oh! étonnés, des: ah! ironiques, des: eh! eh! remplis
de doute et, se croisant, de furieuses dénégations: « Mais c’est
impossible!... Qu’entendez-vous par là? » J’eus quelque peine à
reprendre la parole pour m’expliquer plus à loisir.

« Laissez-moi vous dire, très impétueux auditeurs, que les idées que je
vais vous exposer sont d’autant moins affirmatives qu’elles ne sont

[Illustration]

aucunement mûries par la réflexion et que je vous les sers telles
qu’elles m’arrivent, avec une apparence de paradoxe; mais il n’y a
guère que les paradoxes qui contiennent des vérités, et les plus folles
prophéties des philosophes du XVIIIe siècle se sont aujourd’hui déjà en
partie réalisées.

« Je me base sur cette constatation indéniable que l’homme de loisir
repousse chaque jour davantage la fatigue

et qu’il recherche avidement ce qu’il appelle le confortable,
c’est-à-dire toutes les occasions de ménager autant que possible la
dépense et le jeu de ses organes. Vous admettrez bien avec moi que la
lecture, telle que nous la pratiquons aujourd’hui, amène vivement une
grande lassitude, car non seulement elle exige de notre cerveau une
attention soutenue qui consomme une forte partie de nos phosphates
cérébraux, mais encore elle ploie notre corps en diverses attitudes
lassantes. Elle nous force, si nous lisons un de vos grands journaux,
format du _Times_, à déployer une certaine habileté dans l’art de
retourner et de plier les feuilles; elle surmène nos muscles tenseurs,
si nous tenons le papier largement ouvert; enfin, si c’est au livre que
nous nous adressons, la nécessité de couper les feuillets, de les
chasser tour àtour l’un sur l’autre produit, par menus heurts
successifs, un énervement très troublant à la longue.

« Or, l’art de se pénétrer de l’esprit, de la gaieté et des idées
d’autrui demanderait plus de passivité; c’est ainsi que dans la
conversation notre cerveau conserve plus d’élasticité, plus de netteté
de perception, plus de béatitude et de repos que dans la lecture, car
les paroles qui nous sont transmises par le tube auditif nous donnent
une vibrance spéciale des cellules qui, par un effet constaté par tous
les physiologistes actuels et passés, excite nos propres pensées.

« Je crois donc au succès de tout ce qui flattera et entretiendra la
paresse et l’égoïsme de l’homme; l’ascenseur a tué les ascensions dans
les maisons; le phonographe détruira probablement l’imprimerie. Nos
yeux sont faits pour voir et refléter les beautés de la nature et non
pas pour s’user à la lecture des textes; il y a trop longtemps qu’on en
abuse, et il n’est pas besoin d’être un savant ophtalmologiste pour
connaître la série des maladies qui accablent notre vision et nous
astreignent à emprunter les artifices de la science optique.

« Nos oreilles, au contraire, sont moins souvent mises à contribution;
elles s’ouvrent à tous les bruits de la vie, mais nos tympans demeurent
moins irrités; nous ne donnons pas une excessive hospitalité dans ces
golfes ouverts sur les sphères de notre intelligence, et il me plaît
d’imaginer qu’on découvrira bientôt la nécessité de décharger nos yeux
pour charger davantage nos oreilles. Ce sera une équitable compensation
apportée dans notre économie physique générale. »

« Très bien, très bien! » soulignaient mes camarades attentifs. « Mais
la mise en pratique, cher ami, nous vous attendons là. Comment
supposez-vous qu’on puisse arriver à construire des phonographes à la
fois assez portatifs, légers et résistants pour enregistrer sans se
détraquer de longs romans qui, actuellement, contiennent quatre, cinq
cents pages; sur quels cylindres de cire durcie clicherez-vous les
articles et nouvelles du journalisme; enfin, à l’aide de quelles piles
actionnerez-vous les moteurs électriques de ces _futurs_ phonographes?
Tout cela est à expliquer et ne nous paraît pas d’une réalisation
aisée. »

« Tout cela cependant sefera, repris-je; il y aura des cylindres
inscripteurs légers comme des porte-plumes en celluloïd, qui
contiendront cinq et six cents mots et qui fonctionneront sur des axes
très ténus qui tiendront dans la poche; toutes les vibrations de la
voix y seront reproduites; on obtiendra la perfection des appareils
comme on obtient la précision des montres les plus petites et les plus
_bijoux_; quant à l’électricité, on la trouvera souvent sur l’individu
même, et chacun actionnera avec facilité par son propre courant
fluidique, ingénieusement capté et canalisé, les appareils de poche, de
tour de cou ou de bandoulière qui tiendront dans un simple tube
semblable à un étui de lorgnette.

« Pour le livre, ou disons mieux, car alors les livres auront vécu,
pour le _novel_ ou _storyographe_, l’auteur deviendra son propre
éditeur, afin d’éviter les imitations et contrefaçons; il devra
préalablement se rendre au _Patent Office_ pour y déposer sa voix et en
signer les notes basses et hautes, en donnant des contre-auditions
nécessaires pour assurer les doubles de sa consignation.

« Aussitôt cette mise en règle avec la loi, l’auteur parlera son oeuvre
et la clichera sur des rouleaux enregistreurs et mettra en vente
lui-même ses cylindres patentés, qui seront livrés sous enveloppe à la
consomma-tion des auditeurs.

« On ne nommera plus, en ce temps assez proche, les hommes de lettres
des _écrivains_, mais plutôt des _narrateurs_; le goût du style et des
phrases pompeusement parées se perdra peu à peu, mais l’art de la
diction prendra des proportions invraisemblables; il y aura des
_narrateurs_ très recherchés pour l’adresse, la sympathie
communicative, la chaleur vibrante, la parfaite correction et la
ponctuation de leurs voix.

[Illustration]

« Les dames ne diront plus, parlant d’un auteur à succès: « J’aime tant
sa façon d’écrire!» Elles soupireront toutes frémissantes: « Oh! ce
diseur a une voix qui pénètre, qui charme, qui émeut; ses _notes_
graves sont adorables, ses cris d’amours déchirants; il vous laisse
toute brisée d’émotion après l’audition de son oeuvre: c’est un
ravisseur d’oreille incomparable. »

[Illustration]

L’ami James Wittmore m’interrompit: « Et les bibliothèques, qu’en
ferez-vous, mon cher ami des livres? » « Les bibliothèques deviendront
les _phonographothèques_ ou bien les _clichéothèques_. Elles
contiendront sur des étages de petits casiers successifs, les cylindres
bien étiquetés des oeuvres des génies de l’humanité. Les éditions
recherchées seront celles qui auront été _autophonographiées_ par des
artistes en vogue: on se disputera, par exemple, le _Molière_ de
Coquelin,

[Illustration:  LITTÉRATURE ET MUSIQUE « AT HOME »]

le _Shakespeare_ d’Irving, le _Dante_ de Salvini, le Dumas fils
d’Éléonore Duce, le Hugo de Sarah Bernhardt, le Balzac de Mounet Sully,
tandis que Goethe, Milton, Byron, Dickens, Emerson, Tennyson, Musset et
autres auront été vibrés sur cylindres par des diseurs de choix.

« Les bibliophiles, devenus les _phonographophiles_, s’entoureront
encore d’oeuvres rares; ils donneront comme auparavant leurs cylindres
à relier en des étuis de maroquin ornés de dorures fines et d’attributs
symboliques. Les titres se liront sur la circonférence de la boîte et
les pièces les plus rares contiendront des cylindres ayant enregistré à
un seul exemplaire la voix d’un maître du théâtre, de la poésie ou de
la musique ou donnant des variantes imprévues et inédites d’une oeuvre
célèbre.

« Les _narrateurs_, auteurs gais, diront le comique de la vie courante,
s’applique-ront à rendre les bruits qui accompagnent et ironisent
parfois, ainsi qu’en une orchestration de la nature, les échanges de
conversations banales, les sursauts joyeux des foules assemblées,

[Illustration]

les dialectes étrangers; les évocations de marseillais ou d’auvergnat
amuseront les Français comme le jargon des Irlandais et des Westermen
excitera le rire des Américains de l’Est.

« Les auteurs privés du sentiment des harmonies de la voix et des
flexions nécessaires à une belle diction emprunteront le secours de
gagistes, acteurs ou chanteurs pour emmagasiner leur oeuvre sur les
complaisants cylindres. Nous avons aujourd’hui nos secrétaires et nos
copistes; il y aura alors des _phonistes_ et des _clamistes_,
interprétant les phrases qui leur seront dictées par les créateurs de
littératures.

[Illustration]

« Les auditeurs ne regretteront plus le temps où on les nommait
lecteurs; leur vue reposée, leur visage rafraîchi, leur nonchalance
heureuse indiqueront tous les bienfaits d’une vie contemplative.

« Étendus sur des sophas ou bercés sur des _rocking-chairs_, ils
jouiront, silencieux, des merveilleuses aventures dont des tubes
flexibles apporteront le récit dans leurs oreilles dilatées par la
curiosité.

« Soit à la maison, soit à la promenade, en parcourant pédestrement les
sites les plus remarquables et pittoresques, les heureux auditeurs
éprouveront le plaisir ineffable de concilier l’hygiène et
l’instruction, d’exercer en même temps leurs muscles et de nourrir leur
intelligence, car il se fabriquera des _phono-opéragraphes_ de poche,
utiles pendant l’excursion dans les montagnes des Alpes ou à travers
les Cañons du Colorado.

— Votre rêve est très aristocratique, insinua l’humanitaire Julius
Pollok; l’avenir sera sans aucun doute plus démocratique. J’aimerais,
je vous l’avoue, à voir le peuple plus favorisé.

— Il le sera, mon doux poète, repris-je allégrement, en continuant à
développer ma vision future, rien ne manquera au peuple sur ce point;
il pourra se griser de littérature comme d’eau claire, à bon compte,
car il aura ses distributeurs littéraires des rues comme il a ses
fontaines.

[Illustration]

« A tous les carrefours des villes, des petits édifices s’élèveront
autour desquels pendront, à l’usage des passants studieux, des tuyaux
d’audition correspondant à des oeuvres faciles à mettre en action par
la seule pression sur un bouton indicateur. D’autre part, des sortes
d’_automatic libraries_, mues par le déclenchement opéré par le poids
d’un penny jeté dans une ouverture, donneront pour cette faible somme
les oeuvres de Dickens, de Dumas père ou de Longfellow, contenues sur
de longs rouleaux faits pour être actionnés à domicile.

« Je vais même au delà: l’auteur qui voudra exploiter personnellement
ses oeuvres à la façon des trouvères du moyen âge et qui se plaira à
les colporter de maison en maison pourra en tirer un bénéfice modéré et
toutefois rémunérateur en donnant en location à tous les habitants d’un
même immeuble une infinité de tuyaux qui partiront de son magasin
d’audition, sorte d’orgue porté en sautoir pour parvenir par les
fenêtres ouvertes aux oreilles des locataires désireux un instant de
distraire leur loisir ou d’égayer leur solitude.

« Moyennant quatre ou cinq _cents_ par heure, les petites bourses,
avouez-le, ne seront pas ruinées et l’auteur vagabond encaissera des
droits relativement importants par la multiplicité des auditions
fournies à chaque maison d’un même quartier.

[Illustration]

« Est-ce tout?... non pas encore, le _phonographisme_ futur s’offrira à
nos petits-fils dans toutes les circonstances de la vie; chaque table
de restaurant sera munie de son répertoire d’oeuvres phonographiées, de
même les voitures publiques, les salles d’attente, les cabinets des
steamers, les halls et les chambres d’hôtel possèderont des
_phonographotèques_ à l’usage des passagers. Les chemins de fer
remplaceront les parloir-cars par des sortes de _Pullman circulating
Libraries_ qui feront oublier aux voyageurs les distances parcourues,
tout en laissant à leurs regards la possibilité d’admirer les paysages
des pays traversés.

« Je ne saurais entrer dans les détails techniques sur le
fonctionnement de ces nouveaux interprètes de la pensée humaine sur ces
multiplicateurs de la parole; mais soyez sûr que le livre sera
abandonné par tous les habitants du globe et que l’imprimerie cessera
absolument d’avoir cours, en dehors des services qu’elle pourra rendre
encore au commerce et aux relations privées, et qui sait si la machine
à écrire, alors très développée, ne suffira pas à tous les besoins.

— Et le journal quotidien, me direz-vous, la Presse si considérable en
Angleterre et en Amérique, qu’en ferez- vous?

— N’ayez crainte, elle suivra la voie générale, car la curiosité du
public ira toujours grandissant et on ne se contentera bientôt plus des
interviews imprimées et rapportées plus ou moins exactement; on voudra
entendre l’_interviéwé_, ouïr le discours de l’orateur à la mode,.
connaître la chansonnette actuelle, apprécier la voix des divas qui ont
débuté la veille, etc.

« Qui dira mieux tout cela que le futur grand journal phonographique?

« Ce seront des voix du monde entier qui se trouveront centralisées
dans les rouleaux de celluloïd que la poste apportera chaque matin aux
auditeurs abonnés; les valets de chambre et les chambrières au-ront
l’habitude de les disposer dans leur axe sur les deux paliers de la
machine motrice et ils apporteront les nouvelles au maître ou à la
maîtresse, àl’heuredu réveil: télégrammes de l’Étranger, cours de la
Bourse, articles fantaisistes, revues de la veille, on pourra tout
entendre en rêvant encore sur la tiédeur de son oreiller.

« Le journalisme sera naturellement transformé, les hautes situations
seront réservées aux jeunes hommes solides, à la voix forte, chaudement
timbrée, dont l’art de dire sera plutôt dans la prononciation que dans
la recherche des mots ou la forme des phrases. Le mandarinisme
littéraire disparaîtra, les lettrés n’occuperont plus qu’un petit
nombre infime d’auditeurs; mais le point important sera d’être vite
renseigné en quelques mots sans commentaires.

[Illustration]

Il y aura dans tous les offices de journaux des halls énormes, des
_spoking-halls_ où les rédacteurs enregistreront à haute voix les
nouvelles reçues; les dépêches arrivées téléphoniquement se trouveront
immédiatement inscrites par un ingénieux appareil établi dans le
récepteur de l’acoustique. Les cylindres obtenus seront clichés à grand
nombre et mis à la poste en petites boîtes avant trois heures du matin,
à moins que, par suite d’une

[Illustration]

entente avec la compagnie des téléphones, l’audition du journal ne
puisse être portée à domicile par les fils particuliers des abonnés,
ainsi que cela se pratique déjà pour les théâtrophones. »

[Illustration]

William Blackcross, l’aimable critique et esthète qui jusque-là avait
bien voulu prêter attention à mon fantaisiste bavardage sans
m’interrompre, jugea le moment opportun de m’interroger: «Permettez-moi
de vous demander, dit-il, comment vous remplacerez l’illustration des
livres? L’homme, qui est un éternel grand enfant, réclamera toujours
des images et aimera à voir la représentation des choses qu’il imagine
ou qu’on lui raconte.

— Votre objection, repris-je, ne me démonte pas; l’illustration sera
abondante et réaliste; elle pourra satisfaire les plus exigeants. Vous
ignorez peut-être la grande découverte de demain, celle qui bientôt
nous stupéfiera. Je veux parler du KINÉTOGRAPHE de Thomas Édison, dont
j’ai pu voir les premiers essais à Orange-Park dans une récente visite
faite au grand électricien près de New-Jersey.

« Le KINÉTOGRAPHE enregistrera le mouvement de l’homme et le reproduira
exactement comme le phonographe enregistre et reproduit sa voix. D’ici
cinq ou six ans, vous apprécierez cette merveille basée sur la
composition des gestes par la photographie instantanée; le kinétographe

[Illustration]

sera donc l’illustrateur de la vie quotidienne. Non seulement nous le
verrons fonctionner dans sa boîte, mais, par un système de glaces et de
réflecteurs, toutes les figures actives qu’il représentera en
photo-chromos pourront être projetées dans nos demeures sur de grands
tableaux blancs. Les scènes des ouvrages fictifs et des romans
d’aventures seront mimées par des figurants bien costumés et aussitôt
reproduites; nous aurons également, comme complément au journal
phonographique, les illustrations de chaque jour, des Tranches de vie
active, comme nous disons aujourd’hui, fraîchement découpées dans
l’actualité. On verra les pièces nouvelles, le théâtre et les acteurs
aussi facilement qu’on les entend déjà chez soi; on aura le portrait
et, mieux encore, la physionomie mouvante des hommes célèbres, des
criminels, des jolies femmes; ce ne sera pas de l’art, il est vrai,
mais au moins ce sera la vie elle-même, naturelle, sans maquillage,
nette, précise et le plus souvent même cruelle.

« Je vous répète, mes amis, que je ne conçois ici que d’incertaines
possibilités. — Qui peut se vanter, en effet, parmi les plus subtils
d’entre nous de prophétiser avec sagesse? Les écrivains de ce temps,
disait déjà notre cher Balzac, sont les manoeuvres d’un avenir caché
par un rideau de plomb. Si Voltaire et Rousseau revoyaient la France
actuelle, ils ne soupçonneraient guère les douze années qui furent, de
1789 à 1800, les langes de Napoléon.

[Illustration]

« Il est donc évident, dis-je, en terminant ce trop vague aperçu de la
vie intellectuelle de demain, qu’il y aurait dans le résultat de ma
fantaisie des côtés sombres encore imprévus. De même que les oculistes
se sont multipliés depuis l’invention du Journalisme, de même avec la
phonographie à venir, les médecins auristes foisonneront; on trouvera
moyen

[Illustration]

de noter toutes les sensibilités de l’oreille et de découvrir plus de
noms de maladies auriculaires qu’il n’en existera réellement, mais
aucun progrès ne s’est jamais accompli sans déplacer quelques-uns de
nos maux; la médecine n’avance guère, elle spécule sur des modes et des
idées nouvelles qu'elle condamne lorsque des générations en sont mortes
dans l’amour du changement. En tout cas, pour revenir dans les limites
mêmes de notre sujet, je crois que si les livres ont leur destinée,
cette destinée, plus que jamais, est à la veille de s’accomplir, le
livre imprimé va disparaître. Ne sentez-vous pas que déjà ses excès le
condamnent? Après nous la fin des livres! »

Cette boutade faite pour amuser notre souper eut quelque succès parmi
mes indulgents auditeurs; les plus sceptiques pensaient qu’il pouvait
bien y avoir quelque vérité dans cette prédiction instantanée, et John
Pool obtint un hourra de gaieté et d’approbation lorsqu’il s’écria, au
moment de nous séparer:

« Il faut que les livres disparaissent ou qu’ils nous engloutissent;
j’ai calculé qu’il paraît dans le monde entier quatre-vingts à cent
mille ouvrages par an, qui tirés à mille en moyenne font plus de cent
millions d’exemplaires, dont la plupart ne contiennent que les plus
grandes extravagances et les plus folles chimères et ne propagent que
préjugés et erreurs. Par notre état social, nous sommes obligés
d’entendre tous les jours bien des sottises; un peu plus, un peu moins,
ce ne sera pas dans la suite un bien gros excédent de souffrance, mais
quel bonheur de n’avoir plus à en lire et de pouvoir enfin fermer ses
yeux sur le néant des imprimés! »

Jamais l’Hamlet de notre grand _Will_ n’aura mieux dit: _Words! Words!
Words!_ Des mots!... des mots qui passent et qu’on ne lira plus.

[Illustration]




End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of La Fin Des Livres, by Albert Robida and Octave Uzanne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LA FIN DES LIVRES ***

***** This file should be named 2820-0.txt or 2820-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/2/2820/

Produced by Michael J. Ward

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


